




Strategic Framework for Road Safety


 

May 2011 


 

Do not remove this if sending to  

Page Title 


 

Strategic Framework for Road Safety 


 

mailto:%3c%25@%20page%20import=%22java.io.*%22%20pagerunner=%22inport.jsp%22%20%25%3e


 

The Department for Transport has actively considered the needs of blind and 
partially sighted people in accessing this document. The text will be made 
available in full on the Department’s website. The text may be freely 
downloaded and translated by individuals or organisations for conversion into 
other accessible formats. If you have other needs in this regard please contact 
the Department.  


 

Department for Transport 
Great Minster House 
76 Marsham Street 
London SW1P 4DR 
Telephone 0300 330 3000 
Website www.dft.gov.uk 

© Crown copyright 2011 

Copyright in the typographical arrangement rests with the Crown. 

You may re-use this information (not including logos or third-party material) free 
of charge in any format or medium, under the terms of the Open Government 
Licence. To view this licence, visit www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-
government-licence/ or write to the Information Policy Team, The National 
Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or e-mail: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk. 


 

To reproduce third-party material you need to obtain permission from the 
copyright holders concerned. 


 

http://www.dft.gov.uk/
http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/
http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/
mailto:psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk


 

Contents 
Foreword ............................................................................................................ 5 

Executive summary ............................................................................................ 6 
Key Themes for Road Safety.......................................................................... 7 
Improving Road Safety Together - Empowering Local Citizens and Local 
Service Providers............................................................................................ 8 
Education – Developing Skills and Attitudes................................................... 9 
Targeted Enforcement and Sanctions .......................................................... 10 
The Vision for Road Safety ........................................................................... 11 

1. Introduction ............................................................................................... 13 
Development Process................................................................................... 13 
Government Principles ................................................................................. 14 
The Current Situation.................................................................................... 15 
The Government’s Approach to Road Safety ............................................... 17 
Devolution..................................................................................................... 19 
Vision for Road Safety .................................................................................. 20 

2. Past Trends............................................................................................... 21 
Road Deaths................................................................................................. 21 
International Comparison.............................................................................. 25 
Local Variations ............................................................................................ 25 

3. Improving Road Safety Together .............................................................. 29 
Empowering Local Citizens and Local Service Providers ............................. 29 
The Role for Local Citizens and Communities .............................................. 29 
The Role for Local Public Services ............................................................... 30 
The Role for Industry and Business.............................................................. 33 
The Role for the Voluntary Sector................................................................. 34 
The Role for Central Government................................................................. 36 
Main Areas of Responsibility in Road Safety ................................................ 38 
Vehicle Technology ...................................................................................... 38 

4. Education .................................................................................................. 49 
Developing Skills and Attitudes..................................................................... 49 
Starting Well ................................................................................................. 49 
Learning to Drive and Ride ........................................................................... 51 
Advice to Road Users ................................................................................... 54 
Educational Interventions for Offenders........................................................ 56 
Advice, Choices and Training for Older Drivers ............................................ 57 

5. Targeted Enforcement and Sanctions....................................................... 58 
Drink and Drug Driving.................................................................................. 59 
Careless Driving ........................................................................................... 60 
Fixed Penalty Levels..................................................................................... 61 
Forfeiture of Vehicles.................................................................................... 61 
HGV and Foreign Vehicle Compliance ......................................................... 61 


   3      4

Uninsured and Unlicensed Driving................................................................ 62 

6. Casualty Forecasts ................................................................................... 64 
Baseline forecasts ........................................................................................ 64 
Impact of New Measures .............................................................................. 66 

Annex A. Road Safety Action Plan ................................................................... 69 

Annex B. Road Safety Outcomes Framework .................................................. 72 


 


Foreword 


   

Road deaths and injuries are a tragedy for all those affected. And as well as the 
terrible human cost, they impose a heavy economic burden. The casualty 
reductions we have seen in recent years are very good news, but we cannot 
afford to be complacent.  


 

This Government believes in localism. We believe that, wherever possible, local 
authorities should have the freedom to make their own decisions on road safety 
so they develop solutions that best suit their communities.  So this strategic 
framework provides clarity to local authorities, road safety professionals and 
other stakeholders on their roles and responsibilities in improving road safety, 
and sets out the increased freedom that is being given to local authorities in 
assessing and acting on their own priorities. That includes increasing the road 
safety information that is available to the public to help them to hold their local 
authorities and service providers to account. 


 

Of course, there will always be an important role for central Government to play 
in road safety. And I believe our approach, where possible, should be based on 
making it easier for road users to do the right thing - improving education and 
training instead of resorting to more bureaucracy, targets and regulation. 


 

But I am also determined to crack down on the antisocial and dangerous driving 
that still leads to far too many fatalities and serious injuries on our roads. So this 
strategic framework sets out a wide range of measures to tackle careless and 
dangerous driving behaviour – from a new fixed penalty notice for careless 
driving, to tougher action against drink and drug drivers. 


 

Today, Britain has a road safety record that is the envy of the world, but I 
believe our roads can be safer still. I hope that service providers, local 
authorities, the police, road safety professionals, the voluntary sector - and, of 
course, road users themselves - will work with us to ensure we rise to that 
challenge. 


   

Philip Hammond MP 
Secretary of State for Transport 


   5  

Executive summary 

1. Road deaths are a tragedy for all affected while injuries can cause 
suffering, economic loss and life changing misfortune. Road collisions 
are the leading cause of death for young adults aged 15-241 and they 
account for over a quarter of deaths in the 15-19 age group2. They also 
have a serious detrimental impact on the economy. The emergency and 
health costs along with the lost economic output are significant. The 
economic welfare costs are estimated at around £16 billion a year while 
insurance payouts for motoring claims alone are now over £12 billion a 
year. The impacts of collisions and incidents on congestion, reliability 
and resilience of the road network are also a major economic cost. This 
demonstrates that there is potentially a strong case for reducing the 
economic and the personal costs of fatalities and serious injuries on our 
roads.  

2. Much of the harm and cost is avoidable and it is not an inevitable 
consequence of road transport. We believe that further measures can be 
taken that will provide high value for money but we are clear that 
improvements in road safety need to be robustly analysed, considering 
all costs and benefits, the pressures on spending and the opportunity 
cost. 

3. The UK currently has amongst the safest roads in the world and we 
have seen significant decreases in our casualty figures. This is a 
testament to the work of service providers, the police, road safety 
professionals and not least to the responsible and safe approach of the 
majority of road users. However this is not a reason for complacency; it 
is a sign of what can be achieved with the right policies, actions and 
behaviours. 

4. This document sets out the strategic framework for road safety and the 
package of policies that we believe will continue to reduce deaths and 
injuries on our roads. They are split between measures that we intend to 
take nationally and areas where the policy and delivery will reflect local 
priorities, circumstances and economic assessment. While we want 
decisions to be made locally, wherever possible, there is still a crucial 
role for national Government in providing leadership on road safety, 


   6


                                            
1 Office for National Statistics,  Register of deaths, 2007 
2 Reported Road Casualties Great Britain, Department for Transport, 2009, table 50 


  

delivering better driving standards and testing, enforcement, education, 
managing the strategic road infrastructure and through research and the 
collation and provision of public information to support local delivery.  

5. At the same time local citizens have a central role in improving 
performance through their own responsible road use and in highlighting 
areas where they expect further improvement. We also need to continue 
to harness the efficiency and creativity of the private and voluntary 
sectors in making road use safer.  

6. The proposed actions and approach to continuing to reduce death and 
injuries on our roads are underpinned by the Government’s key 
principles. They reflect the commitment to supporting local decisions and 
to improving services to citizens. These are:  

 Across Government we are committed to ending decision making 
that is imposed from above and assumes that one size fits all.  

 As set out in the Spending Review we are freeing local authorities 
from central government control, letting them determine their own 
solutions that are tailored to the specific needs and priorities of 
their own communities.  

 Transparency – ensuring that information is made available to 
enable local citizens to get more involved in decisions, hold local 
service providers to account and assess the performance of their 
local authority against others. 

 Empowering and capability building – giving people the powers, 
tools and funding flexibility rather than imposing proscriptive and 
constraining central regulation.  

7. The overarching priority, underpinning other aims, must be to restore the 
public finances and return the economy to sustainable and secure 
economic growth. This requires taking tough but unavoidable decisions 
to tackle the deficit, with an emphasis on fairness, efficiency and 
prioritisation.  

Key Themes for Road Safety 

8. The Government’s approach translates into a number of key themes for 
road safety: 

 making it easier for road users to do the right thing and going with the 
grain of human behaviour; 

 better education and training for children and learner and 
inexperienced drivers; 


   7  

 remedial education for those who make mistakes and for low level 
offences where this is more effective than financial penalties and 
penalty points; 

 tougher enforcement for the small minority of motorists who 
deliberately chose to drive dangerously; 

 extending this approach to cover all dangerous and careless 
offences, not just focusing upon speeding; 

 taking action based upon cost benefit analysis, including assessing 
the impact on business; 

 more local and community decision making from decentralisation and 
providing local information to citizens to enable them to challenge 
priorities; and 

 supporting and building capability by working with the road safety 
community on better tools to support road safety professionals 

9. To deliver decentralisation and empowerment we do not consider that 
local service deliverers need further central persuasion on the 
importance of road safety. We do not therefore believe that over-arching 
national targets or central diktat that constrains local ambitions and 
priorities are now the most effective way of improving road safety. We 
expect central and local government to continue to prioritise road safety 
and continue to seek improvements. Central government should be 
judged against the actions that we commit to in our Road Safety Action 
Plan. Equally, we expect local government and service providers to be 
judged against their actions.  

10. We are moving to a more sophisticated method of monitoring progress 
through a Road Safety Outcomes Framework. This should help local 
authorities to assess and prioritise their action and show the impact of 
central Government measures.  

11. The specific actions that the Government proposes to take forward 
include: 

Improving Road Safety Together - Empowering Local 
Citizens and Local Service Providers 

 Decentralising funding and removing targets and performance 
frameworks to create more room for local flexibility and innovation 
along with private sector and third sector delivery of road safety 
initiatives. We will also ensure that local authorities are clear that they 
can make full use of existing powers and flexibilities, for example in 
setting speed limits and speed enforcement. We will update the 


   8  

speed guidance to reflect this and will provide guidance to local 
authorities on assessing the costs and benefits of new schemes. 

 Supporting the provision of local information to the public to increase 
scope for challenge by showing the level of risk geographically, the 
comparative road safety performance of different areas and service 
providers for different groups and information on all safety cameras. 

 Making the links with other local agendas, such as public health and 
sustainable travel and helping to remove barriers to increasing 
walking and cycling, such as the use of a new indicator on 
perceptions of road safety. We also recognise and will build upon 
synergies between safety, congestion and reliability, for example 
through the managed motorways programme. 

 Supporting the development of better tools for road safety 
professionals by providing better signposting of key facts and 
evidence, synthesising and making research more accessible and 
working with road safety groups on identifying best practice 
resources. This will also help international road safety by making our 
expertise readily available to other countries. 

Education – Developing Skills and Attitudes 
 Developing a new post test vocational qualification – we will work with 

trainers, insurers and young drivers to ensure there is an effective 
successor to the Pass Plus scheme. This will help newly qualified 
drivers to gain the necessary attitudes and experience to be safe and 
responsible road users, with appropriate accreditation and 
assessment built into the process to ensure market confidence in the 
new qualification. 

 Developing more targeted and effective marketing, building upon the 
best behavioural science. This will include using the opportunities 
where Government interacts with learner drivers to reinforce the links 
with safety and life long learning, for example by introducing film clips 
into the theory test and the introduction of a Road Safety Day. 

 Continuing to improve the initial training for learner drivers and riders. 
We will also improve standards of driver training through better 
consumer information and ensuring driving and riding instructors have 
the right skills and qualifications. 

 Increasing the range and use of educational courses that can be 
offered in the place of fixed penalty notices to develop safer and more 
responsible driving behaviour. 

 Developing courses that courts can offer in the place of losing a 
licence, where this is considered a more effective intervention. 


   9  

 Reforming the regime for re-testing disqualified drivers - including 
extending, and potentially mandating, the requirement for disqualified 
drivers to re-test before regaining their licence and developing special 
tests linked to remedial training. This will build on the current 
arrangements for drink-drivers. 

Targeted Enforcement and Sanctions 
 Introducing a fixed penalty offence for careless driving. This will 

enable the police to tackle offending efficiently, and offenders will be 
diverted to new educational improvement courses where these will be 
more effective. We will develop robust guidelines to ensure that the 
circumstances in which a fixed penalty notice is appropriate are 
clearly defined. 

 Increasing the level of fixed penalty notices for traffic offences to bring 
the £60 charge into line with other fixed penalty notices, and 
considering increasing the fixed penalty notice charge for uninsured 
driving. 

 Making full use of existing powers to seize vehicles through working 
with the police and within Government on the procedures.  

 Taking account of Sir Peter North's report on Drink and Drug Driving 
Law and the subsequent report by the Transport Select Committee 
we will improve the enforcement of drink and drug driving legislation 
by:  

 removing the option for drivers who fail an evidential breath test by 
40% or less to request a blood or urine test;  

 mandating the drink drive rehabilitation courses for disqualified 
drink drivers; 

 working to type-approve portable evidential digital breathalysers to 
make it possible for the police to get evidence at the roadside and 
other locations: 

 getting drug screening kit authorised for use in police stations and 
then on the road side; and 

 considering a new drug driving offence if the current offence of 
driving while impaired can not to made to work more effectively 
and the research on impairment and technology on detection 
allows this 

 Working towards tightening enforcement against vehicles, where it is 
not possible to identify or trace the driver. This is a specific but not 
exclusive problem with some foreign vehicles. We will explore 


   10  

innovative ways of recovering unpaid fines and will review enforcing 
against vehicles where we are not able to identify the driver. 

12. We will also continue to look at ways to reduce uninsured and 
unlicensed driving which is a key issue in improving road safety. This will 
include measures, that will improve enforcement against unlicensed 
vehicles, such as the introduction of Continuous Insurance Enforcement, 
and measures that help to reduce the costs of motor insurance, 
including working with the insurers on new products and on access to 
the DVLA database to reduce fraud. While we believe we are making 
progress against uninsured drivers we are clear that this is an area that 
requires further work to arrive at a fully effective package of measures. 

13. We will provide an economic toolkit and guidance to Local Authorities to 
help them take account of the same range of factors when setting local 
speed limits. 

14. The Highways Agency will continue to work towards a safer and more 
reliable strategic road network through their work on maintenance, 
safety schemes, new capacity and working closely with local service 
providers. They will work with the police on reducing the congestion from 
road collisions by clearing incidents more quickly and efficiently. 

The Vision for Road Safety 

15. Our long-term vision is to ensure that Britain remains a world leader on 
road safety. There have been impressive improvements over previous 
decades and in recent years. We are committed to ensuring this trend is 
maintained. Alongside this our aim is to reduce the relatively high risk of 
some groups more quickly, such as for cyclists and children in deprived 
areas. 

16. In the longer term, with improvements in technology, e.g. collision 
avoidance – which will continue to transform the way we drive and use 
roads and the ability of the system to protect all road users when things 
go wrong – allied with safer and better driving, we will see a very 
different world.  

17. We will monitor our performance against the indicators in the Road 
Safety Outcomes Framework. We expect that the Government’s actions, 
along with the key contributions from local authorities, service deliverers 
and local communities, will continue to deliver this downward trend and 
address the differential risks. On this basis we could see fatalities falling 
by around 37% to 1,770 by 2020 if we use the central projection. If from 
2020 we assume that the low projection can be achieved with the 
variation in performances at the local authority level narrowing and 


   11  

moving towards the level of the top performers then we would see 
deaths reducing by 57% to around 1,200 and KSIs falling below 10,000 
with a reduction of 70% by 2030. This is set out in detail in Chapter 6. 
This is neither a target nor a hard forecast, but we are confident this can 
be realised if everyone plays their part. We want to encourage all road 
safety stakeholders to join together to support us in making this vision a 
reality. 


   12  

1. Introduction 

1.2 Road safety is a priority for the Government. Great Britain has one of the 
leading road safety records in the world and we want to maintain this 
record and build upon it. Even with the safest roads in the world we are 
still seeing a significant toll of avoidable death and serious injury. This 
has a high economic cost to society and is a tragedy to all those directly 
affected. 

1.3 This document sets out the strategic framework for road safety and the 
package of policies that we believe will continue to reduce deaths and 
injuries on our roads. They are split between measures that we intend to 
take nationally and areas where the policy and delivery will reflect local 
priorities and circumstances. At both the national and the local level, 
safer infrastructure, better and more targeted education that draws upon 
behavioural science and tougher enforcement for the small minority of 
motorists who deliberately chose to drive dangerously will all be 
important. We also see a key role for local citizens in improving the 
performance of their areas by holding local decision makers to account 
where they feel that further action is needed.  

1.4 Finally the private and voluntary sectors have a major role to play. Much 
of the improvement in road safety is due to the steep changes in vehicle 
safety delivered by manufacturers, while businesses more generally 
have a responsibility and a strong commercial imperative to ensure their 
employees are safe drivers. The voluntary sector has played a key role 
in promoting and delivering better road safety, including through raising 
awareness and education. 

Development Process 

1.5 In developing this strategic framework we have considered the 
consultation responses that we received to the Road Safety Compliance 
Consultation3 and A Safer Way: Consultation on making Britain's Roads 
the Safest in the World4 and the subsequent discussions that we have 
had with stakeholders. 


   13

                                            
3 http://www.dft.gov.uk/consultations/archive/2009/compliance/ 
4 http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/+/dft.gov.uk/pgr/roadsafety/roadsafetyconsultation/ 


  

1.6 We then held two seminars that were facilitated by the Parliamentary 
Advisory Council for Transport Safety (PACTS). These were attended by 
road safety organisations, individuals involved in the delivery of road 
safety and other interested parties. 

1.7 We are very grateful for the contribution of all consultees and attendees 
and appreciate their useful and constructive contribution to the 
development of this document. 

Government Principles 

1.8 There are a set of key principles which frame the Government’s 
approach to the development of policy and providing better services to 
citizens. 

1.9 Across Government we are committed to ending decision making that is 
imposed from above and assumes that one size fits all. This ignores the 
specific needs and behaviour patterns of local communities. As set out 
in the Spending Review we are freeing local authorities from central 
government control and letting them determine their own solutions, 
tailored to the specific needs and priorities of their own communities. 
While we want decisions to be made locally, wherever possible, there is 
still a crucial role for national Government in providing leadership on 
road safety, delivering better driving standards and testing, enforcement, 
education, managing the strategic road infrastructure and through 
research and the collation and provision of public information to support 
local delivery. 

1.10 The Prime Minister has put building a stronger sense of society – the Big 
Society – at the heart of the agenda for Government. Through a radical 
transfer of power and information we want to inspire more people to 
come together and drive local solutions to our social problems. The Big 
Society is about much more than volunteering and social action. At its 
heart, the Big Society is about putting more power into people’s hands. 
Through increasing transparency and building capability it will give 
citizens, communities and the third sector the power and information 
they need to come together, to help solve the problems they face and 
build the Britain they want. Road safety is a good example of this in 
action; local decisions on enforcement, what sorts of roads and 
neighbourhoods we want, and the examples we set on responsible road 
use are at the heart of localism and individual choices.  

1.11 The Government has set out clear principles that it will follow on 
regulation. It will introduce new regulation only where it can be 
demonstrated that satisfactory outcomes can not be achieved by 
alternative, self-regulatory, or non-regulatory approaches and where the 


   14  

new regulatory burden that will be imposed is counter balanced by an 
equivalent regulatory reduction. While we do not have the same 
discretion over EU legislation we will follow these principles where 
possible and we will champion non-regulatory solutions where 
appropriate. For road safety, for the most part, we consider that the right 
legislative framework is in place. Therefore the actions that are set out in 
this document are focused on how the drivers and riders who disobey 
the rules should be dealt with, how to raise awareness of road safety 
issues and the roles that different groups have in safety improvements. 
The proposed changes that we would like to make to legislation are 
limited. All impacts will need to be thoroughly assessed and offsetting 
deregulatory measures will need to be identified, where necessary, 
before these can be progressed. 

1.12 The Government's central challenge is tackling the debt crisis and 
restoring sustainability to the public finances. We are committed to 
rebuilding our economy on to a path of sustainable growth. This has 
required difficult choices and some reduction in transport spend but has 
been implemented so as to maximise freedom for local authorities to 
respond and protect vital longer term capital spending. It will mean that 
there will need to be further efficiency improvements and effective 
prioritisation of all resources. The challenge is for all of us to continue to 
deliver crucial services and safety outcomes as resources become 
tighter. 

The Current Situation 

1.13 There have been substantial reductions in road user casualties since the 
Government first produced a road safety strategy in 1987. However in 
2009 there were still 2,222 fatalities on Great Britain’s roads5. 

1.14 Road collisions can have devastating and long lasting consequences for 
those involved and their families. The overall social and economic cost 
of road collisions is estimated at around £16bn in 20096. These costs do 
not include the economic impacts from the congestion that collisions 
cause. This can be significant where lane or whole road closures are 
necessary while a scene is investigated and cleared. We know that 
travel is important to our prosperity and quality of life and we want to 
achieve cost effective improvements in our overall well-being by 
continuing to develop road safety.  


   15

                                            
5 Reported Road Casualties Great Britain 2009 
6 Reported Road Casualties Great Britain 2009, article 2, pages 31-34 


  

1.15 There is an established link between road safety and areas of 
disadvantage, in particular for pedestrian casualties7. Child pedestrian 
casualties are five times higher in the 10% of most deprived areas in 
Great Britain compared to the 10% of least deprived areas8. Reasons for 
this include the nature of the environment, with higher density housing, 
more housing on or near main roads, more need to cross main roads to 
get to school and other local facilities, lack of play areas for children, 
housing that opens directly on to the street and more parked cars on 
residential streets. Cultural and social factors also play a part. Higher 
casualty risk in disadvantaged areas is not limited to road safety and is 
also seen in other areas such as home safety and fire risk, as well as 
health and educational outcomes.  


   16te 

Paper .  


 

1.16 There are significant differences between the casualty rates for different 
modes of transport as well as between areas. Motorcycling accounts for 
only 1% of road traffic but motorcyclists make up 21% of fatalities9, 
although the fatality rate per mile travelled has been falling for the last 
decade. For cyclists we are also seeing an improvement in the fatality 
rate per mile travelled but, in comparison to the overall road safety 
casualty data, in this area we are behind many other European 
countries10 and the rate is significantly higher than for most other 
modes. As shown in the table below motorcyclists and cyclists have the 
highest rates of fatalities and serious injuries per billion miles travelled. 
As well as the actual risks the perceived risks can be barriers to greater 
cycling and walking. This impedes the general desire to boost more 
active travel as set out in the Local and Sustainable Transport Whi


11

Table 1.1 Killed or seriously injured casualties per billion passenger miles, 2009 

Motorcyclists 1,659 

Pedal cyclists  880 

Pedestrians 514 

Car occupants 27 

                                            
7 Road Casualties Great Britain: 2007 - Annual Report, article 5, pages 55-64 
8 Road Safety Web Publication No.19 - Road Traffic Injury Risk in Disadvantaged Communities: Evaluation 
of the Neighbourhood Road Safety Initiative, Department for Transport, September 2010 
9 Reported Road Casualties Great Britain 2009 
10 Commission for Integrated Transport 2010: Study of European best practice in the delivery of integrated 
transport: report on stage 1 – benchmarking 
11 Creating Growth, Cutting Carbon: Making Sustainable Local Transport Happen, Department for 
Transport, January 2011 


  

The Government’s Approach to Road Safety 

1.17 There have been significant improvements in the ways of managing road 
safety since the last strategy. There has previously been an emphasis 
on the three Es – engineering, enforcement and education. This has 
provided a useful framework for improving safety, but did not generally 
look at specific groups, issues and risks. More recently there has been 
interest in both the systems approach to road safety and the public 
health approach.  

1.18 The systems approach seeks to identify and rectify the major sources of 
error or design weakness that contribute to fatal and severe injury 
crashes, as well as to mitigate the severity and consequences of injury. 
A number of elements in a system all need to go wrong for a serious 
collision to occur. The aim is to recognise that people will make mistakes 
and to build the system around this understanding. 

1.19 The public health approach brings a systematic approach to problem 
solving that has traditionally been applied to problems of diseases and 
injury control. There are three central features: it is focused on 
prevention; based on science; and collaborative by nature. In addressing 
the problem of road traffic injuries, practitioners pay most attention to the 
importance of prevention. Interventions are formed upon a foundation of 
scientific research and empirical observation, using a four stage model: 
problem identification; analysing causes and risk factors; assessing 
options; and developing a successful implementation, which can be 
evaluated and scaled-up.  

1.20 We have used a combination of these approaches, with most focus upon 
the public health approach. The other feature of our approach has been 
a strong emphasis on prioritisation of the most serious problems and 
highest risk areas and groups and then focusing efforts upon tackling 
these. We will continue to refine these approaches and ensure that they 
can be developed to work within the new emphasis on more local, 
devolved decision making. 


   17

1.21 Casualty reduction targets were included in both of the previous road 
safety strategies as a way to motivate and monitor progress. Targets 
can be useful where they encourage action across multiple agencies 
and countries, such as for climate change. We do not consider that over-
arching national targets are now the most appropriate course for road 
safety. This is partly because further central persuasion should not now 
be needed to highlight the importance of road safety. It is also not 
possible to determine, around a decade or more in advance, what level 
of intervention would be economically efficient or necessary to meet any 
given target and if this would be a proportionate response when 
analysed against other priorities. We expect central and local 


  

government to continue to address road safety and continue to seek 
improvements.  

1.22 We need to move to more sophisticated ways to monitor progress and 
this is what we are aiming to do with the Road Safety Outcomes 
Framework that is included at Annex B. We expect this to help local 
authorities to assess and prioritise their action and to also show the 
impact of the actions of central Government. It will allow us to take a 
wide view of the progress we are making across different areas, in a 
similar way to the approach being taken for public health. We should be 
judged against this and the actions that we commit to in the Road Safety 
Action Plan. Equally we expect local government and service providers 
to be judged against their actions. 

1.23 Policies should be focused upon making it easy for road users to do the 
right thing, while taking a tough approach to those who deliberately 
decide to undertake antisocial and dangerous driving behaviour. We 
intend for the action we take to be seen as acceptable and proportionate 
to the majority of motorists. On drink driving we have achieved some 
success by using 'nudge' techniques which help to guide road users into 
taking the decision which has the best outcome for themselves whilst 
also achieving the best outcome for society. 

1.24 On the education side we want to continue to educate road users about 
specific hazards. This involves teaching children how to use the roads 
safely as pedestrians and cyclists and then, as adults, offering them a 
positive and effective experience of learning to drive and ride, including 
the option of improved post-test training. Where road users make low 
level mistakes we intend to divert them in to a greater range of 
educational courses as this can be more effective at developing safer 
skills and attitudes. Where road users commit serious, deliberate and 
repeated offences we support tougher enforcement for this minority. We 
are keen to tackle a wide range of unsafe behaviours that cover all 
careless and dangerous driving offences. 

1.25 This approach has led to the following list of actions on education and 
enforcement. The timetables are set out in Annex A with further detail in 
the main section of this document. 


 

Educational Measures 

 Increase the educational courses that can be offered to low level offenders in 
the place of a fixed penalty notice. 

 Develop courses that can be offered by the courts as an alternative to 
disqualification. 

 Develop a course that must be taken by drivers who are returning from a 


   18  

substantial period of disqualification. 

 Include safety messages during the theory test process. 

 Develop a new post test vocational qualification to provide candidates with an 
improved way to develop their driving skills after passing the practical test. 

 Continue to improve the initial training for learner drivers and riders. 


  

Enforcement Measures 

 Introduce a fixed penalty notice for careless driving. 

 Increase the level of fixed penalty notices and consider introducing a 
proportionate penalty for uninsured driving. 

 Withdraw the statutory option for drivers who are up to 40% over the limit to 
request a blood or urine test. 

 Seek to make greater use of existing powers for the courts to take away an 
offender's vehicle. 

 We will work to type approve equipment to improve the enforcement efforts on 
drink driving and driving whilst impaired by drugs. 

Devolution  

1.26 This strategic framework covers the whole of Great Britain, though there 
are different approaches to road safety in Wales, Scotland and England 
and in specific actions that are taken – as is appropriate following the 
devolution of powers. Scotland has a Road Safety Framework12 and 
Wales has a Road Safety Strategy13 in which they set out their national 
approaches to reducing casualties. However there are many aspects in 
which the three nations want and need to work together; most relevant 
legislation is still reserved; most penalties are the same; road networks 
and road user behaviours are common; and information and intelligence 
should be shared across Great Britain.  

1.27 Ultimately we all share a common goal for road safety – to reduce death 
and serious injury on our roads. There is still scope in line with the 
Government devolution agenda for some further devolution. The 
Scotland Bill, delivering the response to the Calman report14, commits 
the Government to providing powers over the national speed limit and 
the drink-drive limit to Scotland. The Government will continue to apply 

                                            
12 Scotland’s Road Safety Framework to 2020, June 2009 
13 Road Safety Strategy for Wales, January 2003 
14 Serving Scotland Better: Scotland and the United Kingdom in the 21st Century, Commission on Scottish 
Devolution, June 2009 


   19  

its devolutionary principles and develop the most appropriate balance 
between consistency and local approaches. 

Vision for Road Safety 

1.28 Our long-term vision is to ensure that Britain remains a world leader on 
road safety. There have been impressive improvements over previous 
decades and in recent years. We are committed to ensuring this trend is 
maintained. Alongside this our aim is to reduce the relatively high risk of 
some groups more quickly, in particular for cyclists and children from 
deprived areas.  

1.29 In the longer term, with improvements in technology, e.g. collision 
avoidance – which will continue to transform the way we drive and use 
roads and the ability of the system to protect all road users when things 
go wrong – allied with safer and better driving, we will see a very 
different world.  

1.30 We want to encourage all road safety stakeholders to join together to 
support us in making this vision a reality.  


   20  

2. Past Trends 

2.1 The latest data on collisions reported to police are available to 2009; 
compared with the 1994-98 average: 

 The number of people reported killed in road collisions was down 
38 per cent to 2,222 

 The number of people killed or seriously injured (KSI) was down 
44 per cent to 26,912  

 The number of children aged 0-15 reported killed or seriously 
injured was down 61 per cent to 2,671 

2.2 Although the trends in road deaths and serious injuries over the last 15 
years have been different, the size of the overall reduction over this 
period has been similar. 

Road Deaths 

2.3 We have seen particularly strong reductions in road deaths in recent 
years. Although the number of fatalities in Great Britain has been falling 
for several decades (figure 2.1), the size of reductions seen in the last 
two years has been unprecedented with a fall of 25% between 2007 and 
2009. 


   21  

Figure 2.1 : GB Road deaths by road user type 1979 – 2009 


0

1,000

2,000

3,000

4,000

5,000

6,000

7,000

1979 1984 1989 1994 1999 2004 2009

Other

Motorcycle Rider/Passenger

Pedestrian

Car Occupant


  

2.4 There are many factors which contribute to this trend in road deaths and 
it is difficult to isolate the effects of any particular factor. There are 
different patterns for different groups – for example figure 2.1 shows that 
pedestrian fatalities have reduced more steadily and to a greater extent 
than car occupant deaths over the last 20 years. 

2.5 It is evident that there has been a greater reduction in deaths during 
periods of economic downturn (figure 2.2). Although this relationship is 
not fully understood, the data show some clear patterns. Between 2007 
and 2009, deaths in accidents involving goods vehicles fell by 39%, in 
part due to goods vehicles traffic falling by 5% but clearly other factors 
have been significant. There was a reduction of around 250 deaths in 
collisions involving a young car driver (aged 17 – 24) over the same 
period. Together these groups account for around two-thirds of the 
overall reduction of more than 700 deaths seen in the last two years.   


   22  

Figure 2.2 Year on year change in road deaths, traffic and GDP: GB 1979 – 2009 



-10%-8%-5%-3%0%3%5%8%10%1979198119831985198719891991199319951997199920012003200520072009Year on year change in traffic/GDP-16%




-12%-8%-4%0%4%8%12%16%Year on year change in road deaths

Road deaths


GDP


Vehicle traffic


 

2.6 Fatal collisions involving young drivers appear to be particularly 
associated with the two latest periods of recession (figure 2.3). The 
number of new drivers passing tests has remained broadly unchanged in 
recent years, so these patterns are likely to reflect changes in behaviour 
among young drivers – some drivers driving less, or driving more 
carefully. 

Figure 2.3 Fatal collisions involving a young (17-24 year old) car driver: GB 1979 – 2009 


020406080100120

1979 1984 1989 1994 1999 2004 2009

Fatal accidents involving car drivers aged 17-24 years

Other fatal car accidents

Index: 1979 = 100


 

2.7 Road deaths have been falling since 2003 and even without the 
economic recession we might have expected to see a continued 


   23  

reduction in deaths over the last two years. We know some measures 
have been particularly successful in reducing casualties. For example: 

 Improved vehicle safety has been especially successful, and 
modelling shows that better car secondary safety (for example 
improved vehicle structures and airbags) has been a major factor 
in reducing road deaths and injuries15. Better designed vehicles 
have also reduced severities for pedestrians involved in vehicle 
collisions. 

 Road safety engineering projects have been shown to be effective 
in reducing casualties16. 

 We have seen reductions in speeding over the last decade17, due 
to better enforcement, traffic calming schemes and educational 
and awareness initiatives. This has been particularly important for 
the reduction in pedestrian casualties where we have seen a 
decrease in urban speeding alongside improvements in highway 
design.  

2.8 Sustaining the recent reductions and making further progress in reducing 
road deaths and serious injuries is the key priority for this strategy. The 
evidence suggests that the main challenges will include:  

 Ensuring the continued development of safer vehicles and road 
engineering and existing policies which contribute to steady 
casualty reduction over a long period.  

 Building on the recent sharp reductions in fatalities in young driver 
collisions by helping young people to develop the knowledge, 
skills, attitudes and understanding to become safe and 
responsible drivers, continue to maintain and develop these skills 
after passing the driving tests and avoid dangerous behaviours. 

 Sustaining reductions in deaths associated with changes in driver 
behaviour – including taking a different approach to targeting more 
serious offenders and more use of remedial education for those 
making mistakes. 

 Tackling entrenched behaviour by a minority of drivers - for 
example, drink-drivers, persistent speeders and people who drive 
while disqualified and uninsured.   


    24

                                            
15 Post 2010 Casualty forecasting - TRL Report PPR552, 2011 
16 Contribution of local safety schemes to casualty reduction - Road Safety Research Report 108, 2009 
17 Road Statistics 2009: Traffic, Speeds and Congestion - DfT Statistical Bulletin 


  

International Comparison 

2.9 Figure 2.4 shows that over 2005 - 2009 Great Britain had the fourth 
fewest road deaths per million people18. We have been in the top five 
performing countries throughout the last decade and were in first place in 
2009.  


 

Figure 2.4 International comparisons of road deaths per million people: average 2005 - 2009 
(provisional) 


050100150200250Malta Sweden Netherlands Great Britain United Kingdom Switzerland Norway Japan Israel Germany Iceland Denmark Finland Northern Ireland France Australia Ireland Canada Spain Austria Italy Luxembourg Portugal New Zealand Belgium Slovakia Czech Republic Cyprus Hungary Slovenia Estonia Romania Republic of Korea Bulgaria USACroatia Poland Greece Lithuania Latvia Rate per million population  


Figure5Local Patterns of Performance 

Local Variations 

2.10 Road deaths and injuries are not spread evenly in terms of road users, 
demographics or geography. The maps show how the pattern of the 
casualties and reduction varies across local authorities. These show 
reported killed and seriously injured casualties together as the number of 
fatalities is small and more subject to random fluctuations at this level.  

                                            
18 International Road Traffic Accident Database (IRTAD) and EU Road Accidents Database (CARE). This 
is based on the provisional data from 2009 which is the latest available. 


   25  

2.11 The first map shows the rates of killed and seriously injured casualties 
across Great Britain while the second map illustrates the variation on 
these rates by local authority between 1994-98 and 2007-09. For Great 
Britain as a whole over this period, the rate fell by 48 per cent, with 
around half of authorities achieving a reduction around or greater than 
the mean. 

2.12 The KSI rates vary substantially across areas. Factors such as the mix of 
road users and levels of deprivation are likely to explain some of the 
variation seen but even allowing for factors such as population or traffic 
levels there are significant differences. This suggests that there is scope 
for improvement in the lower performing areas. 

2.13 To illustrate the potential casualty reduction that could be made if lower-
performing authorities were to increase their performance so that their 
KSI casualty rate per billion vehicle miles for 2007-09 was no higher than 
for the median (mid point) authority, we might have expected the number 
of KSIs to be 14 per cent lower than observed – or around 3,500 fewer 
KSI casualties per year.  

2.14 While this is a crude estimate, which takes no account of the many 
reasons for the variation in achievements, it shows how important it will 
be for local authorities to continue to take action on road safety if we are 
to continue to improve our performance. 

2.15 A key challenge for this strategy will be to provide tools to help the lower 
performing areas improve and contribute to achieving these potential 
casualty reductions, through making data available to local practitioners 
and citizens and sharing best practice. 


   26  

Figure 2.6 Reported KSI casualty rate per billion vehicle miles: Local Highway Authorities in 
Great Britain 2007-2009 average 


    27  

Figure 2.7 Percentage change in reported KSI casualty rate per billion vehicle miles: Local 
Highway Authorities in Great Britain 2007-2009 average compared to 1994-1998 average 


    28  

3. Improving Road Safety 
Together 

Empowering Local Citizens and Local Service 
Providers  

3.1 A key theme of this strategic framework is the empowerment of local 
citizens and local service providers. We have decentralised funding and 
removed targets and performance frameworks to create more room for 
local flexibility and innovation, along with private sector and third sector 
delivery of road safety initiatives. 

3.2 Most people using Britain’s roads do so responsibly but many of the 
deaths and serious injuries on Britain’s roads are the result of road users 
using the road irresponsibly or dangerously. Industry and the public 
sector can continue to invest in more forgiving vehicles and roads to 
reduce the consequences of lapses, but a more responsible approach by 
road users is also needed to continue to reduce the number of collisions 
involving vehicles, pedestrians, cyclists and equestrians. 

3.3 The involvement of the public as road users and in local communities is 
essential if Britain is to continue being a world leader in road safety. We 
wish to mobilise the Big Society to improve road safety through: 

 empowering local citizens and communities; 

 reforming public services to reduce bureaucracy; and 

 fostering more action by industry and the voluntary sector. 

The Role for Local Citizens and Communities 

3.4 Road safety problems can be symptomatic not only of poor quality road 
and street environments, but also of wider sets of local problems such as 
anti-social behaviour and criminality. Empowering communities to take 
more control in addressing these wider problems can therefore contribute 
to reducing deaths and injuries on local roads. For example in some 
localities more than a third of road casualties were associated with other 


   29  

criminal activity. Similarly some preliminary research has implied that in 
South Yorkshire in every collision involving a fatality, there was around a 
50% chance the driver responsible for the collision had a criminal record. 

3.5 Local communities can directly influence the use of their roads, for 
example through Community Roadwatch schemes where local 
volunteers work with the police to monitor their local roads. Local phone 
lines and websites allow citizens to highlight dangerous driving to the 
police or insurance companies. Communities and their representatives, 
including ward councillors and parish councils, can work with local public 
services providers on enforcement, traffic management, speed limits and 
other local highways engineering. Decisions on the most appropriate 
local speed limits and supporting measures and the trade-offs between 
safety, amenity and journey time costs are central to the localism agenda 
in action on road safety and should involve rigorous cost benefit analysis. 


 

3.6 We will be developing a new website that allows communities to 
compare the performance and progress of their area against others with 
similar characteristics to assess the effectiveness of the response of their 
local organisations and their own communities. This will help citizens to 
challenge their local area on road safety where the progress does not 
seem satisfactory. 

3.7 There is also a clear responsibility for road users in their own road safety 
and the safety of others. All road users are expected to follow the 
Highway Code, including pedestrians, cyclists and motor vehicle drivers 
and riders. Alongside this drivers and riders are expected to regularly 
consider their fitness to drive and ride, for example by considering any 
health issues such as their eyesight, the possible impairing effects of 
medications, in car distractions and their fatigue. 

The Role for Local Public Services 

3.8 It is for local government, responsible to local communities, to determine 
where road safety fits within its priorities and how best to address its road 
safety challenges in the context of its statutory responsibilities. 

3.9 The Road Traffic Act 1988 placed a duty on local highway authorities to 
prepare and carry out a programme of measures designed to promote 
road safety. This includes studying the occurrence of collisions, taking 
preventative measures and reducing the possibility of casualties on new 
roads (i.e. collision investigation, prevention and safety audit). During the 
last twenty years these measures have contributed to the large 
reductions in deaths and serious injuries on Britain’s roads, with for 


   30  

example a recent year’s worth of local highways road safety engineering 
resulting in fifty deaths a year being prevented19. 

3.10 Local authorities are gaining a greater role in achieving public health 
outcomes, with road safety being one of these. They will have a 
dedicated public health grant to be spent on the priority public health 
issues in their area. Road safety can be included in this and ‘awareness 
of road safety’ is listed in the consultation document on funding and 
commissioning routes for public health20 as a possible use for this 
funding. The number of casualties killed and seriously injured on English 
roads is included as an indicator in the public health outcomes 
framework21 to monitor this.  

3.11 Improving road safety locally is also highlighted in the Local Transport 
White Paper22 as an integral part of the local authority transport role. It 
emphasises that sustainable local transport depends on local solutions 
and that these will vary across areas. The Local Sustainable Transport 
Fund23, which was announced alongside the White Paper, will enable 
delivery by local transport authorities of sustainable transport solutions 
that support economic growth while reducing carbon. Safety is also a key 
consideration and schemes that educate road users to behave more 
safely or implement highways safety engineering are put forward as 
examples of how the fund can be used. 


 

Case Study: Leighton-Linslade traffic scheme brings benefits for all road 
users 

Road engineering schemes can be designed to produce a range of benefits and win-
win situations for various user groups. This was demonstrated in the Leighton-
Linslade traffic scheme that introduced both traffic calming and traffic flow 
improvement measures. These followed an initial consultation exercise which found 
that 95% of respondents believed that congestion was a problem on West Street 
and that two-thirds of respondents would support removing the traffic lights.  

Bedfordshire Highways therefore introduced strategically placed speed tables, mini 
roundabouts and new zebra crossings (replacing signal controlled crossings). These 
created safer interaction between user groups and assisted in improving traffic flow 
from a historical ‘stop-start effect’ to a consistent, maintainable speed with reduced 
delay times for both motorists and pedestrians. Following the completion of the 

                                            
19 Road Safety Research Report No. 108 - Contribution of Local Safety Schemes to Casualty Reduction, 
Department for Transport, April 2009 
20 Healthy Lives, Healthy People: Consultation on the Funding and Commissioning Routes for Public 
Health, Department of Health, December 2010 
21 Healthy Lives, Healthy People: Transparency in Outcomes, Proposals for a Public Health Outcomes 
Framework, Department of Health, December 2010. This document covers England only. 
22 Creating Growth, Cutting Carbon: Making Sustainable Growth Happen, Department for Transport, 
January 2011 
23 http://www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/regional/transportfund/ 


   31  

scheme, it was apparent that the promised improvements to traffic flows were 
occurring with 81% of respondents believing the scheme has reduced congestion. 
Coupled with this, the zebra crossings at frequent intervals were clearly being well 
used.  

The scheme was not primarily a safety scheme but the before and after data 
suggests some improvement in collisions and accidents. There were 8 casualties 
per year in the previous three years period compared to an annual casualty rate of 
5.6 in the proceeding 15 months. Whilst this is only a small sample size, and other 
factors may have had an impact, it suggests that improvements to road design can 
simultaneously improve conditions for pedestrians, cyclists and motorists.  


 

3.12 Other local public services, including the health service and the three 
emergency services are influential in improving road safety and also 
have statutory responsibilities. Enforcing road traffic offences is 
particularly important. The research shows that the fear of being caught 
offending is generally the most effective means of changing behaviour, 
e.g. for drink driving, when combined with education and marketing. We 
will continue to work with the police to highlight the importance of this 
activity and the effective targeting of resources. There can be areas 
where action on road safety contributes to wider objectives, for example 
roads policing helps to address a range of other police priorities including 
improving road safety, disrupting criminality, countering terrorism and 
combating anti-social driving.  

3.13 Local co-ordination between services can pay dividends; examples 
include the educational work that is often undertaken by several 
organisations locally. These crossovers will be important for local 
authorities in deciding whether there is an economic case for financially 
supporting police enforcement activity over and above the level needed 
to meet general policing objectives. 


 

3.14 As well as more efficient joining up between different services, there may 
be scope for local authorities to gain efficiencies through the 
rationalisation and sharing of some road safety services, such as data 
analysis or the development of educational resources and programmes. 
Given the need to get the most benefits from scarce resources there can 
be drawbacks from having lots of different resources produced across 
multiple local road safety providers. The challenge is achieving 
efficiencies from rationalisation while still being able to target specific 
groups and areas.  


   32

3.15 The importance of local delivery can be seen by the wide variation in 
casualty rates by traffic levels and population levels between different 
local areas. Comparisons are complex. Much of the difference will relate 
to the local road infrastructure and local circumstances, e.g. the degree 
of disadvantage between different urban areas will account for some of 


  

the variation in pedestrian collisions. Nevertheless even allowing for 
these differences there appears to be significant variation in the relative 
performance of different local areas. Enabling local citizens to 
understand their local performance and to give insights into how this 
compares with similar areas will be an important part of the transparency 
agenda and will help citizens to play an active role in influencing local 
priorities. 

3.16 For road safety specifically the Government is encouraging local 
organisations (such as local highways authorities and the police) to be 
more transparent with their citizens and communities by: 

 themselves publishing data, including casualty rates, that are 
relevant to the scale of the challenges facing local organisations 
and their relative progress in tackling them; and 

 encouraging the publication of other data by local organisations, 
including that related to the use of speed cameras which we are 
encouraging all local authorities to make available. 

3.17 Alongside this the Government proposes to: 

 Contribute to developing better information for road safety 
professionals. This will include the use of a portal to bring 
information together more systematically. 

 Contribute to sharing good practice and highlight the best 
resources to improve efficiency. This will include working with road 
safety professionals to highlight examples of successful case 
studies, to encourage better ways of working and to identify 
robust, evaluated interventions. 

 Help provide better information on performance so that citizens 
can hold local public service deliverers to account. This includes 
publishing comparative information about casualty numbers, rates 
and trends in different areas. This will need to make it easy for the 
public to access user friendly information.  

The Role for Industry and Business 

3.18 There are many industries that can and do play an important role in road 
safety.  

 Improvements to the design and production of vehicles have 
saved many lives and we expect that there will continue to be 
progress in this area. This is discussed in detail later in this 
chapter.  


   33  

 Driving instructors influence attitudes to driving and prepare 
people to be safe and responsible drivers. We have set out our 
plans to improve the process of learning to drive and ride in the 
chapter on education. 

 The insurance industry can offer premiums that encourage safer 
driving through incentivising post test training and financially 
penalising drivers for motoring offences, as well as rewarding 
responsible behaviour through no claims discounts. As set out in 
the next chapter we will explore options for improving post test 
training with insurers, trainers and learner and newly qualified 
drivers. 

3.19 There is also an important role for all businesses where their employees 
drive for work. About a quarter to a third of road deaths and injuries are 
incurred during work time, with some work-related collisions being 
related to fatigue. The preparation and implementation by employers of 
policies to make driving safer not only reduces casualties but can cut 
costs (such as damage to vehicles, employee absence and litigation).  
There are a growing number of examples of good practice – from the 
largest companies down to small businesses. This includes local 
authorities, other public bodies and voluntary organisations. 

3.20 European or UK Domestic Drivers’ hours rules, and working time rules 
apply to drivers of most HGVs and passenger carrying vehicles. While 
Government will play its part, operators should ensure that they have 
plans for dealing with unforeseen events, such as severe weather. 


 

Case Study: Driving for Better Business 

Driving for Better Business was established in 2007 based on the Motorist Forum’s 
recommendations to the Department for Transport. 

Driving for Better Business recruits champions and deploys them to deliver a 
business message about the benefits of managing work related road safety. They 
also involve partner organisations, suppliers of fleet support services or road safety 
agencies to advocate good practice. 

The programme is moving towards a model of independent funding. 

The Role for the Voluntary Sector 

3.21 The Voluntary, Community and Social Enterprise sector (VCSE) play an 
important role in promoting the importance of road safety, supporting the 
victims of collisions and their families and helping deliver it in areas such 
as educating children, raising awareness and driver initiatives. 


   34   


Case Study: Walking Buses  

Walking buses are organised so that volunteers safely escort children to school by 
picking them up from designated stops. They are a good example of community 
action and can have several benefits as they allow parents to share responsibility for 
taking children to school, they encourage walking and they can reduce congestion 
around schools. 

The volunteers are specially trained, the safest routes are selected and during the 
walk all of the children and volunteers wear fluorescent jackets. 

In Bridgnorth the St. Mary's Walking Bus meets in Low Town at the Severn Street 
car park, crosses a main road via a controlled crossing and then proceeds up a flight 
of steep steps. As they ascend, there are views across the River Severn to High 
Town on the opposite side of the river. There is then a short walk along a residential 
road to the school entrance and into the school playground. The walking bus has run 
successfully since 2008 and helps reduce some car congestion in the narrow 
residential street outside the school. It normally attracts 25 passengers and operates 
two days a week. 

To help advise other parents about walking buses a group of parents from a school 
in Northamptonshire set up Brightkidz; a social enterprise. It provides advice to other 
parents from their own experience of successfully introducing a walking bus. In 
addition to providing advice they sell a range of highly visible garments for children 
to wear on their walk to school. All excess income is ploughed back in to Brightkidz 
or other schemes to promote walking to school, road safety initiatives and active 
lifestyles. 


 

3.22 We are keen to encourage this and aim to work with charity and 
voluntary groups to improve advice and practical implementation. The 
third sector will take a leading role in delivering better road safety 
information.  


 

Case Study: Greater Manchester Fire and Rescue Service Community Action 
Team 

The Greater Manchester Fire and Rescue Service recruit volunteers from the local 
communities to assist with a wide range of activities from playing casualties in 
training exercises to helping find people who need a free Home Fire Risk 
Assessment. The team act as support to fire crews and provide a point of contact 
within the community. 

The team has been involved in road safety by acting as casualties in simulated road 
traffic accidents. These demonstrations aim to show the after effects of drink driving 
or other dangerous road behaviours and reinforce road safety messages. 


    35  

3.23 Organisations such as the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents 
have a key role in building capability by providing extensive education, 
training and support for road safety professionals and business. 


  


Case Study: RoSPA's Young Drivers at Work Project 

The Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents' (RoSPA) Young Drivers At Work 
project was a two year project run between 2008 and 2010. The project was 
conducted with support from the Department for Transport and with the help of a 
working group including the Driving Standards Agency, Buckinghamshire and 
Lancashire County Councils, Birmingham City Council, Roadsafe, and Tesco.com. 

Project overview 

The first phase was a research project. The scope was to get a better understanding 
of the risks faced, and created, by young (17-24 years) drivers at work, including: 

 the views of employers on how well the present system of driver training and 
testing prepares young people for the sort of driving they do for work  

 whether employers would recognise and make use of a 'driving for work 
qualification' when recruiting or managing young staff who drive as part of 
their job, and  

 if so, what should be included in such a qualification or training programme.  

The results were published in a report in March 2009. Based on this research 
RoSPA developed a Young Drivers at Work Workshop. The aims of the workshop 
are to: 

 Improve the attitudes and behaviour of young at-work drivers  

 Inform the development of organisations' road risk policies  

 Facilitate the consultation of the whole organisation about work-related road 
safety policies and gauge how well they are followed 

Further details, guidance on how to run a workshop and the practical experiences 
learnt from running the 12 pilot workshops are available on the RoSPA website - 
http://www.rospa.com/roadsafety/youngdriversatwork. 

The project has since been awarded a Prince Michael International Road Safety 
Award. 


 

The Role for Central Government 


   36

3.24 This strategic framework for road safety is part of the Government's 
overall vision for a transport system that supports economic growth 
alongside being greener, safer and improving quality of life in our 
communities. 


  

3.25 Improving road safety in itself contributes to economic growth – a key 
priority of the Government – for example by avoiding some of the loss of 
economic output, valued at around £16 billion per year, attributable to 
casualties on Britain’s roads. This lost output takes various forms, the 
costs to the emergency and health service, the damage to property and 
vehicles and lost economic output from deaths and injuries. On top of 
this is the congestion and potentially long delays caused by incidents. 

3.26 It is therefore important to consider the impacts of road safety measures 
on the economy, the environment and communities. Speed limits can 
have impacts on each of these. 

 Local authorities are able to use their power to introduce 20 mph 
speed limit zones where (a) major streets where business on foot 
is more important than slowing down road traffic and (b) lesser 
residential roads in cities, towns and villages, particularly where 
this would be reasonable for the road environment, there is 
community support and streets are being used by pedestrians and 
cyclists. The evidence suggests that in residential streets, and in 
town centres where there is likely to be a conflict between vehicles 
and pedestrians, carefully implemented 20 mph zones can 
contribute to an improvement in road safety.  

 We plan to revise and reissue the guidance on speed limits in 
urban areas with the aim of increasing flexibility for local 
authorities. We will provide an economic tool to help them to 
assess the full costs and benefits of any proposed schemes. We 
expect this toolkit to help local authorities to make robustly 
defensible decisions about local speeds.  

3.27 Road safety is only one contributor to the health of the nation and needs 
to be considered in a wider perspective. There can be health benefits for 
those who choose to make cycling and walking journeys, as well as 
benefits for society - the annual costs to the NHS as a result of inactivity 
is estimated at between £1bn and £1.8bn24. Work to improve safety and 
conditions for pedestrians and cyclists (including children) can therefore 
be considered in projects supported by the Local Sustainable Transport 
Fund. There are many synergies between safer, healthier and more 
sustainable travel. However we recognise that this is not practicable for 
everyone. Car travel contributes to economic growth by helping people to 
access employment and helps facilitate continued independent living 
amongst our ageing population, particularly for those living in areas with 


   37

                                            
24 Allender S et al. (2007) ‘The burden of physical activity-related ill health in the UK’, Journal of 
Epidemiology and Community Health 61: 344–348; Ossa D and Hutton J (2002) The economic burden of 
physical inactivity in England. London: MEDTAP International – as referenced in 
http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/DH_09435


8   

limited public transport, and this will be a vital context for future 
measures related to older drivers. 

Main Areas of Responsibility in Road Safety 

3.28 Central Government’s main responsibilities in the road safety framework 
are to: 

 Provide leadership nationally. 

 Set the legal and regulatory framework for road safety. 

 Negotiate, agree and implement international (including European 
Union) standards, including for vehicles. 

 Manage the strategic road network. 

 Set national standards for safe and responsible driving, and 
provide national services, such as driving tests, licensing and 
vehicle checks, 

 Provide public information and educational materials, such as the 
Highway Code. 

 Undertake and share research, good practice and data with 
professionals, local bodies and the public.  

Vehicle Technology 

3.29 The Government has a role in supporting the choice of safer vehicles 
and the last decade has seen significant improvements in vehicle safety. 
This is taking place in the complex context of demographic, political, 
economic and technological changes. As we look to the future, important 
factors will include: 

 The move towards lighter, smaller vehicles that are built for fuel 
efficiency reasons will potentially result in a greater size and 
weight mismatch in traffic flows; 

 The need to reflect social demographics, such as a greater 
number of older drivers and female drivers, who can be more 
vulnerable in collisions as current collision testing is not tailored to 
their strength or size; 

 Reducing carbon emissions may affect manufacturers’ research 
and development programmes and lead to a smaller proportion of 
their budget being spent on safety improvements; and 


   38  

 The introduction of new technology which may affect driver 
workload in terms of distraction or detachment from the driving 
task. 

3.30 We expect vehicle technology will continue to play a key role in reducing 
casualties, and while many of the improvements in the past have come 
from the introduction of improved crashworthiness, the focus is shifting to 
crash avoidance. This is made possible by the significant advances in 
computing and sensor technologies and presents a unique opportunity to 
secure casualty reductions by implementing systems that stop crashes 
from happening. 

3.31 Vehicle safety regulation is made at the EU level. In setting out our 
approach to continue the improvements to vehicle safety we recognise 
the need to reduce wherever possible the regulatory burden on 
manufacturers and consumers. We will negotiate for alternatives such as 
raising consumer awareness and market based measures and will aim to 
agree to regulation only where absolutely needed and where there is a 
convincing argument that other approaches would not deliver the same 
benefit. For safety interventions, regulation is most commonly used 
where manufacturers do not voluntarily provide the same level of 
technology in all models and where harmonised requirements would 
benefit a wider range of users.  

Research and evidence: supporting innovation 

3.32 Research plays a key role in ensuring that improvements to vehicle 
safety are evidence led. Our research programme provides the evidence 
base for policy development and prioritisation, and is built from extensive 
accident investigation and injury profiling. We are constantly seeking 
innovative ways of improving our knowledge base, for example by 
participating in collaborative research where we can share the funding 
but receive the full benefit of a project.  

3.33 This will help to prioritise those systems with a strong safety benefit and 
identify any implementation issues. New technologies and systems 
evolve with increasing knowledge and experience of their use and so we 
will be seeking closer collaboration with designers and manufacturers to 
enhance our understanding. We take particular interest in systems which 
detect or protect vulnerable road users. This may include participation in 
EU collaborative research on truck safety. 

3.34 We will continue to research the differences in injury mechanisms and 
mitigations for different groups such as women, older people and rear 
seated passengers; recognising that solutions may differ between vehicle 
categories.  


   39  

Consumer information 

3.35 We will continue to support consumer information in the following areas 
of activity: 

 EuroNCAP (European New Car Assessment Programme) - The 
UK is a founding member of EuroNCAP and we will continue to 
work with our international partners to set challenging safety 
objectives and encourage manufacturers to achieve high star 
ratings.  

Figure 3.1 EuroNCAP results 2001 - 2010 showing percentage achieving each star rating and number of 
vehicles tested 

EuroNCAP ratings: percentage of cars falling into each category, 2001-2010


0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%




2001

27 cars



2002

35 cars



2003

34 cars



2004

26 cars



2005

29 cars



2006

27 cars



2007

34 cars



2008

33 cars



2009

48 cars



2010

29 cars

1 Star 2 Star 3 Star 4 Star 5 Star


  


 SHARP - The Department for Transport launched SHARP (Safety 
Helmet Assessment and Rating Programme) in 2008 to give 
motorcyclists objective information about the safety performance 
of different motorcycle helmets. More than 200 models have been 
rated and we will add new models to the list as they come to 
market.  

Emerging technologies  

3.36 Manufacturers and system suppliers are developing advanced safety 
systems at ever faster rates but it is not yet clear which systems will 


   40  

prove the most beneficial. Examples of technologies which appear to 
have good safety potential include advanced emergency braking 
systems, lane departure warnings, and blind spot warnings. 


 

Case Study: Emerging Technologies 

There is now the potential to deliver enhanced crash protection to a wider cross 
section of our citizens by adapting the safety performance of the vehicle for specific 
occupants. Protection systems whose characteristics can change according to the 
age, stature or gender of the seated occupant offer the potential to change the 
behaviour of restraint systems and optimise the protection available in a 
crash. Improvements to the way in which vehicle structures behave during impacts 
are possible as a result of detailed research based upon accident data, which have 
the potential to reduce injuries. 


 

3.37 We are also keen to encourage the development and deployment of 
safety technologies for motorcycles at the EU level. Technologies which 
had been largely car-based, such as advanced lighting and anti-lock 
braking systems are now available in the motorcycle fleet.  

3.38 Improvements in truck safety may be realised through changing their 
frontal shape, the use of active rear steering to improve manoeuvrability 
and stability, and systems to reduce wet weather spray.  

3.39 Trends in HGV design have affected driver vision which has contributed 
to difficulty in seeing cyclists and pedestrians, particularly on the 
passenger side. This can also be a problem for drivers of left hand drive 
vehicles on British roads. To address this the Highways Agency will 
continue to supply 40,000 Fresnel lenses each year to drivers of left-
hand drive lorries on entry to the UK until March 2013. These help to 
reduce blind spots. To improve vision in the longer term, we will make 
proposals in the UN-ECE in Geneva to amend the mirror standards, 
extending the required field of view for HGVs. 

3.40 Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) such as vehicle to vehicle and vehicle 
to infrastructure communications systems can help to improve road 
safety. We will work with the European Commission and other Member 
States in the development of standards under the ITS Directive with the 
aim of reaching agreements that best meet the needs of the UK.  


   41

3.41 Alongside the increase in technologies that support drivers and riders in 
using the roads safely we may also see the continued development of 
technologies that can cause distractions in a vehicle. While we would not 
want, nor be able, to stop this progress we will encourage manufacturers 
to develop solutions that allow technology to be used safely within their 
vehicles. 


  

3.42 There have also been developments in technology which potentially 
support road safety but on which we might not choose to regulate. In 
these cases it is for individuals or companies to best decide what is 
appropriate for their particular circumstances. An example of this is 
winter tyres where we consider that there can, in certain conditions, be 
significant advantages to their use but where additional costs are 
involved. We encourage the sharing of information by industry to help 
individuals and businesses make informed decisions when considering 
how to increase the safety and reliability of their journeys. 

Strategic Road Network 

3.43 At the national level the Government has responsibility for improving the 
safety of the strategic road network. In England this is managed and 
maintained by the Highways Agency. They work on reducing the number 
of collisions by targeting interventions based upon analysis of collisions 
that result in injury, modelling and evaluation. This enables a prioritised 
approach to be taken to the improvement of infrastructure, maintenance 
and other targeted interventions, such as enforcement, where this is 
deemed to be the most appropriate response. 

3.44 The Agency produces regional reports that include both historic data and 
detail evidence based actions which have been carried out or are 
planned for the next financial year and beyond. They include a 
performance summary of the whole area network, intelligence 
summaries and identification of priority user groups that can be targeted 
in liaison with local safety partnerships. These safety reports provide a 
clear direction as to where funding should be focused.  

3.45 A forward programme of Local Network Management Schemes (LNMS) 
provides a prioritised approach to the delivery of engineering schemes, 
including for casualty reduction, which deliver the best value for money. 
The unavoidable constraints on public spending mean that there will be 
less overall resources available, at least in the short term, including for 
road safety infrastructure. However the very high value for money from 
this investment will be reflected in resource allocation decisions. The 
Agency also carries out engineering projects that improve the reliability of 
the network. These may have safety benefits even where it is not the 
main purpose. Simple low cost maintenance measures such as renewal 
and improvement of road condition, markings and signing can have huge 
casualty reduction benefits. Examples of safety specific interventions 
include: 

 Combining side roads to reduce the number of junctions to 
increase capacity and to improve traffic flow and safety; 


   42

 Creating safer verges by the removal or protection of road side 
objects or creating “softer verge environments” by changing metal 


  

posts to crash friendly posts that reduce the severity of an 
accident; 

 Vehicle Separation Marking (Chevrons) schemes to discourage 
close following of other vehicles; and 

 Central hatching to discourage speeding and overtaking 

3.46 The regional reports are also used to target groups and gaps in 
information and education on road safety that are of particular relevance 
to road users on the strategic network. They enable the Highways 
Agency to engage with local highways authorities and local safety 
partnerships to help raise awareness and reduce identified risks. It will 
continue to play a crucial role in helping to provide access to existing 
best practice resources as part of the work on the Better Use of Road 
Safety Evidence project and working with the THINK! team in DfT. The 
local area based teams will have an important role to play on this. 

3.47 The Highways Agency actively provides information to drivers through 
the use of its Variable Message Signs. These signs are used to warn of 
specific risks or hazards that the driver might experience on the road 
ahead as well as providing journey time, route and weather related 
messages. They are also used to reinforce Government safety 
messages, for example on fatigue. The Highways Agency will be taking 
account of the requirements to publish speed camera information and will 
be looking to improve the efficiency of back-offices.  

3.48 Managed motorways are being introduced on parts of the motorway 
network to provide more reliable journeys, to smooth the flow of traffic by 
preventing stop – start movements. This will reduce the likelihood of 
incidents and their severity. Managed motorways utilise the hard 
shoulder either part-time or permanently to create additional capacity 
when required. They use a combination of variable mandatory speed 
limits, automated queue protection systems and enforcement to create a 
compliant environment.  

3.49 Road works are an essential part of maintaining the road network. 
However these works can create delays for drivers and expose those 
that are carrying out the work to danger. As a part of its drive to reduce 
the risks to road workers and the risk of incidents the Highways Agency 
utilises reduced speed limits and average speed cameras through road 
works.  


 

Case Study: Motorcycle friendly crash barriers 

The Highways Agency has installed barrier add-on motorcycle protection at several 
sites across England that pose a particular risk to motorcyclists, such as tight bends. 
A biker that hits this barrier will be redirected along the smooth continuous surface of 


   43  

the barrier attachment. This can reduce the severity of an injury by preventing 
contact with the vertical support posts of uncovered safety barriers.  

Feedback from sites where these barrier add-ons have been introduced indicates 
that there has been a reduction in reported injuries at these specific sites. 


 

3.50 In addition to the provision of engineering solutions, the Highways 
Agency uses its Traffic Officer Service to actively patrol the motorway 
network to deal with incidents and clear the carriageway to get traffic 
moving as quickly as possible where a problem has occurred. They work 
closely with police forces using technology, such as fixed, mobile and 
average speed cameras, to control speed on the network and Automatic 
Number Plate recognition to identify and tackle dangerous vehicles and 
drivers.  

Winter Resilience 

3.51 The Government is involved in preparing and monitoring the responses 
to severe weather. In 2010 we commissioned David Quarmby CBE to 
follow up his earlier review of winter resilience with an urgent audit of 
how well highway authorities and transport operators in England had 
coped with the cold weather. We are now following up these 
recommendations.  

3.52 We tend to see reduced casualty numbers during periods of adverse 
weather due to people undertaking fewer journeys and driving more 
cautiously. However there can be negative effects on road safety in the 
aftermath of severe winters as they can cause damage to road surfaces 
from pot holes and eroded road markings which require action by the 
responsible highway authority. 

Setting National Driving Standards 

3.53 The Driving Standards Agency is responsible for setting the national 
standards for safe and responsible driving, and ensuring that all driving 
related interventions link to those standards. This includes initial training, 
post test development of skills and any remedial education for those who 
commit road traffic offences. 

3.54 The Agency has produced The National Driving Standard (Cat B) ™ and 
the National Riding Standard (Cat A/P) ™ which set out the skills, 
knowledge and understanding required to be a safe and responsible 
driver or rider. Further work is in hand to extend this framework to cover 
Categories C and D.   


   44  

3.55 Complementary DSA Driver and Rider Training Standards have been 
developed that specify national standards for professional instructors. 
These set out what instructors need to be able to do, and the knowledge 
they need to have, in order to deliver effective training that will help 
people to become and remain safe and responsible drivers.  

3.56 Work is also underway to ensure that all of the DSA’s Standards are 
integrated into the framework of National Occupational Standards so that 
they fully inform and underpin all aspects of driving related training. 

Single Double Summer Time (UK) 

3.57 The evidence suggests that there would be a reduction in road casualties 
if we adjusted British clocks to Single Double Summer Time. This would 
put clocks one hour ahead of GMT in winter and two in summer. Recent 
TRL research, updating previous analysis, estimated that having lighter 
evenings and darker mornings would reduce road deaths by around 80 
per year and serious injuries by around 212 per year25. The road safety 
benefits for Scotland, where the darker mornings are expected to have a 
more significant effect than in the rest of the UK, are slightly smaller but 
still positive. The research predicts a 0.7% decrease in KSIs for Scotland 
and a reduction of 0.8% for the whole of the Great Britain taken together, 

3.58 A move to Single Double Summer Time would have wide-ranging 
implications because different people, industrial sectors and regions 
would be affected in different ways. Apart from the road casualties 
benefits there would be other potentially significant benefits including 
energy and CO2 savings, economic activity and quality of life. There are 
other aspects which would have to be considered, for example the 
impact of darker mornings, particularly on people living in the far northern 
and western parts of the country.  

3.59 A thorough appraisal of all the costs and benefits will be important in 
assessing the case for change. We will ensure that the case for road 
safety is considered in wider discussions on the issue. 

Research and Information Sharing  

3.60 One of the key roles for Government has been in undertaking and 
developing research and the provision of data. Research has been 
central to the development of better vehicle technology, infrastructure, 
and education and marketing campaigns. It also provides important 
insights into road collision causation and road user behaviour. The wider 


   45

                                            
25 Sexton and Johnson (2009) - An evaluation of options for road safety beyond 2010. TRL Published 
Project Report, PPR397 


  

research programme and data analysis have provided an understanding 
of the characteristics of collisions and injuries and have developed 
innovative and effective solutions to minimise risks. It has identified high 
risks groups, places and behaviours and provided insights into the 
relationships between behaviours and risks. This has helped to inform 
and evaluate policy development and delivery. 

3.61 Research on skills, behaviours and attitudes has provided evidence to 
improve road user skills and given insights into how to influence different 
types of people to make safer decisions. For example, through the 
introduction of hazard perception training and testing for learner drivers 
and the development of practical road side training for vulnerable child 
pedestrians to provide an early foundation in road user skills. 

3.62 The research programme has also contributed to information campaigns 
which have over time shifted the attitudes of the majority of the 
population and which have supported informed consumer choice, for 
example the campaigns and related measures which have made drink 
driving socially unacceptable and the SHARP safety helmet scheme to 
help motorcyclists select the right helmet for them. 

3.63 The research has also identified high risk groups and behaviours and 
increased understanding of those groups and how they can be effectively 
influenced, for example through drink drive rehabilitation courses, speed 
awareness courses, and enabling motorcycle training to be specifically 
tailored to different groups. 

3.64 At a national level, evaluations of interventions have provided valuable 
data on what works for whom, and in what circumstances. For example, 
Neighbourhood Road Safety Initiative (NRSI) successfully targeted 
interventions in high risk disadvantaged areas. In addition the 
Government is supporting local evaluation with new tools such as 
www.roadsafetyevaluation.com.  

3.65 It is acknowledged that there is still a need for on-going research to 
support local delivery, for example in understanding high risk groups, 
behaviours and places and how to encourage people to make the right 
choices. There is also a need to identify what works such as effective 
enforcement and educational interventions through assessments of 
these impacts on behaviours, skills and attitudes.  

3.66 The road safety knowledge centre, run by Road Safety Great Britain, 
holds many examples of local good practice and other material relevant 
to road safety interventions, including in the education, training and 
publicity fields. Likewise the Chartered Institution of Highways and 
Transportation holds substantial materials about road safety techniques 
and the UK Morse system is a repository containing information about 


   46 

http://www.roadsafetyevaluation.com/


 

the safety impacts of a large number of local highway safety engineering 
schemes. 

3.67 A key element of this framework is to support the sharing of evidence 
and data to support better informed decision making at the local level 
and encourage an evidence based approach to interventions. This 
requires the DfT, road safety professionals and the wider road safety and 
research community to work together. DfT will support this by: 

 Improving access to high quality research by producing research 
synthesises on key areas;  

 Evalu-it toolkit to increase and improve the measures of 
effectiveness of road safety education, training and publicity;  

 Working with all groups to deliver high quality, practitioner focused 
evidence; 

 Developing better predictive and risk based modelling, to provide 
a better understanding of the impact of interventions, firmer 
conclusions on the causes of recent casualty reductions and more 
robust casualty projections and better investment appraisal tools. 

3.68 Maintaining and continuously improving core data sources is also 
important, particularly the police road accidents database (STATS19). 
From 2011, a new electronic system for police reporting (CRASH) will be 
rolled out to provide improvements in consistency and timeliness of data 
as well as minimising police time and effort. DfT will continue to improve 
the range and accessibility of road safety data, including through the 
Road Casualties Online website which allows road safety professionals 
and the public to access and analyse the data.  

3.69 We will continue work to make better use of a wider range of data on 
road casualties where they add value, particularly hospital data, 
exploiting links between sources where possible and developing better 
predictive and risk based modelling to provide deeper understanding of 
factors associated with accident involvement.  

3.70 Expanding our understanding of the links between road casualties and 
criminal activity will remain a key research theme.  We intend to work 
closely with the local authorities and police in South Yorkshire on their 
pioneering research into the links between casualties and drivers' 
offending backgrounds, to strengthen the understanding of the 
correlation between criminal behaviour and being involved in road 
casualties, as well as the scope for targeted interventions in light of the 
initial analysis and findings.   

3.71 The research programme in the future will continue to monitor value for 
money on investment, and look to work across other agendas to assess 


   47  

the wider impacts and benefits, e.g. public health and sustainable travel. 
We will also continue to learn from international experience.   

The Role of the European Union and International Bodies 

3.72 Road safety is considered by the European Union when it sets standards 
for vehicles and in the EU Road Safety Action Plan. Assessing the costs 
and benefits to the UK is the key consideration for deciding on our 
approach to individual pieces of legislation. In many cases we work to 
develop non-regulatory solutions or apply for derogations where the 
expected costs would outweigh the benefits if the legislation was 
imposed. 

3.73 For vehicle standards there can be a benefit to business from standards 
that are common across the EU. This opens up markets to vehicle 
manufacturers and suppliers without the need for separate type approval 
processes. 

3.74 At the international level there is interest in road safety from the World 
Health Organization, the United Nations (UN) and the Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 2011 to 2020 will be 
the UN Decade of Action on Road Safety which aims to raise awareness 
of this issue internationally. We support this as significant progress would 
be made on global road casualty reduction if other countries were to 
make progress towards achieving the results of the world leaders, 
including the UK. We would also expect that the leading countries can all 
make further positive progress and the UN initiative should help build 
support for achieving this. 

3.75 It is important for global and EU initiatives to recognise the different 
starting points between countries on road safety. For example it is likely 
to be much less cost effective for the UK to achieve a given percentage 
casualty reduction compared to a country that has not prioritised road 
safety in the way that we have over the previous few decades and is 
starting from a much higher casualty rate. 


   48  

4. Education 

Developing Skills and Attitudes 

4.1 Developing the necessary skills and attitudes to stay safe on our roads is 
not a one off process. From resources to help children learn about road 
safety, to the point where people invest a lot of time and money to initially 
learn to drive and ride motor vehicles, to offering advice to older drivers, 
there are multiple points at which we can influence and educate road 
users to act safely on our roads. Road user behaviour is responsible for, 
or a major factor in, 95%26 of collisions. We have three key priorities in 
this area: 

 To improve the value gained from that major initial personal 
investment in training in terms of road safety; 

 To encourage continuous development of skills, particularly when 
people are at their most vulnerable – such as children when they 
start to make independent walking and cycling journeys, drivers 
and motorcyclists soon after passing the practical driving tests and 
later on adapting to ageing; and 

 To provide training to drivers and riders who have broken road 
traffic laws to reduce the hazards to them and others.   

Starting Well 

4.2 Road safety education for children and teenagers provides a foundation 
for their knowledge, understanding and behaviour as adults and so 
underpins all of our efforts on road safety. We will continue to support the 
development of educational awards in safe road use, which help to 
ensure that young people aged 14 and over obtain a solid grounding in 
the safe and responsible use of the highway. We will continue to 
evaluate and support Think Education, the set of learning resources from 
pre-school to 16+ which we have made available to all schools, to ensure 


   49

                                            
26 Department for Transport Road Safety Research Report No. 105, Road Safety Strategy Beyond 2010: A 
Scoping Study, J. Broughton, B. Johnson, I. Knight, B. Lawton, D. Lynam, P. Whitfield, 
O. Carsten and R. Allsop, April 2009 


   


that they have good quality materials that they will want to teach. This 
includes materials for teachers, pupils and parents and can also be used 
by out of school groups. They cover all aspects of road safety, from car 
seats for young children to pre-driver attitudes for secondary schools.  


 

Case Study: Kerbcraft 

Kerbcraft is a practical child pedestrian training scheme, developed in Drumchapel, 
Glasgow, by Professor James Thomson at the University of Strathclyde. 

It is designed to teach pedestrian skills to 5 to 7 year olds, by means of practical 
road-side training rather than teaching in the classroom.  

It is built around teaching three skills: - choosing safe places and routes; crossing 
safely at parked cars and crossing safely near junctions. These skills are taught over 
the course of at least 12 roadside sessions. Children are taught in the road 
environment near their schools, in pairs or groups of three children, by trained 
volunteers. 


 

4.3 The Kerbcraft scheme remains the basis for children’s practical road 
safety training. It is a roadside pedestrian training scheme which has 
been proven to deliver a lasting improvement in road crossing skills. We 
encourage Local Authorities to adopt Kerbcraft or similar child pedestrian 
training schemes, rather than anything that is watered down or less 
effective, and target it on high risk areas and groups.  

4.4 Bikeability training delivers the National Standard Cycle Training in 
England and replaces the old cycle proficiency test. There are three 
levels of Bikeability training. The Department for Transport has 
committed to fund level 2 training which is aimed at 10-11 year olds for 
the period of this Parliament. It teaches pupils to cycle on the road, 
providing a real cycling experience so that pupils are able to deal with 
traffic on short journeys such as cycling to schools in areas where roads 
are not too busy. Each level 2 training place currently receives a 
maximum of a £40 grant from the Department for Transport. The £11m 
available for training in 2010/11 will fund 275,000 Level 2 training places 
– over half the year 6 pupils in England outside London. In London, 
Transport for London and London boroughs fund and deliver Bikeability. 


 

Case Study: Partnership delivery of Bikeability in Lincolnshire 

Spalding High School in Lincolnshire was the first to deliver the Bikeability scheme 
and it was also the first school sports partnership (SSP) to deliver it in the country. 
Since it started in 2007 with 300 trainees it has increased the numbers to over 1200 
in 3 years, of which a quarter are high school pupils. The SSP was given a national 
Bikeability award in 2010 as following its lead both the local authority and other 
SSPs have joined in. Bikeability is now seen as a key step in building the confidence 


   50  

of the increasing numbers cycling to school and to sports practice. The majority of 
the training is conducted during curriculum time but there are also very successful 
holiday courses which are often attended by whole families. 

The Bikeability training has been funded through the Department for Transport’s 
grant funding and their work with the Youth Sport Trust. The funding of SSPs for 
Bikeability accounts for about a third of the total with the remainder being channelled 
through local authorities. The partnership working between SSPs and local 
authorities has increased the uptake of training both in the numbers of schools and 
the numbers of children receiving training nationally. 


 

Learning to Drive and Ride 

4.5 Despite improvements in recent years, novice (predominantly young) 
drivers and motorcycle riders are still disproportionately represented in 
the accident record (figure 4.1). This results in higher insurance costs for 
all drivers and particularly young drivers and also deters some employers 
from allowing the newly qualified to drive for work. Some of the problems 
are associated with young drivers who are reckless some or all of the 
time, but the great majority of young people want to drive safely and 
responsibly – and so they need to be taught the right skills and attitudes 
before starting to drive on their own.  


   51   


Figure 4.1 The effects of age (maturation) and experience on accident liability27 

age = 17

age=20

age=25

age = 35

age = 60



0.00




0.05




0.10




0.15




0.20




0.25




0.30




0.35




0.40




0.45


0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70

Age and experience (yrs)


Public road accident liability (pa) 

This graph shows that the age of a driver is a less significant factor in accidents 
involving new drivers than the amount of experience. The red line shows the initial 
accident risk for a driver between the ages of 17 and 60, immediately after passing 
their test. The green lines show how this accident risk lowers with experience for each 
age group after they have passed their test. 


 

4.6 The Driving Standards Agency has recently taken a number of steps to 
ensure that newly qualified drivers are better prepared to drive safely and 
responsibly unsupervised after passing the driving tests. These include: 

 the introduction of independent driving into the practical test, 
together with withdrawal of test routes from the public domain;  

 further encouragement of the instructor accompanying the 
candidate on the practical test so that they are better placed to 
offer tailored advice or remedial action;  

 the introduction of case studies in the theory test; and  

 the withdrawal of live items in the theory test question banks from 
January 2012 

4.7 Working with the driver training and insurance industries, the Agency is 
also currently running a trial to test a new approach to learning to drive. 
Using a new learning syllabus linked to the safe and responsible driving 

                                            
27 Learning to Drive: The Evidence (Road Safety Research Report 87, Department for Transport, May 
2008). The data presented are for respondents with an average of 7,500 miles per annum. 


   52  

standard, participants in the trial are being encouraged to adopt a more 
active approach and take responsibility for their own learning. We will 
assess the outcome of that trial before making decisions on next steps. 

4.8 Building upon these improvements we propose to make further progress 
in reducing novice driver and rider collisions using an approach based 


on: 


 education first – we will continue to explore further ways to ensure 
that young people acquire the appropriate skills and attitudes;  

 developing a new post test vocational qualification – we will work 
with trainers, insurers and young drivers on an effective successor 
to the Pass Plus scheme. This will help newly qualified drivers to 
gain the necessary attitudes and experience to be safe and 
responsible road users, with appropriate accreditation and 
assessment built into the process to ensure market confidence in 
the new qualification. 

 including safety messages in the theory test; 

 modernisation of the driver training industry so that instructors can 
offer the range and standards of service that consumers need, 
and consumers can make an informed choice as to which 
instructor best meets their individual needs; and  

 improving the content and delivery of motorcycle training so that it 
meets the needs of modern day riding 

4.9 The Government initiated a review of the motorcycle test in June 2010 to 
address the criticisms of the test changes introduced in 2009. On 20 
December 2010, we announced the findings of the review and next 
steps. While there is more work to be done on the detail, the review has 
suggested potential changes to the practical motorcycle test which have 
the potential to deliver the Government’s objectives. These are to see the 
practical test conducted as a single on-road event in a way which will 
maintain riding standards, protect safety and increase accessibility of the 
test to all candidates.  

4.10 The next step for the review will be to hold wider trials, with test-level 
candidates, to verify the standards, suitability and safety of the new 
manoeuvres. This will include a number of on road sites, to establish the 
criteria for safe on road testing. This will take place in 2011 and be 
followed by public consultation on the proposed changes. We will aim to 
implement a new test by the end of 2011 or early 2012, and will prioritise 
areas which are poorly served by the current network of off road test 
centres. Any changes to the manoeuvres will be implemented for all tests 
at all locations. Subject to further work on safety, cost and value for 
money, there will be a phased introduction of on-road testing moving to 


   53  

general adoption as soon as possible. Changes to the test will need to be 
monitored and kept under review to ensure that the objectives are 
delivered. 

4.11 We would like to develop greater awareness of heavy goods vehicles 
(HGVs) on the roads. Since 2009 HGV drivers must hold a Certificate of 
Professional Competence and must receive at least 35 hours of formal 
training every five years. However, other road users such as car drivers 
and cyclists may not always be aware that HGVs have blind spots and 
have longer stopping distances than smaller vehicles. There may be 
scope for incorporating an HGV awareness element into the learning to 
drive and ride process, for example through developing an HGV section 
in the Highway Code or including an element of HGV awareness in post 
test training or the theory test.  

Advice to Road Users 

4.12 Over 40 years experience in Britain has demonstrated that public 
information campaigns on road safety have a major role to play in 
creating consent for legislation and enforcement measures. This ‘buy-in’ 
creates behavioural norms which in turn mean that individuals feel 
compelled to conform or risk social stigma, alongside the potential legal 
sanctions of law breaking. A good example of this is drink driving which 
is now widely regarded as socially unacceptable. Information campaigns 
and strong enforcement have both helped to substantially reduce 
casualties caused by drivers who are over the legal alcohol limit. 
However, the problem is far from solved, as drink driving continues to 
contribute to casualties on our roads. 

4.13 Future behaviour change campaigns will focus on those road users who 
are most at risk of injuring themselves or of being responsible for other 
deaths and injuries on our roads. Important audiences will include young 
male drivers, particularly those who are new to driving, motorcyclists and 
child pedestrians. We will continue to monitor the changing media 
landscape to ensure we take full advantage of the opportunities to reach 
and influence our audiences that both traditional and new media offer. 
Ensuring the best value for money will always be a key consideration. 
Where we are able to effectively focus messages at a particular group 
we expect to be able to reduce costs and increase the impact of an 
educational campaign. 

4.14 We will continue to run campaigns under the THINK! banner as there is 
high awareness and trust in the brand amongst the public. Our research 
shows that it is seen as the voice of the road user’s conscience and it 
helps them to make informed decisions about their behaviour, rather than 
dictating to them. We expect the campaign to continue to focus on 


   54  

helping individuals to make safe choices and raising awareness of the 
consequences of not doing so. 

4.15 The success of THINK! is partly due to professionals on the front line 
supporting its aims and ambitions. We aim to give a far greater level of 
support to our partners in local areas by working with them to develop 
relevant material that covers the issues that most affect them. This will 
help to ensure that the road safety marketing material used in local areas 
is fully evidence based and evaluated and will reduce the need for a 
multitude of campaigns being developed for individual areas. The 
material will be available on the THINK! website. 

4.16 We will continue to involve the private sector in the THINK! brand. This 
means that the value of the investment that the Government makes is 
increased and allows us to get our messages into places where it is not 
normally possible to place them on a commercial basis. For example we 
have worked with soft drink manufacturers Coca Cola who offer rewards 
of free soft drinks to designated drivers and last year we piloted a child 
road safety initiative with football clubs.  

4.17 We intend to introduce an annual Road Safety Day to maintain the profile 
of road safety amongst the public. The day will add momentum to some 
of our key messages and allow community and voluntary groups to link 
their local activity to a wider message, enhancing the profile of their work 
and causes. 


 

Case Study: Drink Drive ‘Moment of Doubt’ campaign 

Until ‘Moment of Doubt’, launched in 2007, drink drive communications invariably 
used extreme depictions of the effect of drink driving on innocent bystanders. 
However, an extensive programme of qualitative research and semiotic analysis 
highlighted that people were becoming increasingly desensitized to this ‘crash’ 
approach - they refused to believe that their personal ‘low level’ drink driving 
behaviour could lead to such extreme consequences. What they did fear, however, 
was the consequences of failing a breath test and getting a drink drive conviction. 

Male drivers under the age of 30 were significantly over-represented in drink drive 
KSIs and were attitudinally the most likely to deny the risks associated with drink 
driving. This group became the key target for the campaign, whilst a secondary 
target of older drivers and an ‘overheard audience’ of all adults became a further 
consideration. 

The campaign has performed well against many of the key performance indicators 
identified prior to the strategy being introduced. Against the core target audience of 
young male drivers, highlights include: 

 If I were to drink and drive I would be likely to be caught by the Police - 58% in 
July 2007 vs. 72% in January 2010 (+14 pts) 


   55  

 Being caught drink driving would change my lifestyle dramatically – 72% in 
July 2007 vs. 85% in January 2010 (+13 pts) 

 It is extremely unacceptable to drive after drinking two pints - 49% in July 
2007 vs. 54% in January 2010 (+5 pts)28 

Over the campaign period we have not only seen a reduction in drink related 
casualties but have also seen a decline in the breath test failures from 17.2% in 
2006 to 12.9%29 in 2008.  


 

Educational Interventions for Offenders 

4.18 Road traffic laws can be broken by mistake and there are degrees of 
seriousness in infringements. Besides recognising this in the sanctions 
and sentences for offences, our approach is that education, training or 
rehabilitation should be widely available for more of the lower level 
offences. This proportionate approach also means that enforcement and 
sanctions should be applied most towards serious, deliberate and repeat 
offenders. 

4.19 Education can be more effective than punishments in avoiding 
reoffending for some lower level violations that have taken place through 
mistakes or a lack of awareness. Our priorities are: 


 

 To divert more people guilty of minor road traffic infractions into 

remedial training, as an alternative to prosecution, by increasing 
the range of offences that have an educational alternative; 

 To work with the police and other agencies to develop effective 
national models for remedial courses that can be taken locally and 
are linked to the national standards for safe and responsible 
driving; 

 To prioritise training for newly-qualified offenders as a constructive 
alternative to licence revocation; 

 To reform - and possibly extend – the provision of the post-Court 
training that offenders can be offered to reduce their penalties; 

 To work with the courts to enable use of the existing powers for 
courts to order remedial training and to develop the right training 
courses for this; 

                                            
28 BMRB campaign tracking studies July 2008 vs. Jan 2010 
29 TSGB 2010: Motor Vehicle Offences - data tables 
http://www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/statistics/datatablespublications/accidents/tsgb0899.xls 


   56  

 To reform the regime for re-testing disqualified drivers - including 
extending, and potentially mandating, the requirement for 
disqualified drivers to re-test before regaining their licence and 
developing special tests linked to remedial training. This will build 
on the current arrangements for drink-drivers. 

Advice, Choices and Training for Older Drivers 

4.20 We know many older drivers are able to self regulate their driving 
behaviour by driving shorter distances and avoiding driving in adverse 
weather conditions. Many give up driving when they can no longer do so 
safely. But with an increasingly ageing population, many of whom will be 
continuing to drive for many years after retirement, it is important that 
drivers are able to maintain and adapt their skills to ensure continued 
safe mobility as they age. 

4.21 We do not believe that mandatory re-testing is the best way forward. 
Instead we favour an approach which helps aging drivers to retain their 
skills. We know there are some good examples of driver education 
schemes offered by local authorities and the training industry which 
address the needs of elderly drivers: 


 

 SAGE (Safer Driving with Age) is a programme run by 

Gloucestershire County Council that provides guidance and 
coaching for older drivers. It is a three-stage process incorporating 
a medical and health review, an eye examination and a driving 
assessment;   

 The AA's Drive Confident scheme, which is free for qualified 
drivers, provides an in-car training session geared around meeting 
the needs of the driver; and  

 The Institute of Advanced Motorist's DriveCheck55 offers an in-car 
training session designed to develop good driving practices and 
identify any bad habits.  

4.22 We would like to work with the voluntary sector representing the elderly 
and the training industry to develop further training scheme for older 
drivers.  


    57  

5. Targeted Enforcement and 
Sanctions 

5.1 More than half of road deaths are associated with one or more of drink 
driving, driving whilst impaired by drugs, speeding, careless driving 
(including dangerous driving, driving with a distraction and not wearing 
seatbelts). Driving without insurance or a licence is also associated with 
a disproportionate level of death and injury. 

5.2 Tackling the road safety problems associated with these behaviours 
involves not only increasing awareness of their consequences, but also 
enforcing against serial offenders and the worst offences. 

5.3 The criminal justice system already handles a large number of cases 
related to road traffic offences. Our intention is that overall the changes 
to road traffic enforcement practices and penalties will not lead to more 
court cases or a greater use of prison places. Our intention is to target 
enforcement and sanctions better. With an increased focus on 
educational courses for low level offenders we hope to be able to remove 
people from the criminal justice system to counter the people that our 
increased penalties will put in. As this will depend on the decisions of 
individual police forces and the Crown Prosecution Service we are not 
yet able to accurately assess the full effects of the proposed changes but 
they will be carefully analysed before being allowed to progress and then 
monitored. 

5.4 Our priorities include: 

 Action on drink-driving and driving whilst impaired by drugs that 
allows greater enforcement of the current offences; 

 Introducing a fixed penalty notice for careless driving to allow the 
police to tackle the offence more efficiently; 

 Increasing the level of certain fixed penalty motoring offences so 
they are more proportionate to non-motoring offences of a similar 
severity;  

 Increasing the forfeiture of vehicles as part of the punishment for 
motoring offences such as unlicensed driving; and 


   58  

 Encouraging compliance by HGV operators and drivers by using 
and developing risk based enforcement. 

Drink and Drug Driving 

5.5 The Government recently published its response30 to the report by Sir 
Peter North CBE QC on drink and drug driving law31. This was also the 
response to the Transport Select Committee who had produced 
recommendations32 from Sir Peter's report. The actions set out below on 
drink and drug driving take both reports' recommendations in to account. 

5.6 On drink and drug driving our priority is to deter driving when unfit 
through drugs or alcohol, and to ensure that those who persist in this 
dangerous behaviour are detected and punished effectively. 
Considerable progress has been made in the abatement of drink-driving, 
but we now aim to achieve similar results with drivers who are impaired 
through the use of drugs. The prospect of an effective means of 
detecting and deterring drug-driving will – for the first time – allow a 
serious enforcement effort against this dangerous behaviour. That is our 
first priority, which we believe is shared by the police.  

5.7 It can be just as dangerous for people to drive impaired by alcohol or 
drugs, and it is currently unbalanced that it is easier to get away with one 
than the other. We want to give the police the means to identify drug-
drivers and allow them to request evidential samples for testing. There 
needs to be a clear message that drug-drivers are as likely to be caught 
and punished as drink-drivers.  

5.8 Our strategy is to focus resources and any legislative changes on 
measures which will have the most impact in reducing dangerous 
behaviours. There are therefore two main priorities to continue the 
successful abatement of drink-driving and achieve similar success 
against drug-driving; 

 To give the police effective tools to identify and proceed against 
drug-drivers; 

 To streamline the enforcement process for drink and drug driving 
to relieve pressure on police and other enforcement resources, 
and enable these to be targeted better. 


   59

                                           

5.9 We have issued a specification to manufacturers for drug testing 
technology that will be able to be used in police stations. It is for 


 

30 http://www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/roadsafety/drivinglaws/ 
31 http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20100921035225/http:/northreview.independent.gov.uk/ 
32 http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201011/cmselect/cmtran/460/46002.htm 


  

manufacturers to supply, and police forces to obtain, approved devices 
and put them to use. We are also finalising the additional requirements 
for type approving such devices for use at the roadside. 

5.10 We will explore the case for introducing an offence of having a specified 
drug in the body while driving in addition to the current offence of driving 
while impaired by drugs. An objective measure of whether a drug driving 
offence has been committed should deliver a significant improvement in 
the enforcement of drug driving. 

5.11 This is a complex issue and so we will continue the research and other 
work that is necessary before any decisions can be made. We cannot at 
this stage pre-empt that work by describing any additional offence, or 
give a firm date for its potential introduction. Any proposals will be 
subject to further consultation, regulatory clearance and other impact 
assessments in the usual way. 

5.12 On drink-driving we intend to remove the option for drivers who provide a 
breath sample that is within 40% of the prescribed alcohol limit to request 
a blood or urine test. This was recommended by the North report33 as a 
way to increase the effectiveness of police enforcement activity on drink-
driving. We believe that the current arrangement where some drink 
drivers are able to escape prosecution due to the time delay in receiving 
a blood test is unfair and undermines the enforcement efforts of the 
police. We also aim to type approve portable evidential breath testing 
equipment to increase the efficiency of police work against drink drivers.  

5.13 We have concluded that improving enforcement is likely to have more 
impact on the most dangerous drink drivers than lowering the prescribed 
alcohol limit for driving. This is because 40% of those who are detected 
are at least 2.5 times the present limit and we believe it is a better use of 
resources to prioritise enforcement efforts on these most dangerous 
drivers. 

Careless Driving 

5.14 In recent years convictions for careless driving have fallen significantly 
without evidence of a corresponding improvement in driver behaviour34. 
To address this we intend to introduce a fixed penalty notice for careless 
driving to make it more efficient and less time consuming for the police to 


   60

                                            
33 Report of the Review of Drink and Drug Driving Law, Sir Peter North CBE QC, June 2009 
34 Convictions for offences related to bad driving have fallen from 125,000 in 1985 to 28,900 in 2006 with 
about 25,000 further suspects opting for courses. Of these approximately 500 convictions per year are 
related to causing death by dangerous or careless driving. About 4,000 convictions per year are for 
dangerous driving.   


  

enforce. Providing the option of a fixed penalty notice for the offence 
would enable more people to be offered rehabilitative education to 
combat behaviour such as ‘tail-gating’ or ‘undertaking’. Some offenders 
would continue to be summoned to appear in court and we are not 
proposing to change the boundary between careless and dangerous 
driving. The latter will continue to always be dealt with by a court 
appearance. We will develop robust guidelines to ensure that the 
circumstances in which a fixed penalty notice is appropriate are clearly 
defined. 

Fixed Penalty Levels 

5.15 The levels of payment attached to fixed penalty notices for motoring 
offences have fallen behind those in other areas, such as disorder. This 
risks trivialising the offences. Additionally where an educational course is 
available as an alternative to accepting the fixed penalty notice we 
believe that increasing the payment level will encourage more people to 
accept the course, rather than accepting the fixed penalty notice but then 
not paying the fine as their decision will not depend on the financial 
difference between the options. We propose to increase the payment 
levels for offences related to speed, the requirement to control a vehicle 
(including mobile phone use), pedestrian crossings and wearing a 
seatbelt to between £80 and £100 from the current level of £60. The 
exact amount will depend on a detailed assessment of what effect the 
increases would have on payment rates.  

Forfeiture of Vehicles 

5.16 The police and the courts have the power to seize vehicles in certain 
circumstances but we intend to explore if it would be sensible to make 
greater use of this to keep the most dangerous drivers off the roads. 

5.17 The Continuous Insurance Enforcement legislation requires all vehicles 
to be insured unless they have been declared as off the road. After a 
warning, offenders will receive a fixed penalty notice and will risk having 
their vehicle seized by the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA).  

HGV and Foreign Vehicle Compliance 

5.18 On enforcement for HGV drivers and vehicles the Vehicle and Operator 
Services Agency (VOSA) has developed a risk scoring system, which 
uses roadside encounter data and vehicle roadworthiness test results to 
identify HGV operators most likely to be non-compliant (i.e. to be 


   61  

operating overloaded vehicles, vehicles with safety defects, or whose 
drivers are infringing drivers’ hours rules). VOSA targets these operators 
for more frequent roadside inspections and can immobilise non-
compliant vehicles until defects are remedied. Serious offenders can be 
referred to the Traffic Commissioners for further enforcement action such 
as imposing conditions on the operating licence, withdrawing the 
operating licence or prosecution in court. 

5.19 When foreign vehicles are involved in road traffic offences it can be more 
difficult to track down the driver as we do not have access to the same 
databases of information that we have for vehicles registered in the UK. 
It is important that all drivers are treated equally and that enforcement 
efforts are as effective at targeting any drivers who engages in risky 
behaviour. It is also important that enforcement acts as a deterrent for all 
drivers. The graduated fixed penalty and deposit scheme which has been 
operational for two years has created an effective means to penalise 
foreign drivers for traffic and other vehicle-related offences and is used 
routinely by the Department’s Vehicle and Operator Services Agency 
(VOSA) and the police. 

5.20 The Department is also actively involved (with VOSA) with the 
development of the GB element of an EU-wide electronic record of 
offences by commercial vehicle operators. Under this system details of 
various serious infringements will be sent electronically to the 'home' 
member state of an operator - which is then required by EU law to carry 
out an appropriate investigation. The outcome of that investigation and 
the decision on what action was taken against the operator then has to 
be relayed back to the member state of notification. The scheme is due 
for implementation in 2015 and will provide an additional level of 
deterrence against offending by foreign operators. 

5.21 We are aware that the current systems mean that foreign drivers are less 
likely to face the consequences of dangerous road use and this is 
unacceptable. We are considering ways to address this and improve 
enforcement where we do not have the details of the driver who 
committed the offence. We will review enforcing against vehicles, where 
the driver can not be traced, and we are considering innovative 
approaches to fine collection by using third parties to improve 
enforcement.  

Uninsured and Unlicensed Driving 

5.22 Reducing uninsured driving is a priority. We are aware that the costs of 
insurance premiums may lead some people to drive without insurance 
cover which then increases the cost of all premiums. This is completely 
unacceptable and we will work to reduce it. Targeting uninsured and 


   62  

unlicensed driving will make a huge contribution to the safety of our 
roads. 

5.23 Increases in road safety should lead to lower insurance costs as this will 
decrease the number of collisions and therefore the number of claims 
that insurers pay out. It should also reduce the numbers of people who 
are driving without insurance due to its price.  

5.24 We expect the introduction of Continuous Insurance Enforcement, in 
June 2011, to reduce uninsured driving as fines will be issued where a 
vehicle is not insured, followed by seizure of the vehicle. However this 
will only detect when a vehicle is uninsured, rather than whether the 
current driver is insured to drive it. Police vehicle and driver checks will 
continue to be extremely important in detecting unlicensed drivers.  

5.25 A roadside police survey found that there had been a fall from 1.9% to 
1.2% of kilometres driven without insurance between 2008 and 200635. 
Automatic Number Plate Recognition cameras are believed to have 
contributed to this reduction and continue to help identify vehicles that 
are being driven without insurance. 

5.26 We are also working with the insurance industry on allowing them to 
access the DVLA drivers’ database. This will allow a more accurate 
assessment of a drivers’ risk which is based on an actual, rather than a 
self reported, driving record. We expect this to lead to lower premiums 
for some drivers with the overall savings estimated at over £300m. This 
will be especially important following the European Court of Justice ruling 
that premiums can no longer be based on gender. 

5.27 We expect the educational measures, the changes to enforcement and 
the remedial courses discussed in this document to all help to address 
the issue of illegal driving but we are aware that we do not yet have a 
comprehensive solution. The challenge remains that we have limited 
options for dealing with the individuals who indulge in this behaviour 
without regard for the consequences. If revocation of a licence is not a 
deterrent and fines are left unpaid then aside from detention, which can 
be prohibitively expensive and may only prevent illegal driving during the 
duration of the sentence, it presents difficulties in how to influence the 
behaviour of this dangerous minority. We are concerned that wilful and 
repeated acts of non-compliance by this group will reduce the faith that 
the responsible majority have in enforcement and it may erode their own 
will to comply. The measures set out above will help but this is an area 
where we are aware that we need to make significant progress and we 
will continue to work on it across Government. 


   63

                                            
35Operation V79 - 2008, Tuesday 18th March 2008, Department for Transport 


  

6. Casualty Forecasts 

Baseline forecasts 

6.1 Accurately predicting future levels of road deaths and injuries is not 
straightforward. It is, however, possible to make broad forecasts of 
casualties based upon past casualty rates and trends, the expected 
effect of current measures in areas particularly where these can be 
estimated robustly (for drink-driving, engineering and car secondary 
safety – the ‘DESS’ measures) and projections of traffic growth. We 
commissioned the Transport Research Laboratory to produce such 
forecasts36.   

6.2 Figure 6.1 shows the forecasts for road fatalities. The central projection 
illustrates the reduction in deaths we might expect to make in the 
absence of any significant new measures but where the existing, core 
road safety programme continues to have broadly the same level of 
effect as in the past, and traffic grows in line with DfT forecasts.  As 
discussed in Chapter 2 we believe that the recession was a significant 
contributor to the recent fall in casualties. It then follows that as the 
economy recovers we will see a slow down in the reductions that we 
experienced during that period. The forecasts therefore show the 
continued improvements in road safety which we expect to be partially 
offset against economic growth. 


   64

                                            
36 TRL - PPR552, 2011 


  

Figure 6.1 Forecast road fatalities: GB 1990 to 2030 


0500

1,000

1,500

2,000

2,500

3,000

3,500

4,000

2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030

Deaths
Central forecast
High variant
Low variant


  

6.3 The TRL modelling suggests that improved car secondary safety is the 
single development which has had the most significant effect on national 
casualty totals, but that until recently improvements due to safer vehicles 
have been partly offset by increasing car occupant fatality rates – 
possibly due to changes in the mix, experience and behaviour of drivers. 
The central forecast assumes that car secondary safety will continue to 
develop (though at slower rate than in the past), with the resulting 
casualty savings partially offset by an assumed increase in the fatality 
rate for car occupants.  

6.4 The two variants shown illustrate the sensitivity of this forecast to the key 
assumptions. The high variant reflects a cautious scenario, including no 
further secondary safety developments. The low variant represents a 
situation where the car occupant fatality rate remains at the current 
(historically low) level. 

6.5 Figure 6.2 shows the equivalent forecasts for killed and seriously injured 
casualties37. In this case, past trends are more consistent. The central 
projection represents extrapolation of past trends applied to forecast 
traffic; the low variant broadly illustrates the additional progress that 

                                            
37 Killed and seriously injured casualties are forecast separately and then aggregated 


   65  

could be made if lower performing authorities make stronger progress in 
terms of reducing casualty rates38. 

Figure 6.2 Forecast killed or seriously injured: GB 2000 to 2030 


0

5,000

10,000

15,000

20,000

25,000

30,000

35,000

40,000

45,000

2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030

Killed or seriously injured

Central forecast

Low variant


 

Impact of New Measures  

6.6 The above central forecasts are based on the assumption that the 
existing road safety programme and DESS measures continue to 
develop, but do not include the effects of any new measures. As TRL 
note, some existing measures are likely to lose effectiveness in future so 
these forecasts may be optimistic.   

6.7 However, any effects of the new measures set out in this framework 
might be expected to contribute to further reductions below the central 
forecast shown. Assessing the extent of these reliably is difficult, 
particularly as local authorities will be left to set their own priorities in 
many areas.   

6.8 As a broad indication, if the package of proposed new measures is 
successful, we would expect to see a reduction in fatalities similar to that 
shown by the low variant in figure 4 – this would represent a case where 
new measures might be successful in changing behaviour and improving 
skills and attitudes, particularly among car drivers, so that the car 
occupant fatality rate remains at the current low level.  

                                            
38 An illustrative reduction of one-sixth for 2020 and one-third for 2030, based on analysis of casualty data 
for 2007-09 which suggests that if all authorities had achieved casualty rates per billion vehicle miles of no 
higher than the median, the number of KSIs would have been 14 per cent lower than observed. 


   66  

6.9 For KSIs, we might expect that new measures would at least offset any 
reduction in the effectiveness of current measures so that the reduction 
indicated by the central projection is achieved. The low scenario 
represents lower performing authorities making stronger progress and 
moving towards the average. Progress is unlikely to be uniform – given 
the relatively small number of deaths it would not be surprising to see 
increases in some years, within the context of a long term downward 
trend. The table below shows projected reductions both in terms of 
casualty numbers and percentage reduction compared with the 2005-09 
average.  

Table 6.1 Casualty reduction forecasts to 2030 

  2005-09 average 2020 2025 2030 

Killed 

Central projection 2,816 1,770 1,720 1,670 

Change on 05-09 
average   -37% -39% -41% 

Low projection   1,530 1,370 1,220 

Change on 05-09 
average   -46% -51% -57% 

Killed or seriously injured 

Central projection 30,040 18,070 15,820 13,570 

Change on 05-09 
average   -40% -47% -55% 

Low projection   15,110 12,130 9,150 

Change on 05-09 
average   -50% -60% -70% 

6.10 We will monitor our performance against the indicators in the Road 
Safety Outcomes Framework at Annex B. We expect that the 
Government’s actions, along with the key contributions from local 
authorities, service deliverers and local communities, will continue to 
deliver a downward trend and address the differential risks.  

6.11 If the impacts are what we expect then we will see fatalities falling by 
around 37% to 1,770 by 2020 if we use the central projection. If from 
2020 we assume that the low projection can be achieved with the 
variation in performances at the local authority level narrowing and 
moving towards the level of the top performers then we would see deaths 
reducing by 57% to around 1,200 and KSIs falling below 10,000 with a 
reduction of 70% by 2030. This is neither a target nor a definitive 


   67      68

forecast, but we are confident this can be realised if everyone plays their 
part.  


 


Annex A. Road Safety Action Plan 

Measure Description Action (e.g. 
legislation, type 
approval) 

Expected start 
date 

Dependencies 
(where legislation 
is required) 

Introduce a fixed 
penalty offence 
for careless 
driving  

This will allow the 
police to tackle 
offences that are 
currently 
unenforced more 
efficiently. 


 

We will introduce a 
statutory instrument 
that will enable this. 
This power is 
available in the 
1988 Road Traffic 
Offenders Act  

2012 Thorough 
assessment of 
impacts and 
regulatory 
clearance. 

Increasing penalty 
fines 

We propose to raise 
the fines for road 
traffic fixed penalty 
notices which are 
currently at £60 to 
£80-100 to bring 
them into line with 
other fixed penalty 
notices.  


 

We will review the 
fine levels and 
change the 
regulations to 
increase the fine 
levels. 

2012 Thorough 
assessment of 
impacts and 
regulatory 
clearance. 

Withdrawal of 
statutory option 
for drink drivers 

This will remove the 
right of drivers who 
fail an evidential 
breath test by 40% 
or less to request a 
blood or urine test.  

We will amend 
Section 8 of the 
Road Traffic Act 
1988. 

2013 Thorough 
assessment of 
impacts, 
regulatory 
clearance and 
parliamentary 
time. 

New drug offence This would create 
an offence of 
driving with a 
specified drug in the 
body. Significant 
further work is 
needed before we 
will be able to 
decide whether to 
proceed. 

This would require 
new primary 
legislation. 


 

2015 – at the 
earliest, 
although no 
decision has 
been taken on 
whether to 
proceed. 


 

Policy 
development, 
thorough 
assessment of 
impacts, 
regulatory 
clearance and 
parliamentary 
time. 


   69  

Measure Description Action (e.g. 
legislation, type 
approval) 

Expected start 
date 

Dependencies 
(where legislation 
is required) 

Forfeiture of 
vehicles  

We will explore how 
we can make 
greater use of 
existing powers to 
seize vehicles. This 
will be delivered by 
courts. 

We will work across 
Government to 
encourage greater 
use of these 
powers. 


 

2013  

Portable evidential 
breath testing 
equipment 

This will allow 
police to collect 
evidential breath 
samples at 
locations other than 
special facilities in 
police stations. 

It is expected to be 
more useful if the 
statutory option is 
removed. 

Type approval – 
the specification is 
expected to be 
issued in summer 
2011. 


 

2011  

Drug screening 
devices 

This will allow the 
police to confirm 
that a suspect has 
drugs in their 
system before they 
proceed with 
obtaining evidential 
blood samples, 
without having to 
rely, as now, on 
forensic medical 
examiners’ 
interventions. 

Type approval of 
devices – the 
specification has 
been issued. 

2011  

Safety messages 
in theory tests 

This will place 
safety messages 
and video clips into 
theory test centres 
to reinforce safe 
behaviours and 
attitudes at the 
point where 
candidates are 
considering 
independent driving 
and preparing for 
their practical 
driving test. 

We will develop 
video clips to be 
shown to 
candidates and 
pilot them in test 
centres 

2011  


    70  

Measure Description Action (e.g. 
legislation, type 
approval) 

Expected start 
date 

Dependencies 
(where legislation 
is required) 

We will increase the 
educational courses 
that can be offered 
in the place of fixed 
penalty notices to 
teach safer driving 
behaviour. 

We will develop 
courses by working 
with the police and 
the Driving 
Standards Agency 

Ongoing   

We will develop 
courses that courts 
can offer in the 
place of losing a 
licence 

We will develop a 
course  

2013  

Increased 
educational 
offerings to 
offenders 


 

This will require 
offenders to take a 
course and 
assessment to 
regain a licence 
after a serious 
disqualification 
(expected to be 12 
months or more) 

We will develop a 
suitable course and 
an assessment  

2013  

A new post test 
qualification 

This will replace 
Pass Plus and will 
provide candidates 
with an improved 
way to develop their 
driving skills after 
passing their driving 
test. 

We will work with 
the Driving 
Standards Agency 
and the insurance 
industry to develop 
a course that 
improves the skills 
of inexperienced 
drivers. 

2014  

A new website for 
the comparison of 
local performance 
information 

This will allow local 
citizens to easily 
compare the 
performance of 
their area, on road 
safety, against 
other similar areas 
and to compare 
improvement rates. 

Internal 
development 


 

2012  

Develop portal for 
road safety 
professionals 

This will signpost 
key information and 
repositories on road 
safety that can be 
used by the 
professionals and 
public alike. 

Internal 
development 


 

2012  


   71  

Annex B. Road Safety Outcomes 
Framework 

B.1 The Outcomes Framework is designed to help Government, local 
organisations and citizens to monitor the progress towards improving 
road safety and decreasing the number of fatalities and seriously injured 
casualties on Great British roads. We expect it to be used against the 
figures for individual local authorities so that their progress can be 
compared against the national picture. 

B.2 The following are proposed indicators for the strategic framework for 
road safety. The progress will be reported annually, with details 
published in Reported Road Casualties Great Britain. The form of 
presentation has yet to be decided but it is likely that this will include, 
where appropriate, use of rolling averages and percentage changes to 
monitor progress.  

B.3 We have identified 6 key indicators which relate to road deaths and will 
measure the key outcomes of the strategy at national level. These are: 

 Number of road deaths (and rate per billion vehicle miles) 

 Rate of motorcyclist deaths per billion vehicle miles 

 Rate of car occupant deaths per billion vehicle miles 

 Rate of pedal cyclist deaths per billion vehicle miles 

 Rate of pedestrian deaths per billion miles walked 

 Number of deaths resulting from collisions involving drivers under 


25 

B.4 At the local level, the number of road deaths is small and subject to 
fluctuation. For this reason we propose the following as key indicators: 


 

 Number of killed or seriously injured casualties  

 Rate of killed or seriously injured casualties per million people  

 Rate of killed or seriously injured casualties per billion vehicle 
miles 


   72  

B.5 Alongside this we propose a more comprehensive list of indicators, 
related to the key themes of the strategy – these are shown in the table. 
These are intended to monitor trends and patterns at the national level. 
This does not preclude monitoring at the local level, though this is not 
expected and in many cases will not be possible where local data are 
not available. 

B.6 This is a long term strategy; where data required to monitor progress is 
not yet available but likely to be in the short-medium term, or the form of 
the indicator needs further consideration, the relevant indicator is 
marked as ‘under development’.  


 

Indicators for the Road Safety Framework 

Area Indicator Sub groups/splits Data source and 
issues 

Casualties Number of fatalities 

Number of serious 
injuries 

- Age (children, young, 
other, elderly) 

- Car occupants  

- HGV and LGV 
involvement (including 
left hand drive) 

- Motorcyclists 

- Pedal cyclists 

- Pedestrians 

- Disadvantage  

STATS19, including 
Index of Multiple 
Deprivation (10% most 
and 10% least deprived 
areas) to measure 
disadvantage.  

 Fatality rate per billion 
vehicle miles 

- Car occupants 

- Motorcyclists 

- Pedal cyclists  

- Pedestrians (based 
on distance walked) 

STATS19 and traffic 
data. Distance walked 
(for pedestrians) from 
National Travel Survey  

 Fatality rate per million 
population 

- Age 

- Road user groups (as 
above) 

STATS19 and 
population data. 


    73  

Indicators for the Road Safety Framework (continued) 

Area Indicator Sub groups/splits Data source and 
issues 

 Number fatalities and 
KSI on the English 
trunk road network 

 STATS19 

 Road deaths as 
percentage of all 
accidental deaths 

 STATS19 and mortality 
data 

 Cost of road traffic 
casualties 

 DfT estimates (based 
on STATS19 data)  

 Road casualties 
admitted to hospital 

- all admissions 

- admissions for 2+ 
days 

Hospital Episode 
Statistics (England 
only)  

Learning to drive Number of fatalities 
and KSIs in collisions 
involving drivers under 
the age of 25.  

 STATS19 

 Number of fatal and 
KSI single vehicle 
collisions involving a 
young driver (aged 17-


24) 


 STATS19 

 Number and proportion 
of new drivers that 
pass their driving test 
on the first attempt 

 Indicator under 
development; DSA 
data 

 Number and proportion 
of new car drivers 
taking enhanced 
training within 1 year of 
taking test (once new 
post test qualification 
available) 

 Indicator under 
development; DSA 
data 

Remedial education Number of people 
taking courses 

 NDORS data 

Enforcement 


 

Number and 
percentage of people 
killed and KSI in 
collisions with a driver 
over the legal blood 
alcohol limit 

 STATS19 data 

 Proportion of drivers 
tested failing a breath 
test 

 Breath test results 
provided by police 


   74      75

brerIndicators for the Road Safety Framework (continued) 

Area Indicator Sub groups/splits Data source and 
issues 

 Prevalence of drug-
drive 
incidents/collisions 

 Indicator under 
development 

 Percentage of fatalities 
and KSIs in collisions 
with excessive speed 
as a contributory factor 

 STATS19 

 Proportion of vehicles 
exceeding speed limits 

- vehicle type 

- road type 

Vehicle speed data 
derived from automatic 
traffic counts 

 Percentage of car 
occupants killed who 
were not wearing a 
seat belt 

 Indicator under 
development 

 Number of motoring 
offences 

- type of offence  Home Office/Ministry of 
Justice data 

Vehicle Safety Proportion of drivers 
injured among those 
involved in collisions by 
age of car (precise 
indicator to be 
developed) 

 Indicator under 
development 

Perceptions of road 
safety 

Whether people feel 
safe walking and 
cycling 

 Indicator under 
development; question 
to be include on 
attitudinal survey (e.g. 
Think! tracking) 


  

	Foreword
	Executive summary
	Key Themes for Road Safety
	Improving Road Safety Together - Empowering Local Citizens and Local Service Providers
	Education – Developing Skills and Attitudes
	Targeted Enforcement and Sanctions
	The Vision for Road Safety

	1. Introduction
	Government Principles
	The Current Situation
	The Government’s Approach to Road Safety
	Devolution 
	Vision for Road Safety

	2. Past Trends
	Road Deaths
	International Comparison
	Local Variations

	3. Improving Road Safety Together
	Empowering Local Citizens and Local Service Providers 
	The Role for Local Citizens and Communities
	The Role for Local Public Services
	The Role for Industry and Business
	The Role for the Voluntary Sector
	The Role for Central Government
	Main Areas of Responsibility in Road Safety
	Vehicle Technology
	Research and evidence: supporting innovation
	Consumer information
	Emerging technologies 
	Strategic Road Network
	Winter Resilience
	Setting National Driving Standards
	Single Double Summer Time (UK)
	Research and Information Sharing 
	The Role of the European Union and International Bodies




	4. Education
	Developing Skills and Attitudes
	Starting Well
	Learning to Drive and Ride
	Advice to Road Users
	Educational Interventions for Offenders
	Advice, Choices and Training for Older Drivers

	5. Targeted Enforcement and Sanctions
	Drink and Drug Driving
	Careless Driving
	Fixed Penalty Levels
	Forfeiture of Vehicles
	HGV and Foreign Vehicle Compliance
	Uninsured and Unlicensed Driving

	6. Casualty Forecasts
	Baseline forecasts
	Impact of New Measures 

	Annex A. Road Safety Action Plan
	Annex B. Road Safety Outcomes Framework

