




Making it Happen




Fulfilling Potential 
Making It Happen

This publica
available in
us if you req

Web: www

Post: Office
Ground Floo

Email: fulfil

Telephone:

ISBN: 978-1

Produced b

© Crown Co

tion is available in Easy read and Braille. A summary is 
 BSL with audio voice-over and subtitles. Please contact 
uire these or other formats.

.odi.gov.uk/fulfilling-potential

 for Disability Issues, Department for Work and Pensions, 
r, Caxton House, 6–12 Tothill Street, London SW1H 9NA

ling.potential@dwp.gsi.gov.uk

 020 7340 4000

-78153-561-5

y the Department for Work and Pensions, July 2013

pyright 2013

INDEPENDENCE

MENTOR

INSPIRATION

ROLE 
MODEL

POSSIBILITIES

INCLUSION

OPPORTUNITIES

POSITIVITY

WARRINGTON 
WOLVES

CHANGE

COUNSELLOR

DREAM

MUM & DAD

SMILE

FAMILY




This document refers to a wide variety of 
policies, some applicable across the whole of 
the UK and many to England only. The devolved 
administrations have their own policies with regard 
to devolved matters.




Foreword
Shortly after I became Minister 
for Disabled People, we published 
‘Fulfilling Potential – the Discussions 
So Far’ and ‘Next Steps’. That was 
last September, and since then I 
have worked closely with disabled 
people to understand how together 
we can create the best possible 

opportunities for fulfilling their potential.

I have been inspired by the achievements and 
aspirations of those I have met, and now want to  
set out our plans for action. 

We stand firmly by the principles of the UN 
Convention on the Rights of Disabled People, and I 
am proud that the Joint Committee on Human Rights 
sees us as a world leader on both disability rights and 
independent living. 

But I know there is still a long way to go, and I have 
set myself clear priorities. I want all disabled people, 
whatever their age or background, to have the 
opportunity to fulfil their potential – to lead full and 
active lives that are valued by society. We cannot 
achieve this unless we have modern and responsive 
public services to support all disabled people, their 
carers and families. 

It is clear that we need to overhaul the outdated 
systems we inherited to ensure that the UK stays at 
the forefront of equality and independent living and 
acts as a role model to support the aim of fulfilling 
potential.

The need to get the very best start in life as soon as 
possible is something that resonates with me, and 
the incredible and inspiring Paralympic Games last 
year had a positive impact on many of us. I want 



V VI


to build on this legacy and have been working with 
young disabled people – inspirational role models – so 
disabled children, their families and young disabled 
people can see that high aspirations can be achieved 
for every aspect of life, including employment.

We are all aware of the difficult and challenging 
economic situation. In the 2013 Spending Round, the 
Government has made choices, at a time of spending 
restraint, which target resources on the needs of 
disabled people. For example, £3.8 billion has been 
allocated for a pooled budget for health and social 
care services for older and disabled people; £350 
million for employment programmes and support for 
disabled people moving into work; and £335 million 
for local authorities to prepare for capping people’s 
care costs. 

We also believe that there is a new way of doing 
things, a way that aims to involve, inspire and support 
all citizens to share in the shape of our future.

It is not for Government alone to bring about change 
– we all have a role, especially disabled people’s user-
led organisations. Dynamic and creative partnerships 
across sectors are essential for innovation, and can 
bring about the changes needed in communities that 
will have a real and lasting effect on the day-to-day 
lives of disabled people.

Disability is about every one of us – there are now 
almost 12 million disabled people in the UK, many 
of us have disabled people as friends or family, and 
in an ageing society we are all increasingly likely to 
live to an age when we may well experience multiple 
impairments and disability. So we all need to be 
involved in making the changes that are needed.

Esther McVey, MP 
Minister for Disabled People




VII 1

Contents

1. The Government’s approach  2

2. Fulfilling Potential – the cross-Government 
strategy 


9

3. Working together for change  12

4. Disabled people fulfilling their potential – 
improving outcomes


 23


5. Making it happen now 32

6. Conclusion 44

Annex A - Outcomes and indicators framework 46

Annex B - Aims, priority areas and members of 
the Disability Action Alliance


502 3

1. The Government’s approach 

1.1 The UK has a proud history of furthering the 
rights of disabled people, but we know more 
needs to be done to support disabled people 
to participate in every aspect of society. 
Equality is at the very heart of the Coalition 
Government. It is fundamental to building a 
strong economy and a fair society where 
everyone has opportunities to realise their 
aspirations and fulfil their potential. 

1.2 Major reforms to public services and welfare 
are underway – our plans are set out in the 
Action Plan in part 2 of this publication. These 
aim to: 

• support disabled people to live independent 
lives;

• personalise services; 

• give more choice and control; and 

• improve opportunities to work and play a 
full part in society.

1.3 Our welfare system is one of the most 
supportive in the world. However, we also 
need to recognise its faults. Compared 
to other countries, our system is overly 
complicated – our customers tell us as much. 
They find it difficult to understand what 
they are entitled to. We also need to ensure 
support is affordable – we spend 2.4 per 
cent of our Gross Domestic Product (GDP)1 
on disability benefits, a fifth more than the 
European average, and significantly more 
than Germany, France, Italy and Spain, our 
major European competitors2 – and our 
spending grew by a third between 2005 and 
2009.3

1.4 For these valuable services to continue and 
prosper, they must be sustainable and keep 
pace with the needs of disabled people today. 
Our reforms are essential to these aims.

1.5 The Government will act as a catalyst and 
advocate for wider change, promoting 
opportunity, equality, and changes to 
attitudes to disability, working in partnership 
with business, the voluntary sector and wider 
civil society, as well as with disabled people’s 
organisations, individual disabled people and 
those that support them. 

1 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) 
Social expenditure database

2 Source OECD

3 The OECD estimates spending on disability benefits in 2009 in France 
at 0.8 per cent of GDP, Germany at 1.1 per cent, Spain at 1.3 per 
cent and Italy at 0.8 per cent. The OECD estimates UK spending on 
disability benefits at 1.8 per cent of GDP in 2005 and 2.4 per cent in 
2009, an increase of around a third 


4 5

1.6 We have worked with disabled people, a wide 
range of disability and other organisations, 
and colleagues across Government to develop 
‘Fulfilling Potential’. This has ensured we are 
focusing on the issues most important to 
disabled people and that our approach is 
transparent and open. 

1.7 We are not simply concentrating on short-
term actions, but taking a long-term view: 
supporting choice and control to enable 
disabled people to live independently, have 
greater opportunities to work and be more 
active members of society. 

1.8 This must all be consistent with the longer-
term work to change attitudes and 
behaviours – of the public, professionals, 
those involved in service delivery and 
employers – and the aspirations of disabled 
people themselves. 

1.9 So we know that partnerships are key to 
delivery. This is a dynamic new approach 
and a vibrant and responsive way of working: 
action-based policy making involving 
everyone and constantly checking what 
works. 

1.10 As well as reiterating the Government’s 
commitment to supporting disabled people 
to realise their aspirations, this document sets 
out to show what we have done since the last 
‘Fulfilling Potential’ publications and how we 
have sought to fulfil the commitments we 
made in ‘Fulfilling Potential – Next Steps’. 

Paul Ntulila,  
aspiring politician  
and role model 


6 7

Role Models Campaign

The Department for Work and Pensions’ (DWP) 
Role Models campaign was launched on the 
International Day of Disabled People in December 
2012, to raise the aspirations of young disabled 
people and help them to fulfil their potential.

The campaign was produced in co-production 
with some amazing young disabled people, who 
provided advice and suggestions about the people 
who inspired them. As a result DWP filmed some 
of their role models and produced short video clips 
which we’ve published on YouTube.

So far, over 50 role models from a wide range of 
backgrounds have taken part in the campaign. They 
talk candidly about their aspirations, the barriers 
they’ve faced, and what advice they have to offer 
young disabled people who are just starting out. 

Here’s a taster of what some of the role models 
have told us:

Paul Ntulila, aspiring politician: “The best 
achievement is my degree because it was really 
tough and I struggled studying politics [as] high 
level English language for me is really hard to 
understand. I was pretty confident at dealing with 
these issues in my first year, second year more 
so and third year absolutely – my confidence sky-
rocketed and I got my first class degree.” 

I think the main barrier 
for most things is 

independence and just 
being able to do as much 

as you can as easily 
as you can. F inding 

the most efficient and 
straight forward way of 

achieving something is 
the challenge. It's kind of 

enjoyable at times to be 
able to just work around 

a problem, solve it and 
then be able to do it 

yourself.
Dominic Hyams, TV producer  

and role model

Find out more about 
Dominic and his role as 
an assistant producer for 
a TV production company 
which makes programmes 
covering a wide range 
of sports activities on 
YouTube                                     


 

https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3DthN7dmDd5c4%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3DthN7dmDd5c4%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3DthN7dmDd5c4%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3DthN7dmDd5c4%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3DthN7dmDd5c4%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3DthN7dmDd5c4%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3DthN7dmDd5c4%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3DthN7dmDd5c4%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3DthN7dmDd5c4%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player


8 9

Sophie Christianson, Paralympic equestrian gold 
medallist:

“My greatest achievement would be winning three 
gold medals at a home Games, but it’s about the 
whole process of getting there.

The advice I would give to young disabled people 
who are thinking about what to do in the future is 
to follow your dreams. Do what you really enjoy 
doing. I think that’s what life is all about. If the end 
result is harder than you think it’s going to be, it’s 
even more rewarding when you get there.”

Vidar Hjardeng MBE, journalist and diversity 
advisor:

“Based on my experience, if I was starting out 
again as a young person who happens to have a 
disability, I would say be yourself, be very aware of 
what you can do and also pragmatic about what 
you can’t do – and if you can convince yourself 
about your own ability then you have got a good 
chance of convincing other people.” 

Dominic Hyams, TV producer: 

“I think the main barrier for most things is 
independence, and just being able to do as much 
as you can as easily as you can. Finding the most 
efficient and straightforward way of achieving 
something is the challenge. It’s kind of enjoyable 
at times to be able to just work around a problem, 
solve it and then be able to do it yourself.”

2. Fulfilling Potential – the cross 
Government strategy 

2.1 This is the fifth document in the  
‘Fulfilling Potential’ series. You can find  
all previous documents on our website  
at www.odi.gov.uk/fulfilling-potential 

December  


2011


September  


2012


September  


2012


February  


2013


July  


2013


Discussion  
Document

Discussions  
So Far Next Steps

Building 
Understanding

Making It 
Happen

Obtain wide 
range of 
opinions 

and ideas to 
inform new 

strategy

Highlight 
current and 

planned 
activity 

and publish 
response to 
discussion 
document

Online 
strategic 
priorities 

and explain 
how specific 

actions will be 
developed

Draw on 
statistics and 
research to 

explore nature 
of disability in 
the UK today

Outline 
specific 

actions and 
timelines and 
how progress 

will be 
monitored

Co-production

2.2 Throughout the process we have taken a 
phased approach to ensure transparency,  
and that we are taking our stakeholders’ 
views into account in what we do. 




10 11

2.3 Disabled people can still face significant 
barriers to fulfilling their potential and 
playing a full part in society. We have a real 
opportunity to build on the legacy of the 2012 
Paralympic Games – which has dramatically 
changed the public’s awareness and attitudes 
to disability (81 per cent of people said that 
it had changed attitudes to disabled people 
in a positive way4 ). And we can draw on 
new information from the ‘Life Opportunities 
Survey’5 and other sources to understand 
those barriers, and identify options for 
change. 

2.4 Now is the time for action, with disabled 
people and their organisations at the heart; 
developing and implementing change. We 
have committed to a new way of working – 
forming partnerships across sectors to make 
a real and tangible difference to disabled 
people, their families and communities, and 
to wider society. Innovation and action are 
key – and the new Disability Action Alliance 
is at its forefront.

4 Ipsos Mori, September 2012, Paralympics Poll

5 Office for National Statistics, November 2012,  
Life Opportunities Survey




12 13

3. Working together for change 

Disability Action Alliance

3.1 Responses from disabled people to the 
‘Fulfilling Potential’ discussion document 
stated that many barriers faced by disabled 
people could only be overcome by public, 
private and third sector organisations working 
together with disabled people’s organisations. 
The Office for Disability Issues therefore 
supported the setting up of the Disability 
Action Alliance, which brings together 
disabled people’s organisations with other 
organisations from the public, private and 
third sector to work in partnership. It aims to 
identify and deliver actions at a national 
and local level that will make a real difference 
to the lives of disabled people. Disability Rights 
UK agreed to convene the Alliance to ensure 
disabled people’s voices and experiences drive 
change locally and nationally. 

3.2 Some early projects are focusing on outcomes, 
for example:

• improving disabled people’s travel 
experience by working with transport 
providers to help develop common 
approaches to ensuring good journeys;

• increasing understanding of what makes an 
inclusive community and identifying and 
spreading good practice;

• improving joined up financial advice and 
support for disabled people, specifically 
around getting access to relevant financial 
information and managing a budget; 

• expanding the mentoring and advocacy 
services available for offenders and ex-
offenders with learning disabilities and/
or mental health conditions, to build their 
confidence and esteem, helping them to 
resettle back into their community, get a 
job, and participate in society – thereby 
reducing the risk of re-offending; and

• making sure the commissioning of local 
services takes full account of disabled 
people’s aspirations for independent 
living, and increasing the opportunity for 
Disabled People’s User-Led Organisations 
(DPULOs) to compete for and win 
contracts.

3.3 The Alliance is open to all organisations. 
We hope to get the widest possible 
membership, of national and particularly local, 
organisations, to make sure we have strong 
partnerships to take forward actions that 
deliver real change. 

3.4 Most Disability Action Alliance projects 
will draw on the resources of member 
organisations. The Office for Disability Issues is 
providing a secretariat function for the Alliance 
and they will also advise on how to access 
new and existing funding such as the Big 
Lottery Fund, UK Community Foundations  
and the new Innovation Fund.

3.5 There is more information on the Alliance in 
Annex B. 


14

Disability Action Alliance 

Blackpool Transport got the idea for their ‘safe 
journey card’ from the first Disability Action Alliance 
meeting in November 2012, when First Group 
proposed that the Alliance could adapt their older 
people’s card. Blackpool Transport felt it had great 
potential for improving customer service and 
enhancing disabled people’s travelling experience, 
especially for those with hidden impairments. 

After talking to a number of local community 
groups and being met with an enthusiastic and 
positive response from everyone, they decided to 
adopt and customise the card and introduce it for 
bus users in Blackpool. 

Blackpool Transport has said: “The simplicity of 
the scheme is one of its greatest strengths along 
with the modest cost involved to achieve it. The 
enormous benefits to our staff were also perceived 
to be one of the instant gains from such a system, 
and having had the information printed, and 
produced wallets for the cards to be carried in, 
we will shortly be providing training information 
packages for all our drivers in order to ensure that 
they fully understand the system, enabling them to 
maximise the value of the scheme.” 


15

Using the ‘safe journey 
card’ in Blackpool 




16 17

Stephen Brookes MBE Disability First: “Being 
an active disabled person I see that membership 
of the Disability Action Alliance in so many ways 
provides a great opportunity to make a real 
difference to the lives of disabled people. 

From the start we have seen some great 
partnerships emerge, and already we have some 
good outcomes, such as the Alliance involvement 
with Blackpool Transport who are taking forward 
the ‘safe journey card’. 

It is great to have so many disabled people and 
major organisations coming together in increasing 
numbers to make a difference. 

There is much to do and I look forward to seeing 
what we can achieve together.”

There is much 
to do and I look 
forward to seeing 
what we can 
achieve together.
Stephen Brookes, MBE 
Disability First




18 19

Disabled People’s User-Led Organisation

3.6 We have long recognised the value and 
need for strong Disabled People’s User-Led 
Organisations (DPULOs). Organisations run 
by, and for, disabled people play a vital role in 
making sure disabled people have their voices 
heard at every level, and that their needs are 
recognised throughout the development and 
implementation of policies and services that 
affect them. We believe this is fundamental 
to helping achieve our aim of supporting 
disabled people to fulfil their potential. 

3.7 We set up the Strengthening Disabled 
People’s User-Led Organisations Programme 
to promote and encourage the growth 
of DPULOs, and to support their work in 
building their capacity. We have already 
provided more than £2 million to over 130 
organisations across the UK to take forward a 
variety of projects, to build the sustainability 
of these unique organisations and enable 
stronger outcomes for disabled people. You 
can find out more about the Programme 
or access the DPULO Facilitation Fund by 
completing the application form on our 
website.6 

6 www.odi.dwp.gov.uk/odi-projects/user-led-organisations.php

3.8 In addition we have recruited 15 DPULO 
Ambassadors to provide advice and support 
to DPULOs across the UK to help them 
expand the DPULO network. We recognise 
there is a need to work with, and listen to, 
young disabled people. To widen the reach of 
DPULOs and support young disabled people 
in moving from education into work, we have 
recruited six DPULO Young Ambassadors 
aged 16–24 years of age.

3.9 We are working with partner organisations 
to develop new funding opportunities for 
projects addressing the issues identified by 
disabled people in ‘Fulfilling Potential’. 

Creating personalised services for disabled 
people marks a real commitment to building 
services around the needs of the individual.
Mike Adams OBE, Chief Executive Officer,  
Essex Coalition of Disabled People 




20 21

Disabled People’s User-Led Organisations 
Ambassadors 

The DPULO Ambassadors were recruited through 
highly competitive nationwide open competitions. 
The successful candidates were selected for their 
strong interpersonal skills and expertise in the field 
of disability. 

The Ambassadors cover all the geographical  
areas of the UK including Northern Ireland, 
Scotland and Wales.

They use their skills to inspire DPULOs and 
encourage them to build their capacity to deliver 
services to disabled people. They also work with 
local authorities and across the wider public sector 
to encourage new thinking about how services can 
be delivered more effectively. 

The six DPULO Young Ambassadors are working 
closely with Paralympian gold medallist Sophie 
Christiansen to help DPULOs engage more with 
young people, including looking at how they can do 
more to support young disabled people through the 
move from school into further education or work.

Lynne Turnbull,  
DPULO Ambassador 
and Rachael Johnston, 
Young Ambassador




22 23

Louise Ann Hunt, Young Ambassador: 

 “As a young disabled person I don’t feel I have had 
easy access of where to find information of how I 
can get advice and support with my daily life. I am 
extremely ambitious in terms of eventually wanting 
to live on my own, whilst maintaining my desired 
career and have always relied on family or friends 
for support. It wasn’t until I became a DPULO Young 
Ambassador that I was aware of how and where to 
find both advice and guidance and a social network 
(such as DPULOs), to discuss and find solutions to 
live a fully independent life as a disabled person. 
I think an improvement in this area would see a 
significant difference to many disabled people’s 
lives, as sometimes basic emotional support can 
make a huge difference.” 

4. Disabled people fulfilling their   
 potential – improving outcomes

4.1 Disabled people of all ages and backgrounds, 
including older people, have told us they 
aspire to participate in every aspect of 
life – home and family life, community 
life, education, training, employment 
and volunteering. They want to have the 
opportunity to participate fully in society  
and to be valued for their contribution. 

4.2 Our vision is of a society that enables all 
disabled people to fulfil their potential and 
have equal opportunities to realise their 
aspirations. 

4.3 We need to be clear what this looks like 
and how we will measure progress. We will 
need to work towards long-term change in 
society: changing the way we all think about 
disability and the way we ensure disabled 
people have the right opportunities. 

4.4 Using the information we obtained during the 
‘Fulfilling Potential’ discussions and data from 
our analysis to build a picture of disability in 
the UK today7, we have worked with disabled 
people, their organisations and other experts 
to propose six high level strategic outcomes 
(outlined below) with a supporting indicator 
framework.

7 Department for Work and Pensions, February 2013, ‘Fulfilling Potential – Building a 
deeper understanding of disability in the UK today’




24 25

Education Disabled people told us that education is 
fundamental, not just in school but in higher and 
further education, and in lifelong learning.

Employment Being in employment is a key life outcome, but 
also a driver for many of the other strategic 
outcomes.

Income Disabled people are more likely than non-disabled 
people to experience material deprivation.

Health and well-being Health outcomes are very important for everyone. 
Disabled people can experience poor health 
outcomes either as a direct or indirect result of 
their condition. Well-being presents an overarching 
indication of how satisfied disabled people feel 
with their life overall.

Inclusive communities Communities that are inclusive to all people 
enable everyone to participate in and access 
all aspects of society. Particularly important to 
disabled people are transport; housing; social 
participation; friends and family; information and 
access; and attitudes. 

Choice and control To achieve independent living, disabled people 
should have the same choice and control in their 
lives as everyone else.

4.5 Annex A has details of the indicators which 
support these outcomes. More details, 
including data sources, can be found on our 
website.8 We welcome comments on the 
framework. 

4.6 Achieving the outcomes we seek is not a 
short-term activity; it will require an ongoing 
effort from all of us. Our aim is wide ranging – 
disabled people have told us that the barriers 
that need addressing affect every area of 
life. So we need to address the full range of 
issues summarised in ‘Fulfilling Potential – 
The Discussions So Far’. The outcomes and 
indicators framework has been put in place 
to help track progress in doing so. 

4.7 It will do this by enabling a clear and 
transparent method for:

• tracking progress towards the outcomes 
and vision;

• spotting gaps; and 
• identifying actions that will directly 

support the outcomes and the vision.

4.8 It has been designed to help identify where 
progress has been made, where further 
action is required and the direction of travel. 
Achievement against these outcomes, 
including indicator information and trends, 
will be published annually. 

8 www.odi.dwp.gov.uk 


2726


The best achievement is my degree because 
it was really tough and I struggled studying 
politics as high level English language for 
me is really hard to understand. I was pretty 
confident at dealing with these issues in my 
first year, second year more so and third year 
absolutely – my confidence sky-rocketed and I 
got my first class degree.  
Paul Ntulila, aspiring politician and role model 

Find out more about Paul 
and his role as a Youth 
Representative on the 
London 2012 Diversity 
and Inclusion Board on 
YouTube                                   


 

https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3D9td4u4Dpmxk%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3D9td4u4Dpmxk%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3D9td4u4Dpmxk%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3D9td4u4Dpmxk%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3D9td4u4Dpmxk%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3D9td4u4Dpmxk%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3D9td4u4Dpmxk%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player




28 29

4.9 Within Government, the work and actions to 
make our aim a reality will be driven by the 
Fulfilling Potential Strategy Group – a senior 
level cross-Government senior officials group, 
and overseen and reviewed by the Social 
Justice Cabinet Committee chaired by the 
Secretary of State for Work and Pensions. The 
Government will develop new arrangements 
for engaging disabled people and disability 
organisations in this process. 

Influencing change – a new approach to 
supporting the voice of disabled people 

4.10  But this in itself is not enough. We understand 
that the lives of disabled people, their families 
and carers, are diverse, and local services and 
situations will vary too. What is an issue for 
some groups may not be so important for 
others – for example, the priorities for black 
and ethnic minority disabled people in an 
urban area will be different to the priorities 
for disabled children and their families and 
carers, or older disabled people in rural 
communities. 

4.11 Disability organisations have told us that 
they want flexible, timely and responsive 
information that can help them concentrate 
on potential gaps and target action, often in 
local areas. They may want to know about a 
particular issue in more detail, in a particular 
locality, or for a particular impairment group. 

4.12 So we will work with disability and other 
organisations to develop a community action 
toolkit to complement national level data. 
This will include pointers to local data sources, 
survey questions and good practice, which will 
help disability groups or local organisations to 
identify the most significant local issues, as 
well as potential ways forward. 

4.13 This approach will ensure greater 
transparency, and support local organisations 
to have a stronger role in their communities. 
It will give them the information they need to 
plan their course of action and influence local 
decision making. Openness and transparency 
has the potential to transform government 
and public services – it can build trust and 
encourage greater public participation in 
decision making.

4.14 Transparency is also a key part of this 
Government’s efficiency and reform agenda. 
Freeing up public data and putting it in 
people’s hands can help them have more 
of a say in the reform of public services. 
We will continue to co-produce our reform 
programme with disabled people and their 
organisations.




30 31

Influencing change – a new approach to 
supporting the voice of disabled people

Barry Ginley, one of the DPULO Ambassadors, 
speaks about some of his experiences of 
influencing decision making: 

“I have been involved in accessibility-related 
projects since losing my eyesight in 1994. My first 
project was updating RNIB’s ‘Discovering Sports 
Venues’ publication. Recognising the lack of 
provision for disabled sports supporters, I began 
campaigning for improved access to sports venues. 

After gaining a Master of Science degree in 
Inclusive Environments Design and Management, 
I became Head of Disability and Social Inclusion at 
the Victoria & Albert Museum in London in 2002, 
working to ensure that the Museum is an inclusive 
place for everyone to work and visit. This role has 
given me the opportunity to speak about my work 
at conferences all around the world. 

I have also used my accessibility skills to benefit  
my local community, by advising Maidstone Council 
on several projects, including the redevelopment 
of Maidstone High Street. My aim for the High 
Street was for it to be accessible to everyone and 
to prevent the council making a big mistake by 
designing a shared space. The street has now been 
built with a small curb and a defined carriageway 
which enables everyone to use the space safely.

Working with the council on access projects has 
given me a taste for politics and I have been a 
candidate in three recent local elections and am 
hoping to stand as a Member of Parliament in the 
2015 General Election.” 

I have been involved in 
accessibility-related projects 
since losing my eyesight in 1994 
My first project was updating 
RNIB's, Discovering Sports 
Venues, publication.

Barry Ginley, DPULO Ambassador




32 33

5. Making it happen now

5.1 The Action Plan at Part 2 shows how we are:

• reforming public services to better support 
the principle of independent living, giving 
disabled people greater choice and more 
control over the way services are delivered. 
This means more ‘joined up’ provision 
aimed at improving outcomes for disabled 
people, with greater focus on early 
intervention and prevention;

• reforming welfare and removing the 
barriers to work to promote independence 
and reduce the risk of dependency;

• making sure that disabled people can 
play a full role in society through the 
development of inclusive and accessible 
communities, by removing barriers to 
participation in public life and by ensuring 
an effective framework of rights and duties; 

• building on the strong positive effect 
of the 2012 Paralympics by supporting 
disabled people to have and achieve their 
aspirations, by working to promote positive 
attitudes and behaviours; and

• finding new ways to work in partnership 
with disabled people and their 
organisations, those that support or care  
for them, and those in other sectors.

5.2 We have made a lot of progress since we 
published ‘Discussions So Far’. For example, 
since September 2012:

• The Children and Families Bill which will 
transform the system for children and 
young people with special educational 
needs so that services consistently support 
the best outcomes for them, is making its 
way through Parliament. Royal Assent is 
expected in 2014.

• The Care Bill, which aims to transform the 
social care system to focus on prevention 
and the needs and goals of adults and their 
carers who require care and support, has 
been open to public scrutiny and comment.

• We have made a range of improvements 
to Access to Work. For example, extending 
provision to young disabled people 
undertaking voluntary work experience 
under the Youth Contract, and to eligible 
disabled people undertaking business 
start-up activity on the New Enterprise 
Allowance scheme. Recognising that 
DPULOs understand the needs of disabled 
people, we are also funding them to take 
forward a variety of peer support projects 
which provide advice and support and help 
disabled people navigate the Access to 
Work services. 

• Fifteen colleges began trialling the 
Supported Internship programme in 
September 2012, and are progressing 
well. So far, 154 young people have been 
recruited.

• In December 2012, we published 
‘Transport for Everyone: an action plan 
to improve accessibility for all’. It sets 
out the priorities for improving disabled 
people’s experience of public transport by 
building on the success of the Olympic and 
Paralympic Games. 




34 35

• We listened and acted on the consultation 
on the proposed assessment for Personal 
Independence Payment (PIP) and have 
made changes as a result. For example, 
we will reassess people receiving Disability 
Living Allowance (DLA) on a slower 
timetable, and an independent review will 
report in 2014 before the majority of DLA 
recipients claim PIP. We have also started 
a further consultation on the “Moving 
around” activity.

• The Disability Action Alliance has 
been established and membership 
is growing daily. It has already seen 
some good partnerships emerge, and is 
working on five initial projects on travel, 
inclusive communities, financial advice, 
commissioning services and mentoring  
and advocacy for ex-offenders.

• The DPULO Programme has published the 
‘Making a Difference – Disability Hate 
Crime’ document. This publication brings 
together a collection of case studies to 
share best practices, and provide practical 
advice on how DPULOs can provide support 
to disabled people to report hate crime. 

5.3 There are also new areas of action taking 
place. Some by members of the Alliance and 
some across Government, in partnership with 
disabled people and their organisations and 
other disability and carers’ organisations. One 
of the most significant is the work building 
on the Sayce review of specialist disability 
employment programmes that reported in 
June 2011: ‘Getting in, staying in, getting on’. 

5.4 The formal evaluation of the Right to Control 
pilot was published on 1 July 2013. The 
legislation that introduced the Right to Control 
has allowed us to test new ways of working 
and learn how the principles of choice and 
control have given disabled people greater 
flexibility over how their funding is spent by 
them, or on their behalf. Now is the time 
to use what we have learned as further 
personalisation initiatives across Government 
are delivered, making a real difference to the 
daily lives of disabled people. The evaluation 
findings, together with a range of evidence, 
views and advice are being considered, and 
will be used to inform future decisions on 
Right to Control, which will be announced in 
due course. 

5.5 There is also a major programme of activity 
to build on the legacy of the 2012 Olympic 
and Paralympic Games, not only on sport 
but also to change attitudes and behaviours, 
and increase participation and community 
engagement. 

5.6 Part 2 of this document contains the full 
programme of action taking place, organised 
by the outcomes that are most important 
to disabled people. It includes details of 
timelines and which organisations have lead 
responsibility for action. 

5.7 We will monitor the actions in the plan and 
report on them. Updates will be published on 
our website to ensure transparency. 

5.8 We will also publish progress on our 
outcomes framework annually. 




36 37

Whizz-Kidz Child in a Chair in a Day Programme 

Whizz-Kidz is a national charity that provides 
mobility equipment, including powered and 
lightweight wheelchairs, life skills training and 
advice and support for disabled children, young 
people and their families. Whizz Kidz are a member 
of the Disability Action Alliance.

Whizz-Kidz Child in a Chair in a Day Programme 
transforms the lives of disabled children and young 
people, giving them the right mobility equipment, 
which is not always available on the NHS, as early 
as possible, moving their life forward and setting 
them on the path to independent lives. 

This is achieved in collaboration with NHS partners. 
As well as providing huge benefits to the children 
and families who receive a wheelchair in this way, 
there are also important benefits for the NHS, 
including significant efficiency savings and better 
clinical outcomes. 




38 39

‘When William’s parents learned that he had a 
condition that would affect his growth, they were 
determined not to hold him back or wrap him up 
in cotton wool. He’s a real character and wanted 
to keep up with his older sister and his friends. 
William’s family applied for a chair from Whizz-Kidz, 
and when the ball started rolling, were surprised at 
how quickly things happened. 

Mum had a detailed conversation with their local 
Whizz-Kidz therapist, and filled out a form with 
information on what they liked to do as a family, 
William’s measurements and hobbies, and the 
nature of his condition. When Whizz-Kidz turned up 
with just the right powered wheelchair for him – he 
was able to get in it right away and whizz around. 

William says “Now - I can do whatever I want!”, 
and thanks to Whizz-Kidz he can.’

Now – I can do whatever I want!

Employment for disabled people 

5.9 Disabled people tell us that employment is 
one of their most significant issues. Many 
have successful jobs and careers, and only 
nine per cent of disabled people of working 
age have never had a job. However, there 
is still a large gap in the employment rate 
between disabled and non-disabled people, 
with 46 per cent of working-age disabled 
people employed compared with 76 per cent 
of working-age non-disabled people9. Also:

• if disabled people’s employment rate 
matched that of the rest of the population, 
an extra two million disabled people would 
be in work.

• employment rates for disabled people in 
some parts of the country are below 20  
per cent. 

• employment rates differ by impairment 
group. For example employment rates for 
particular impairments such as mental 
health conditions are very low, at less than 
15 per cent. 

• disabled people are more likely to work 
part-time and, on average, earn less per 
hour.10 

9 A review of the analytical evidence around disability employment 
was published as part of ‘Fulfilling Potential – Building a deeper 
understanding of disability in the UK today’ in February 2013. 

10 Office for National Statistics, April 2013, Labour Force Survey Q1 2012 
Appendix Table 42.3.




40 41

5.10 Young disabled people fare particularly poorly 
in the labour market, with:

• lower employment and educational 
attainment rates than their non-disabled 
peers; and 

• employment rate gaps widening quickly – 
from 28 percentage points at age 23 to 36 
percentage points at age 24, once young 
people finish their full-time education. 

5.11 In the responses to the ‘Fulfilling Potential’ 
discussion, disabled people were clear that 
the low employment rate for disabled people 
needed to be addressed. Some of the ideas 
suggested were: 

• more support for specific groups; 
• more support for self-employment;
• improving job retention, especially for 

people who acquire impairments as adults;

• improving career progression;
• improving workplace accessibility;
• addressing negative attitudes of 

employers towards hiring disabled people;
• more flexibility in employment, such 

as more part-time jobs and alternative 
working practices; and

• Government working more closely with 
employers to encourage them to recruit 
more disabled people.

5.12 We are currently developing a cross-
Government employment strategy for 
disabled people and for those with a 
health condition to address these issues. 
The strategy will set out actions to improve 
the position of disabled people in the labour 
market and how best to support disabled 
people to prepare for, get into, stay in and 
progress in work. 

5.13 The strategy will cover:

• improving the transition of young disabled 
people from education to work;

• innovative approaches to employer 
engagement;

• employment support for disabled people;
• increasing self-employment;
• mental health and employment;
• job retention following the acquisition of 

an impairment;

• examining local delivery of services and 
partnership working;

• raising the aspirations of disabled people 
who are economically inactive; and

• career progression.

5.14 The employment strategy for disabled 
people and for those with a health condition 
represents an important opportunity to 
enable disabled people to realise their 
employment aspirations and through this 
achieve greater economic independence. 
In developing the strategy we are building 
on what disabled people told us about 
employment issues during the ‘Fulfilling 
Potential’ discussion, as well as working with 
disabled people, disability charities, DPULO 
Ambassadors and other experts.




42 43

Employment for disabled people 

Across Government work is being done to raise 
awareness and increase support for disabled 
colleagues, including those with mental health 
conditions. 

Chris Morris-Perry, Deputy Head of the Office of  
the Chief Coroner in the Ministry of Justice speaks  
of his experiences: 

“I was diagnosed with Bi-Polar Disorder over 
ten years ago. Back then, there was a lack of 
knowledge about and great stigma attached 
to mental health conditions in the Civil Service. 
I experienced discrimination in the workplace 
resulting from my chaotic behaviour, which is  
not uncommon for those battling with mental 
health conditions. 

Over recent years however, attitudes and support 
for those with mental health conditions in the Civil 
Service have thankfully changed for the better.  
As a result, I have been able to advance my career 
into senior posts in the Ministry of Justice such as 
my current one, as Deputy Head of the Office of the 
Chief Coroner, which would previously have been 
out of my reach. 

As a leader of the Ministry of Justice Disability 
Network, I hear of cases of staff experiencing 
discrimination who feel that they can’t disclose 
their condition to their manager; fearing for their 
jobs. The Ministry is taking steps to improve the 
situation through mental health awareness raising 
events, including around International Day of 
Disabled People and the Time to Change initiative. 
I am involved in these campaigns and sit on a 
number of advisory groups supporting those with 
mental health conditions. But there is still much  
to do.”

Attitudes and support for 
those with mental health 
conditions in the Civil Service 
have thankfully changed for 
the better. As a result, I have 
been able to advance my 
career into senior posts in the 
Ministry of Justice.
Chris Morris-Perry, Deputy Head of the 
Office of the Chief Coroner in the Ministry  
of Justice




44 45

6. Conclusion

6.1 In the ‘Fulfilling Potential’ discussions disabled 
people told us they wanted: 

• Government demonstrating leadership, 
with a long-term vision for disabled people; 

• specific actions, accountabilities and 
measurable outcomes; and 

• disabled people involved at every stage. 

This document addresses those issues. 

6.2 We have developed a new way of working. 
One that brings together a strong evidence 
base, informed by disabled people, but 
moving away from traditional policy making, 
developing policy as we take action, all in 
partnership with disabled people. 

6.3 More than ever we are working and consulting 
with the widest possible range of disability 
groups, and doing so transparently. 

6.4 We continue our discussions with stakeholders 
and disability organisations, and welcome 
any comments and ideas. Please get in touch 
with us, particularly if your organisation is 
interested in becoming a member of the 
Alliance. You can contact us using the contact 
details on the back cover of this document. 

The advice I would give to young disabled people 
who are thinking about what to do in the future 

is to follow your dreams. Do what you really enjoy 
doing. I think that's what life is all about. If the end 
result is harder than you think it's going to be, it's 

even more rewarding when you get there. 
Sophie Christiansen, Paralympic equestrian gold medallist

My greatest achievement would be winning three gold 
medals at a home Games, but it's about the whole 
process of getting there.

Find out more about 
Sophie and her inspiration 
to become a Paralympian 
on YouTube                                  


 

https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3DXJkQJ_wLdDo%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3DXJkQJ_wLdDo%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3DXJkQJ_wLdDo%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3DXJkQJ_wLdDo%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3DXJkQJ_wLdDo%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player




46 47

Annex A – Outcomes and indicators framework

Education 

Headline Indicator
The gap in educational attainment
between disabled and non-disabled
young people at three key stages – 
GSCE, A-Level (or equivalent), and 
degree level.

Supporting Indicators
• Unauthorised absence from school

• Achievement at Key stage 2

• Proportion of 16 year olds in full-time 
education (in development)

• Proportion of young people in higher 
education at age 19 (in development)

• Students who do not continue in 
higher education after their first year

• Satisfaction levels with higher 
education course

• The destination of graduates 6 
months after graduating

• Not in Education Employment or 
Training (NEET) status 

• Confidence in A Levels and GCSE (in 
development)

• Lifelong participation in education and 
training (in development)

• Apprenticeships

Employment

Headline Indicator
The employment rate gap between
disabled and non-disabled people

Supporting Indicators
• Individuals in high-level (managerial, 

professional or skilled-trade) 
employment

• Working age people who have never 
worked

• Working age people who would like to 
work more hours 

• Hourly wage rates

• Highest educational qualifications in 
the working age population

• Individuals not in work who would like 
to work

• Retention in employment for those 
aged 50 or over

• Employers attitudes 

• Work colleagues attitudes

• Economic activity

Actions

Actions taking place on Education can be found in Section 1 of the Making it Happen 
action plan.

Actions taking place on Employment, including those on qualifications and training can 
be found in Section 2 of the Making it Happen action plan. 

Income

Headline Indicator

The gap between the 
proportion of individuals 
in families where at least 
one person is disabled 
living in low income, and 
individuals in families 
where no-one is disabled 
living in low income.

The gap between the 
proportion of children 
living in families in low 
income with a disabled 
member, and children 
living in families in low 
income where no-one is 
disabled.

Supporting Indicators
• Children living in low 

income and material 
deprivation

• Households living in 
fuel poverty

• Individuals living in 
persistent poverty

We may supplement 
these indicators in 
due course to reflect 
the outcomes of the 
Child Poverty Unit’s 
consultation on 
measuring child poverty.

Health and Well-being

Headline Indicator

The gap between the 
proportion of disabled 
and non-disabled people 
reporting medium or 
high satisfaction with 
their life.

Supporting Indicators
•  Management of own 

health condition

• People with long-term 
health conditions 
supported to manage 
their condition

• Having good general 
health

Choice and Control

Headline Indicator

The gap between the 
proportion of disabled 
and non-disabled people 
who believe that they 
frequently had choice 
and control over their 
lives.

Supporting Indicators
• Personal budgets (in 

development)

• Take up of direct 
payments

• Influence on decisions

• Advocacy (in 
development)

• People supported to 
live independently 
through social services

• Rights (in 
development)

Actions

Actions taking place on Income can be found in Section 3 of the Making it Happen action 


plan


Actions taking place on Health and Well-being can be found in Section 4 of the Making it 
Happen action plan 

Actions taking place on Choice and Control can be found in Section 5 of the Making it 
Happen action plan


4948


Annex A – Outcomes and indicators framework

Inclusive communities

Housing

Headline Indicator

The gap between the 
proportion of disabled 
and non-disabled people 
who are able to access 
all parts of their home 
without difficulty.

Supporting Indicators
• Decent    

accommodation

Transport

Headline Indicator

The proportion of 
disabled people who 
do not experience 
difficulties using 
transport.

Supporting Indicators
• Number of trips

• Satisfaction  with 
bus and rail journey 
experience

• Full size buses 
accessible to disabled 
people1

Social participation

Headline Indicator

The gap between the 
proportion of disabled 
and non-disabled people 
who participate in 
various activities – arts, 
museums and galleries, 
sport, heritage sites, 
cinema, and libraries.

Supporting Indicators
• Civic involvement

• Voting (in 
development)

• Volunteering

• Neighbourhood  
belonging

Actions
Actions taking place on Housing can be found in Section 6.1 of the Making it Happen 
action plan 
Actions taking place on Transport can be found in Section 6.2 of the Making it Happen 
action plan
Actions taking place on Social Participation can be found in Section 6.3 of the Making it 
Happen action plan 

1 By full size accessible buses we mean the percentage of local and scheduled bus/coach services holding a 
PSVAR certificate.

Inclusive communities

Friends and Family

Headline Indicator

The gap between the 
proportion of disabled 
and non-disabled people 
who have acquaintances 
they are close to.

Information  
and access

Headline Indicator

The proportion of 
disabled people reporting 
problems accessing 
goods or services, 
specifically public 
services.

Supporting Indicators
• Access to the internet
• Adults without saving 

and bank accounts

Attitudes

Headline Indicator 
The gap between the 
proportion of people 
who reported that they 
thought of disabled 
people as the same as 
everyone else and those 
who did not.

Supporting Indicators
• Hate crime
• Risk of being victim  

of crime

• Confidence in the 
Criminal Justice System

• Fair treatment  
(in development)

• Unfair treatment at 
work (in development)

• Public opinion on 
whether disabled 
people are as 
productive as non-
disabled people

Actions
Actions taking place on Friends and Family can be found in Section 6.4 of the Making it 
Happen action plan 
Actions taking place on Information and Access can be found in Section 6.5 of the 
Making it Happen action plan 
Actions taking place on Attitudes can be found in Section 6.6 of the Making it Happen 
action plan




50 51

Annex B – Aims, priority areas and 
members of the Disability Action 
Alliance
Vision

1.  The Disability Action Alliance is a cross-
sector network of organisations committed 
to making a difference to disabled people’s 
lives by designing and delivering innovative 
changes and identifying and spreading good 
practice, especially at local level.

Background

2. Disabled people told us that they need to 
be more influential in how local services are 
designed and delivered, and that all those 
involved in developing services needed 
to work much more closely together to 
improve outcomes for disabled people. 
During discussions with disabled people, their 
organisations and other stakeholders, the 
idea of a new way of working in partnership 
emerged, and led to the proposal of a 
Disability Action Alliance. 

3. Disability Rights UK convened the Alliance, 
and the Office for Disability Issues provides 
secretariat support. This includes providing 
support to project groups and managing 
communications to ensure the Alliance 
members and other interested organisations 
are kept informed of any new or existing 
projects and actions, including promoting 
successful case studies and good practice. 

4. Disabled people are at the very heart of the 
Alliance, and the aims and priority areas have 
been developed based on what disabled 
people said during the ‘Fulfilling Potential’ 
discussion period. 

5. A steering group of around 11 organisations 
provides light touch leadership to the 
Alliance, helping project groups to get set 
up, promoting the Alliance and making sure 
communication is effective. 

6. The Disability Accessibility Centre, members 
of the Alliance, developed a website for the 
Alliance which went live in February 2013.  
You can find out more at that website:  
www.disabilityactionalliance.org.uk 

7.  The Alliance is open to all organisations and 
we hope to get as wide a membership as 
possible from all sectors.

Aims and priority areas 

9. The Alliance’s aims and priority areas 
have been developed from the issues and 
ideas raised during the ‘Fulfilling Potential’ 
discussions. These are:

Supporting and encouraging early 
intervention

1. Education

2. Employment (including training and work  
 experience)

3. Transitions (including the importance of  
 family life)


52

Enabling disabled people to have increased 
and informed choice and control

4. Independent living (including 
personalisation and financial control)

5. Access to services and information 
(including advice, support and    
advocacy, and making their voice heard)

Promoting inclusive communities, including 
changing attitudes and behaviours

6. Accessible communities (including housing 
and transport)

7. Participation (including participation  
in social life, public life, sport and   
leisure)

8. Rights (including access to justice)

9. Positive awareness (including 
understanding of diversity and disability   
and fair portrayal)

10. Attitudes (including hate crime and 
harassment)

10. The aims and priority areas provide a 
framework for action which will steer the 
Alliance in taking forward actions that will 
have a real impact on disabled people’s lives. 

Members 

The list of members changes daily as more 
organisations join. The up to date list of members  
is on the Disability Action Alliance website,  
www.disabilityactionalliance.org.uk. You can also 
find out more about the Alliance there and sign up 
to join.


53

Based on my experience, if I 
was starting out again as a 
young person who happens 
to have a disability. I would 

say be yourself, be very 
aware of what you can do 
and also pragmatic about 

what you can't do and if you 
can convince yourself about 

your own ability then you 
have got a good chance of 

convincing other people.
Vidar Hjardeng MBE, journalist, diversity 

advisor and role model

Find out more about Vidar 
and his work on a wide 
range of political, social 
action, current affairs 
programmes including 
a senior role in a big 
broadcasting company  
on YouTube                                   


 

https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3DHby21okrfGQ%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3DHby21okrfGQ%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3DHby21okrfGQ%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3DHby21okrfGQ%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3DHby21okrfGQ%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3DHby21okrfGQ%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3DHby21okrfGQ%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3DHby21okrfGQ%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player
https://www.youtube.com/watch%3Fv%3DHby21okrfGQ%26feature%3Dyoutube_gdata_player




Fulfilling Potential 
Making It Happen

This publication is available in Easy read and Braille. A summary is 
available in BSL with audio voice-over and subtitles. Please contact 
us if you require these or other formats.

Web: www.odi.gov.uk/fulfilling-potential

Post: Office for Disability Issues, Department for Work and Pensions, 
Ground Floor, Caxton House, 6–12 Tothill Street, London SW1H 9NA

Email: fulfilling.potential@dwp.gsi.gov.uk

Telephone: 020 7340 4000

ISBN: 978-1-78153-602-5

Produced by the Department for Work and Pensions, July 2013

© Crown Copyright 2013

INDEPENDENCE

MENTOR

INSPIRATION

ROLE 
MODEL

POSSIBILITIES

INCLUSION

OPPORTUNITIES

POSITIVITY

WARRINGTON 
WOLVES

CHANGE

COUNSELLOR

DREAM

MUM & DAD

SMILE

FAMILY




	Fulfilling Potential - Making It Happen
	Foreword
	Contents
	1. The Government’s approach
	2. Fulfilling Potential – the cross Government strategy
	3. Working together for change
	4. Disabled people fulfilling theirpotential – improving outcomes
	5. Making it happen now
	6. Conclusion
	Annex A – Outcomes and indicators framework
	Annex B – Aims, priority areas andmembers of the Disability Action Alliance
	Contact details




