



DCMS Digital Strategy 


                                 


DCMS Digital Strategy    
Becoming digital by default    

December 2012    


 

Department for Culture, Media and Sport 
DCMS Digital Strategy 


    

Our aim is to improve the quality of life for all      
through cultural and sporting activities, support the 
pursuit of excellence, and champion the tourism, 
creative and leisure industries. 


  


Contents 

Ministerial Foreword ............................................................................................. 5 

PART 1: Introduction………………………………………………………………….. 6 

 1.1  Executive summary……………………………………………………………. 6 

 1.2  Purpose and scope…………………………………………………………….. 7 

PART 2: Digital infrastructure………………………………………………………... 9 

 2.1  Broadband………………………………………………………………………. 9 

 2.2  Reducing red tape to support broadband rollout……………………………10 

 2.3  Demand stimulation………………………………………………………...… 10 

 2.4  Libraries………………………………………………………………………... 11 

 2.5  Gaps and key next steps…………………………………………………….. 12 

PART 3: Using digital by default to deliver better policy………………………… 13 

 3.1  Digital engagement work…………………………………………………….. 13 

 3.2  Improving communications - the first Digital Games……………………… 14 

 3.3  Case study - Government Equalities Office action plan………………….. 15 

 3.4  Gaps and key next steps…………………………………………………….. 16 

PART 4: Digital by default best practice……………………………………………. 18 

 4.1  Delivery bodies………………………………………………………………... 18 

 4.2  Strategic, advisory and regulatory bodies………………………………….. 19 

 4.3  Broadcasters………………………………………………………………….. 19 

 4.4  Digital fundraising…………………………………………………………….. 20 

 4.5  Key next steps………………………………………………………………… 20 

PART 5: A digital by default culture……………………………………………….. 21 

 5.1  Change programme and cultural change………………………………….. 21 

 5.2  HR and skills………………………………………………………………….. 22 

 5.3  Procurement…………………………………………………………………... 23 

 5.4  Case study - the correspondence team……………………………………. 24 

 5.5  Gaps and key next steps…………………………………………………….. 25 

PART 6: The 14 actions…………………………………………………………….. 26 

ANNEX A - Arm's length body case studies - English Heritage, British Library, 
Equality and Human Rights Commission, Historic Royal Palaces……………… 31 

ANNEX B - List of DCMS' arm's length bodies……………………………………. 40 


  

Ministerial Foreword 

By Ed Vaizey MP, Minister for Culture, Communications and the Creative Industries.   


     

It seems remarkable that just a few years ago filling out a tax return meant hours sat at 
the kitchen table with a ballpoint pen, and a last minute dash to the post box.  No-one 
likes doing a tax return, but being able to do it online has definitely taken some of the pain 
out of the process.  Government has some way to go before its online services are as 
intuitive and slick as Amazon or PayPal, but thanks to a lot of work over the last few 
years, we are making steps along that route. 


 

Francis Maude, Martha Lane-Fox and the Government Digital Service have moved 
Government to the very edge of a digital revolution, with numerous public services due to 
be redesigned for the digital age.  However for people to use Government services – or 
indeed any services – online, they need fast and reliable internet access.  DCMS is well 
ahead in providing this.   


 

We have pledged to give the UK Europe’s best superfast broadband network by 2015, 
meaning millions more connected homes and businesses, a real boost for economic 
growth and a transformation in the way people live their lives.  DCMS does not provide 
large-scale transactional services to the public that can be moved online: providing the 
physical infrastructure that will enable the success of the Government’s digital agenda is 
our major contribution.  


 

However, just as people tweet their complaints to their train companies, or highlight great 
service on Facebook, citizens rightly expect to be able to interact with their Government 
online – to play their part in developing policy.  Government hasn’t always been the best 
listener – or even made it easy for people to know how, where or when they can get 
involved.  My department is continually looking for ways to engage online, through social 
media and our well-regarded website.   


 

We also need to ensure that the people working at DCMS have the right skills and 
experience to make the most of this digital revolution.  This strategy sets out how we will 


 


create a receptive and digital-savvy department, serving the needs of citizens and 
organisations in our sectors. 


 

Of course, DCMS represents some of the most innovative and creative sectors in the UK.  
Our arm’s length bodies, from museums to Lottery-funders, are leading the way in digital 
projects.  And we are already learning from them: this strategy pulls together some 
examples of how they are putting ‘digital by default’ into practice.   


 

Becoming digital by default marks an important and necessary shift in the way we do 
things.  At DCMS, we want to be at the heart of this exciting shift – and this strategy sets 
out how we aim to do it.  


  

PART 1:  Introduction 

1.1  Executive summary   


 

DCMS plays a key part in the Government’s digital agenda.  As the lead department for 
communications we have responsibility for the regulatory framework for electronic 
communications networks and services – the pipes and wires on which digital networks 
run.  We are responsible for internet policy in government – ensuring, amongst other 
things, that global internet governance structures continue to deliver a safe and open 
internet.   


 

We are also delivering an extensive programme to bring superfast broadband to 90 per 
cent of premises, and to ensure universal availability of standard broadband, to meet the 
Government’s objective of having the best superfast broadband in Europe by 2015.  In 
addition we are working with other government departments, business groups and local 
authorities to stimulate demand for digital services.  Finally we are ensuring that, both in 
policy-making and within our internal ways of working, we embed a digital by default 
culture.  The London 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games, for which DCMS was the 
lead government department, was a fantastic example of a digital approach that 
revolutionised our communications with the press and the public, helping to make the 
Games such a success.  Therefore whilst we do not provide transactional services, the 
digital by default agenda is nonetheless a key one for DCMS. 


 

Our arm’s length bodies are at the very heart of digital developments: including museums 
and galleries that are world leaders in their fields; and strategic, grant-making and 
advisory bodies that fully recognise this challenge and are making great strides to meet it.   
Broadcasters are completely changing the way the public interacts with the media – with 
ground-breaking developments such as BBC iPlayer.   


 

These bodies provide a wide variety of services to the public, and are embarking on a 
journey which will help to digitise the cultural, heritage and sporting capital of the nation.  
They are making all of this available to a whole new generation in the way that is most 
accessible to them.  DCMS is committed to working with them to encourage further digital 
development.  In particular we will work with our bodies to agree appropriate digital 
indicators which can then be reflected in future management agreements.  We will also 
provide an online platform for our arm’s length bodies to share digital successes, user 
testing data and other best practice.   


  

At the workshops we ran to help inform this strategy there was an appetite for moving 
towards the sharing of data – recognising the issues around licensing, metadata etc.  
DCMS is already committed to openness in data sharing as shown in our Open Data 
Strategy.  This is also something that we will encourage our bodies to explore further.  
Sharing successes and other non-sensitive information is a natural first step towards that 
ultimate aim. 


 

In line with the actions set out in the cross-Government Digital Strategy we will: 
 Provide strong departmental digital leadership – action 1 
 Develop digital capability within our staff – actions 3 and 4 
 Complete the transition to GOV.UK – action 7  
 Provide the infrastructure to support an increase in the number of people who use 

digital services – action 8  
 Support work to help stimulate demand for digital services from people who have 

rarely or never been online – action 9  
 Work to broaden the range of those tendering to supply digital services, including 

more small and medium sized enterprises – action 10 
 Remove unnecessary legislative barriers as appropriate – action 12  
 Improve the way DCMS makes policy and communicates with people – action 14  


 

The remaining actions from the cross-Government strategy do not apply to DCMS as 
they refer specifically to the provision of transactional services. 


 

1.2  Purpose and scope 


 

Martha Lane Fox’s 2011 report, Revolution not Evolution, recommended a step change in 
the way Government works in a digital world. The Government Digital Service (GDS) was 
created in 2011 to help usher in a new approach to policy-making, service delivery and 
communication.   


 

In consultation with departments, the GDS has published a new cross-Government digital 
strategy, mandating a “digital by default” approach.  The DCMS Digital Strategy sets out 
how we will contribute to that approach, summarising our response to the issues raised 
and the challenges set.  It includes our response to the themes and actions within that 
document, and provides case studies to showcase the cutting edge work being done in 
this area by our arm’s length bodies.  The 2013/14 DCMS business plan will reflect our 
commitment to maintaining our position at the forefront of digital development.  DCMS 
recognises that there is more for us to do – therefore this strategy sets out a number of 
next steps which will help us to build on the progress we have made so far. 


 

We have also seen this as an opportunity to showcase the excellent work of our arm’s length 
bodies in this field, aiming to share best practice across government and beyond.  DCMS is 

http://www.data.gov.uk/library/dcms-open-data-strategy
http://www.data.gov.uk/library/dcms-open-data-strategy
http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/news/digital-default-proposed-government-services
http://publications.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/digital/
http://publications.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/digital/




responsible for 45 arm’s length bodies – the vast majority of the DCMS budget goes to these 
bodies.  These bodies operate at arm’s length, independently from government.  We are 
looking to work with and encourage them to improve their digital capacity but it is not our role 
to mandate the detail of their operations.  Please see Annex B for a full list of our arm’s 
length bodies. 


 

These organisations engage with the public in new and exciting ways – offering 
innovative digital experiences and services that people really want to use.  They provide 
a huge variety of different transactional services – from ticket booking, to grant 
applications, to providing information, resources and digitally capturing our national 
character and history.   


 

DCMS is working with them to encourage them to share the experiences and successes 
on their digital journeys.  We are also working with them and our sectors as a whole, to 
explore how digital technology can help boost philanthropy as a source of funding.  We 
believe that digital resources can make donating easier for both the donor and the 
recipient, and can improve the quality of the experience for everyone.  It also has the 
potential to increase donations from younger donors.  Please see section 4.4 for more 
details. 


 

The DCMS Digital Strategy is organised in the following way: 


 

• Part 2 summarises the work that we are doing to ensure that the infrastructure is in 
place to ensure that everybody, no matter where in the country they happen to live, 
can go digital.     


 

• Part 3 sets out how DCMS will use digital tools to deliver better policy. 


 

• Part 4 and Annex A give some case studies of the cutting-edge work our ALBs are 

doing to make digital by default a reality, and outline work on digital giving. 


 

• Part 5 explores how DCMS is embedding a digital by default culture to ensure that 
these changes are long-lasting and permanent, allowing us to operate more 
efficiently and deliver a better service. 


 

• Part 6 provides an overview of the DCMS response to the 14 actions set out in the 

cross-Government Digital Strategy. 


  

PART 2:  Digital Infrastructure 

2.1   Broadband   


 

In moving to a world that is “digital by default” we need to ensure that the infrastructure is 
there to allow people to use online services.  


 

DCMS is responsible for broadband and telecoms policy across Government and we have a 
detailed programme in place to ensure that the UK has the best superfast broadband 
network in Europe by 2015.  Our ambition is to provide superfast broadband to at least 90% 
of premises in the UK, and to provide universal access to standard broadband with a speed 
of at least 2Mbps.  


 

Broadband Delivery UK (BDUK), a unit within DCMS, is responsible for managing the 
Government’s broadband funding. Individual projects are the responsibility of local 
authorities and the Devolved Administrations, as set out in BDUK’s delivery model. 


 

Key elements of the work we are doing include:  

• allocating £530 million during the current Spending Review period to stimulate 
commercial investment to roll out high speed broadband in rural communities  

• investing £150 million in “super-connected cities” across the UK  
• investing up to £150 million to improve mobile coverage in the UK for consumers and 

businesses that live and work in areas where coverage is poor or non-existent 


 

DCMS is responsible for delivery of the rural broadband programme and the urban 
broadband fund.  The rural broadband programme is aimed at ensuring provision of 
superfast broadband (connections capable of delivering more than 24 Mbps download) and 
universal standard broadband. The £530m the Government has committed needs to be at 
least matched at the local level.  The programme adds to roll-out of superfast broadband by 
the private sector, which is expected to provide coverage of around two-thirds of the country 
by summer 2014.  


 

The urban broadband fund, which provides the £150m of funding to create “super-connected 
cities” across the UK, will have a particular focus on small and medium-sized enterprises 
(SMEs) and strategic employment zones, to support economic growth. The first ten cities are 
now taking forward their plans, and bids have been received for funding from a second group 
of cities. 


 

http://www.culture.gov.uk/news/news_stories/7621.aspx
http://www.culture.gov.uk/news/news_stories/7621.aspx
http://www.culture.gov.uk/what_we_do/telecommunications_and_online/8129.aspx#superfast_broadband
http://www.culture.gov.uk/publications/8482.aspx
http://www.culture.gov.uk/news/news_stories/7502.aspx
http://www.culture.gov.uk/news/news_stories/8931.aspx
http://www.culture.gov.uk/what_we_do/telecommunications_and_online/8757.aspx


 

2.2   Reducing red tape to support broadband rollout  


 

We are introducing a package of measures to support the rollout of superfast broadband 
across the country and remove the red tape that is slowing this down. This will speed up and 
reduce the cost of deployment, and remove the uncertainty faced by communications 
providers when planning their works.  


 

Part of the package involves reforming legislation around planning and the deployment of 
electronic communications equipment, to make it easier to roll out infrastructure and promote 
online access. We will, for example, be amending the Electronic Communications Code 
(Conditions and Restrictions) Regulations to make it easier to deploy new communications 
infrastructure like poles and cabinets, while DCLG will in parallel amend planning legislation 
to remove the need for prior approval when installing fixed communications infrastructure.  


 

We are also awaiting the Law Commission’s report on changes to the Electronic 
Communications Code, and will take forward its recommendations via legislation.  This will 
allow us to address the problems faced by landowners and communications providers when 
agreeing wayleaves (written consent agreements) for communications equipment on or 
under private land – which currently involves protracted negotiations.  Our amendments will 
make this process much simpler.  


 

Introducing these and other measures will, by reducing costs and increasing certainty, 
support the delivery of superfast broadband and allow more businesses and consumers to 
enjoy the benefits of digital services. 


 

2.3   Demand stimulation  


 

Currently our demand stimulation programme is focused on work with a range of national 
and local partners, and other Government departments, to support them in maximising the 
economic benefits that broadband rollout will bring.  This is being taken forward in two parts: 
a national programme with business groups, Go ON UK, and the Government Digital 
Service; and a local programme based on providing support through one day consultancy 
and workshops for local authorities.  This work complements similar work being undertaken 
by local authorities. 


 

Work at national level is focused around three communities of interest – SMEs, consumers 
and public services/communities: 


 

• SMEs: partnerships with the British Chambers of Commerce, Federation of Small 

Business, and Local Enterprise Partnerships, to help drive demand for superfast 
broadband through their networks and membership channels, using tools and resources 
from Go ON UK and other national partners such as Google. 

http://www.culture.gov.uk/news/media_releases/9331.aspx
http://www.go-on.co.uk/


 

• Consumers: work with the Go ON founders, particularly the BBC, to ensure resources 
they develop support local initiatives; and partnerships with groups including Women’s 
Institutes, Mumsnet, the Scouts, libraries and Age UK. 

• Public services/communities: joint working with the Government Digital Service on 
delivery of public services. 


 

At a local level, BDUK is offering support to all the local projects across the rural and urban 
broadband programmes to help them to develop effective local demand stimulation 
campaigns, including through brokering partnerships with Go ON UK and other national 
bodies.   


 

BDUK has also been an active member of the Government Digital Service assisted digital 
stakeholder group.  We are working to encourage local projects to integrate assisted digital 
into their demand stimulation campaigns.  It is within the third strand outlined above, service 
transformation, that local projects will target their offline population. We are encouraging 
them to mirror the assisted digital approach developed by the Government Digital Service.  
They are seeking to achieve the same objectives at local level.   


 

2.4   Libraries  


 

DCMS is responsible for national library policy, whilst individual public library services are 
delivered by 151 local library authorities in England.  Libraries provide a range of services 
including helping people get online.  Public libraries have been a key part of the Go ON UK 
initiative to get the digitally excluded online.  Libraries’ staff and volunteers saw three million 
people accessing digital services, demonstrating the role they play in tackling the digital 
divide.  


 

DCMS is supportive of the use of e-lending by public libraries. It is important for libraries to 
offer updated services matching technological developments as it is inevitable that library 
users will increasingly come to see e-books as forming part of the basic service. In 
September 2012, Ed Vaizey launched an independent review of e-lending which will seek to 
provide advice on how best to achieve an e-lending model in public libraries in England, and 
will report in the New Year.   


 

Public libraries play a variety of roles and support the delivery of many Government services: 
supporting formal and informal learning; improving literacy; supporting skills and 
employability; and, as community assets, providing spaces for activities, and even business 
start-ups.   


 

While local authorities’ library services play a big role in helping people get online, and are 
increasingly embracing advances in technology such as e-lending, DCMS recognises that it 
is important that authorities continue to take account of local need in their community and the 
range of services that people want – offline as well as online – when shaping the services 

http://dcms.gov.uk/news/news_stories/9366.aspx




they provide.  Therefore we believe that libraries are likely to play a key role in the assisted 
digital agenda.    


 

Since October 2011, Arts Council England has been responsible for supporting and 
developing libraries – a role that transferred on the wind up of the Museums, Libraries and 
Archives Council.  In early 2013 the Arts Council will publish the findings of their major 
research programme, Envisioning the Library of the Future, which is exploring what a 21st 
century library service could and should look like.  It is likely their findings will demonstrate 
the importance of offline services as well as the growing importance of online services.  


 

Another upcoming development in the sector is the Society of Chief Librarians (SCL) Digital 
Offer, being launched by SCL in the New Year. The Offer is likely to include the creation of a 
single digital presence for public libraries, including a single library catalogue.  


 

2.5 Gaps and key next steps 


 

Gaps: 
Work on demand stimulation is continuing to develop, and DCMS will continue to work with 
national and local partners to stimulate demand for superfast broadband, particularly to 
promote the business benefits through working with business organisations and other 
government departments.   


 

Support for implementation of broadband infrastructure is more advanced and is fully funded 
from a government perspective for this Spending Review period.  We are now progressing 
implementation as quickly as possible to give the UK the best superfast broadband in 
Europe by 2015.  We aim to introduce the package of planning and related measures to 
support broadband delivery quickly, facilitating the rollout of infrastructure and addressing 
the issues that are currently slowing down deployment. 


 

Libraries have already played an important role in getting people online, and we believe that 
they are likely to play a part in the assisted digital agenda going forward. 


 

Key next steps: 


 

 Independent review into e-lending underway – reporting early 2013. 
 We have set local demand stimulation projects a target of having a 3 year demand 

stimulation strategy in place by June 2013 (including marketing strategy) with yearly 
plans in place each year to 2015. 

 Rural broadband programme - target to complete procurement by summer 2013. 
 Package of measures to support and reduce the cost of broadband deployment to be in 

place by Summer Recess 2013. 
 Overall objective is to support delivery of the best superfast broadband in Europe by 

2015, with universal standard broadband and 90% superfast. 

http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/what-we-do/supporting-libraries/libraries-consultation/


 

PART 3:  Using digital by default to 
deliver better policy 

3.1  Digital engagement work  

DCMS already has a strong record in digital engagement work, including the 
Communications Review project that has brought stakeholders and the public into the 
debate about the regulatory framework for the communications industry.  We have a 
dedicated digital communication team that sits at the heart of our small communication 
function, as well a number of officials and ministers who are actively engaged on social 
media.  We are keen to continue to grow our work in this area, recognising the challenge laid 
down in the cross-Government Digital Strategy. 


 

DCMS has shown an early commitment to open policy making, including playing a key part 
in the first policy initiative to have its own Twitter profile and interactive blog back in 2008/9.  
The lessons learned from this – including having policy officials actively involved in blogging 
and responding to comments throughout the entire process – continue to be fed into other 
projects, giving stakeholders and the public a direct route to those working on the legislation. 


 

A good example of this approach was the Communications Review, where rather than follow 
the usual format of publishing a green paper for consultation, we decided to engage in a 
much more direct way with the public by holding a series of seminars.   While there were 
limits to the number of people who could attend these in person, we made sure that all 
materials were made available digitally.  Videos of each session were put online and people 
were able to comment both via a dedicated website and Twitter.  This led to a richness of 
comment and input that traditional methods simply would not have delivered.  This blog by 
one of our technology partners gives more information on our approach. 


 

In a similar vein, we created a AAA accessible, fully interactive website for the eAccessibility 
Forum which invited comment on key policy areas.  This allowed people who have issues 
accessing ordinary policy-making processes – or even some digital policy engagement 
projects – to have their say in the development of policy. 


 

We also encourage close working between policy and digital communications colleagues on 
more informal, quick and cheap ways for people to get involved in the policy process, from 
web chats to social media. For example, in 2011 we ran an informal “pre-consultation” on 
moving the May Day Bank Holiday.  We asked Twitter users to tweet their views on the 

http://dcmscommsreview.readandcomment.com/
https://twitter.com/digitalbritain
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20100511084737/http:/interactive.bis.gov.uk/digitalbritain/
http://www.helpfultechnology.com/helpful-blog/2012/07/engagement-on-a-shoestring/
http://www.helpfultechnology.com/helpful-blog/2012/07/engagement-on-a-shoestring/
http://www.discuss.culture.gov.uk/eaccessibility
http://www.discuss.culture.gov.uk/eaccessibility




matter using the #bankhol hashtag.  Over 1,000 comments were received and fed into the 
policy response. 


 

Finally, our Secretary of State, Maria Miller, and our Permanent Secretary, Jonathan 
Stephens, both now have their own personal accounts on Twitter, giving an informal and 
personal view into both the ministerial and Civil Service sides of policy-making and delivery.  
Culture Minister Ed Vaizey, and Equality and Women’s Ministers Helen Grant and Jo 
Swinson, have their own long-established followings on Twitter. 


 

We are looking forward to building expertise and activity in this area, with the advice and 
guidance of GDS.  As we have made clear elsewhere in this strategy, we will build digital 
skills in to the heart of our policy-making process, share best practice across the department 
and ensure that DCMS officials have the latest digital engagement knowledge.   


 

3.2  Improving communications – the first Digital Games 


  

DCMS embraces the latest in digital communication techniques.  We were among the 
earliest government departments to have a blog, and have busy and effective communities 
of stakeholders engaged through our social media channels, from Twitter to Instagram.   


 

The example of the London 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games, where DCMS was 
responsible for setting up and managing the cross-Government Olympic Communication 
(GOC) team, shows how we are starting to embed the concept of ‘digital by default’ in our 
wider communication strategy for various audiences. From the start, we built in a dedicated 
digital team, who sat at the heart of the operation alongside traditional press office and 
strategic communication professionals.   


 

The GOC digital team sought to address London 2012 being the first Digital Games, meeting 
the needs of citizens and journalists who want – and expect – to access information in the 
most convenient way to them. This involved: 

•  Agreeing a comprehensive Olympic digital communication strategy, including working 
with colleagues across Government departments and Number 10 

• Providing a dedicated online newsroom for the 20,000 journalists covering the 
Games.  This allowed us to provide high quality creative-commons-licensed images, 
broadcast-quality video to download, and the latest up-to-date information, delivered 
in a platform-neutral format 

• Setting up dedicated, targeted social media channels and communicating using 
impactful image, video and text content 

• An extensive social media monitoring programme, using sophisticated platforms to 
listen and engage appropriately with the public around the world 


 

The early integration of digital to the communication planning led to tangible results, 
measured in user feedback, with Twitter followers praising @2012govuk as “a good model in 

http://www.goc2012.culture.gov.uk/
http://instagram.com/dcmsgovuk
http://goc2012.culture.gov.uk/media/
http://www.twitter.com/2012govuk


 

tone and delivery for #localgov and #gov comms.”1 We are taking the lessons from our 
Olympic digital communication strategy and applying them right across DCMS. 


 

In line with wider Government policy to provide the public with access to information on how 
and where to participate in sport, we are working to provide an “open data” digital legacy 
from the Games.  It is intended that initiatives which join data across providers will make it 
easier for people who were inspired by the Games to participate in sport.  For example, 
Sport England and the Fitness Industry Association’s spogo digital service provides this kind 
of shared information. 


 

We have worked hard to engage with the public and encourage them to interact with us 
digitally, both in formal consultations and in day-to-day digital communication activity. We will 
use the lessons learnt from projects mentioned above to feed into a programme of 
continuous improvement, aiming to be at the forefront of Whitehall digital communication.   


 

3.3  Case study – Government Equalities Office (GEO) action plan  


 

What was the challenge? 
To make a focussed use of digital media in policy-making and engagement, reflecting 
Cabinet Office’s Digital Engagement Strategy and the Civil Service Reform Plan. 


 

What did you do to help you become digital by default?     
GEO identified three core strands to be delivered via social media: 

• Listening 
• Influencing the debate  
• Disseminating information 


 

Listening to digital conversations on topics relevant to our policy agenda allows us to 
consider the effectiveness and impact of current approaches and test new ones.  We 
appreciate the ability to stimulate and influence debate amongst interested and relevant 
stakeholders by engaging in online fora.  In particular we make use of targeted channels to 
reach a specific audience, like the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development’s 
podcasts.  Finally we recognise the possibilities around online publication (e.g. legislative 
requirements, best practice, consultation documents, general messaging) to targeted 
stakeholders. 


 

Was any cultural change required and how did you approach this? 
In March we launched a programme to develop staff skills and understanding, with a 
successful seminar by No. 10 showcasing some of the work in other departments on 


  

1 Twitter user @danslee, 28/08/12 http://twitter.com/danslee/status/240415914036711424  

https://spogo.co.uk/
http://twitter.com/danslee/status/240415914036711424




different topics. We followed up with a “lunch and learn” on digital tools and a seminar by 
DEMOS on tools to support horizon scanning across digital media.  We created a group that 
meets every six weeks to share learning between project teams and provide a forum for 
policy leads from others departments to present their work. 


 

What was the result? 
The action plan has helped us to deliver our core business aims – examples include:   

• Think, Act, Report: uses Twitter and Linked-In to get businesses to sign up to our 
gender equality initiative - now covers over a million UK workers (influencing) 

• LGB&T Sports Charter: used social media to engage stakeholders and get people to 
sign up to a charter tackling homophobia and transphobia in sport – achieved more 
than 3,000 Facebook pledges (influencing) 

• Review of the Trans Action Plan: survey monkey questionnaire disseminated widely 
via stakeholders’ own social media platforms - resulted in the Trans Action Plan and 
subsequent work with the NHS (disseminating information/listening) 

• Out4Marriage: YouTube virals by Theresa May and Maria Miller (influencing) 
• Equal Civil Marriage Consultation: online survey tools facilitated the largest public 

consultation ever of nearly a quarter of a million responses. We will maximise Twitter’s 
viral potential by mobilising high profile supporters to re-tweet and endorse the 
consultation response (disseminating information/influencing) 


 

3.4  Gaps and key next steps 


 

Gaps: 
While this is a strong base from which to build we recognise that there is more we can do.  
We have successfully shown that digital engagement can bring a richness to policy-making 
and communication, and now we need to ensure that we share best practice across the 
department and carry that approach forward into other policy areas.   


 

The GEO digital engagement plan is an excellent best practice example, and as the 
machinery of government change is worked through we will be looking to ensure that DCMS 
as a whole is learning from their approach and perspective, including in the digital sphere.  
We are already putting the experience of the Olympics to use in business as usual digital 
communication work, and will continue to share and learn with colleagues across the 
department and across Government. 


 

We recognise that staff need support in achieving a digital by default standard, therefore we 
will need to improve capability to ensure that this happens. 


   

Key next steps: 
 Using the move to GOV.UK as an opportunity to improve the accessibility of DCMS 

web content to make sure that everybody can use it easily 
 Building digital capacity among policy makers in the department.  Please see specific 

actions at 5.2 
 Improving the way people can engage with us to help shape policy.   As well as 

looking at ways of making it easier for people to complete “traditional” consultations 
online, we will also continue to push the boundaries of what is possible in terms of 
digital and online consultation and engagement 

 We will explore options, with the aim of introducing a more intuitive and accessible 
“standard” online consultation system in May 2013 

 We will continue to help the public to communicate with us online, pushing the 
barriers of Government digital communication practice throughout the policy process, 
from consultation to implementation  

 We will share best practice internally amongst policy makers and across government 


 

http://www.culture.gov.uk/4912.aspx




PART 4:  Digital by default best 
practice 


 

Digital development is an important part of our arm’s length bodies’ roles in engaging with 
the public.  As became clear in the workshops we held to help inform this strategy, they are 
very aware of this agenda and doing great work in becoming digital.  We will work with our 
bodies to agree appropriate digital indicators which can then be reflected in future 
management agreements.   


 

Our workshops with arm’s length bodies showed that whilst they are at different stages, they 
support the key tenets of the digital by default agenda.  These include the key importance of 
user-centricity, agility, iterative change and organisational responsiveness, efficiency and the 
opportunities presented by collaboration.  In their comments on their own experiences of 
implementing a digital strategy, they echoed the Cabinet Office’s key emphasis on senior 
buy-in and the need for a cultural shift.  They cited having a senior champion at Board level, 
utilising the know-how and digital enthusiasm of younger staff, and a tactic of getting staff to 
use social media-type technology internally to familiarise them with it, as effective ways to 
tackle these challenges. 


 

4.1    Delivery bodies 


 

We have world-leading museums and galleries who provide services and content which 
excite and interest the public.  Museums and galleries are very aware of the challenge and 
opportunities presented by the digital agenda. The Imperial War Museums and National 
Gallery worked together to ‘navigate the bumpy road’ of moving their very traditional 
organisations into a digitally-active space. We have collated a number of detailed case 
studies that can be found at Annex A.   


 

The British Library has embarked on a strategic programme to secure the long-term future of 
the national newspaper collection through digitisation.  Created in partnership with 
brightsolid, the British Newspaper Archive offers access to more than 5.25 million fully 
searchable pages – with a free search facility – featuring around 200 newspaper titles from 
every part of the UK and Ireland.  Please see case study 2 for more details. 


 

You can find data from the existing measures that we ask our museums and galleries to 
track on our website. One of the indicators is the number of unique website visits. Some 

http://www.museumsandtheweb.com/mw2012/papers/navigating_the_bumpy_road_a_tactical_approach_
http://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/
http://www.culture.gov.uk/what_we_do/museums_and_galleries/9461.aspx
http://www.culture.gov.uk/what_we_do/museums_and_galleries/9461.aspx


 

museums have changed the way that they measure this over the reporting period (footnoted 
in the data table).  This has produced a downward discontinuity for these museums, so the 
total for all museum and gallery website visits should be treated with caution.  However for 
those who have not made a reporting change the overall figures show a broadly upward 
trend in the number of website visits. 


 

4.2   Strategic, advisory and regulatory bodies 


 

There is a lot that these bodies are already doing to make it easier for the public to engage 
with them online.  For example Arts Council England actively encourages online applications 
for grants – as online applications reduce their administration costs meaning that they can 
provide more funding for arts.  In general, those bodies that have grant-giving as part of their 
core business provide facilities for online applications. 


 

English Heritage is working towards an overall approach of “digital fluency” – thinking 
digitally first rather than translating into digital at the end of the process.  It has applied this 
approach to particular projects – including work on Stonehenge.  Please see Annex A for 
more details.  


 

The BFI is working towards its long term goal of making the UK’s entire screen heritage 
digitally accessible, which is a key priority in their five year Film Forever plan.  From 2013, 
£3m a year will be made available to archives and rights-holders across the UK to make this 
happen – aiming to make 10,000 films available across a range of digital platforms.  Please 
see further case studies at Annex A. 


 

4.3   Broadcasters  

DCMS are responsible for broadcasting policy and look after the government’s relationship 
with the broadcasters – but those broadcasters are completely independent.  They are 
absolute market-leaders in the development of digital services, fundamentally influencing the 
way that the public interact with the media.  When DMCS set the purpose and remit for 
Channel 4 and S4C (the Welsh fourth channel), and negotiated the Royal Charter that 
establishes the BBC, we ensured that they included digital aims.   


 

The BBC has as one of its six public purposes “delivering to the public the benefit of 
emerging communications technologies and services”.  BBC iPlayer has been a true game-
changer in the way the public digest media content.  The BBC released performance figures 
in October 2012 showing that iPlayer programme requests reached 213 million in that 
month, breaking the 200 million mark for the first time.  It is also now quick and easy to pay 
for your TV licence online. 


 

Channel 4’s public service remit states that they must demonstrate “innovation, experiment 
and creativity in form and content of programmes”.  The remit was updated by the 2010 

http://www.bfi.org.uk/about-bfi/policy-strategy/film-forever
http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/latestnews/2012/iplayer-performance-oct12.html
http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/latestnews/2012/iplayer-performance-oct12.html




Digital Economy Act, requiring Channel 4 to broadcast or distribute “relevant media content 
by means of a range of different types of electronic communications networks”.  Building on 
the success of the hugely popular 4OD, they are now looking to introduce more digital 
innovations.  They have developed a viewer relationship strategy, whereby they ask viewers 
to register so that they can communicate with them directly and in a more targeted way.  So 
far they have 6 million registered users, with 1 in 3 16-24 year olds registered. 


 

S4C have created a group to agree a way forward on digital media.  This recommended 
redefining the channel’s core purpose of providing “television services” to include “a range of 
different media”, establishing a detailed digital strategy and investing in online content 
through the S4C digital fund.  


 

4.4   Digital fundraising 


 

In order to strengthen their financial resilience and encourage philanthropy across society, 
we are supporting our sectors to develop and refine their approach to fundraising.  Digital 
technology provides a fantastic resource to support fundraising and to grow tax-effective 
charitable giving.  Properly harnessed, resources which support mobile online giving, 
crowdfunding2 and micro-donations3 reduce the burden on both the donor and the 
fundraiser.  They also enable arts, heritage and sport bodies to personalise and enhance the 
quality of the experience for their supporters and visitors, as well as encouraging charitable 
giving by young people.  We have commissioned a report on ways in which digital 
technology can be used to boost and democratise philanthropy in our sectors.  The report 
will be published in December 2012, and its recommendations will be pursued in 2013.   


 

4.5  Key next steps 


 

 We will work with our bodies to agree appropriate digital indicators which can be 

reflected in future management agreements – ongoing 
 We will set up a virtual network amongst our ALBs – so that our bodies can take it in 

turns to host sessions on digital developments on a regular basis – December 2012 
 Report into use of digital technology and philanthropy – December 2012 
 We will provide an online platform for our ALBs to use to share non-sensitive digital 

data such as user testing, successes, procurement best practice etc. – by March 2013 
 We will continue to offer the opportunity to ALBs to feature on our website and social 

media channels to highlight their excellent work in the digital arena – ongoing   


  

2 The collective effort of individuals who network and pool their resources, usually via the Internet, to support 
efforts initiated by other people or organisations – source Wikipedia accessed 03/12/12 
3 A form of charitable donations that are small in the donated amount. In the past they have been used most 
effectively by companies collecting spare change at registers and checkouts – source Wikipedia accessed 
03/12/12 

http://www.channel4.com/info/press/news/major-new-digital-innovations-announced-at-channel-4-upfront
http://www.channel4.com/info/press/news/major-new-digital-innovations-announced-at-channel-4-upfront
http://www.s4c.co.uk/e_press_level2.shtml?id=675
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crowd_funding
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Micro-donations


 

PART 5:  A digital by default culture 


 

5.1  Change programme and cultural change 


 

This is an ideal time for DCMS to examine our structure and culture to ensure that it supports 
digital by default, as we are in the middle of a Departmental change programme.  Alongside 
realising our targets on pay and non-pay costs, it is our ambition to build a high performing 
and flexible department and to achieve greater efficiency and effectiveness across the 
organisation.  As part of this process, we are looking at IT capabilities and internal 
communications to support new ways of working.   


 

However we do not underestimate the importance of cultural change in making these tools 
and techniques work for us – and there are no easy answers on this. The DCMS change 
team has sought staff input throughout the process, and this is something we will continue, 
to ensure that other changes have the desired effect in reality.  We have also identified a 
number of learning opportunities for staff which can be found at 5.2. 


 

IT capability and efficiency: 
In terms of taking opportunities to use digital by default to help us work more smartly – 
driving efficiency and allowing us to make savings – this is something that is at the heart of 
our departmental change programme.   


 

We are using the move to a new building as a catalyst for change, and taking the opportunity 
to make a number of improvements that will move us towards a digital by default approach 
internally.  We are looking to encourage more flexible and remote working, and ensuring that 
the technology we provide supports this.  Our aim is to move closer towards providing a 
“paperless office”, by improving our shared electronic filing system to make it much more 
user-friendly, and driving down use of printing which will save money and help us to meet 
sustainability targets.  We are also exploring the possibility of becoming fully Wi Fi enabled – 
meaning that both staff and visitors could access the network allowing more efficient 
working, less paper and collaborative working in meetings.   


 

Another change that we are interested in is whether we could streamline the use of emails to 
save space on the system – and whether we can use our staff directory to help save time in 
locating people by providing a “location update” function.  However, as noted above, to make 
these individual changes have a real impact on the culture of DCMS will require buy-in from 
staff. 


 

Our digital approach will also take account of developments across government to enhance 
opportunities for better ways of working and harnessing technological developments where 
appropriate.   


 

Internal communications: 
Within DCMS we are attempting to put “digital by default” at the heart of our work on 
improving internal communications.  We made the move some time ago to solely digital 
internal and external publications, and we also have a completely online HR system – 
including electronic payslips.  All-staff meetings are filmed and uploaded to the intranet. 


 

However we are not complacent and have recently begun a project to redevelop our intranet 
site to make it the go-to place for all DCMS information.  We want the intranet to be a tool 
which staff actively use to complete transactions such as filling out forms, finding out who is 
working on which projects, and getting information on what is going on in the department.  
Our aspiration is to allow users to personalise their online work profiles to a greater degree – 
including up to date information on the latest projects they are working on and, with staff hot-
desking and working remotely more, location updates to allow people to find each other 
more easily.  We will explore with staff whether this would be of benefit.    


 

We are using the lessons and principles of GOV.UK to govern the intranet redevelopment 
project, working with open source technology, using an iterative, agile development 
technique, and using both the design principles and task-based architecture that GOV.UK 
has demonstrated to such excellent effect.  We are also following GDS procurement advice 
throughout the project.  


 

5.2     HR and skills  


 

In DCMS we recognise that embedding digital by default will require staff to have the 
opportunity to develop digital capability.  In order to achieve this we will seek to recruit 
people with digital skills from outside, as well as investing in our own people. 


 

Digital masterclasses – DCMS runs masterclasses for staff on a range of topics.  These 
provide the opportunity for staff to get together, share ideas and learn from each other, with 
the benefit of guidance from a subject expert.  We already offer a career masterclass which 
focuses on using social media for networking.  We will now consider the possibility of 
providing a session focused on use of digital media in policy-making – drawing on both 
internal digital expertise, and experts from the Government Communications Network and 
GDS as appropriate. 


 

Civil Service Learning – In DCMS we are promoting the Civil Service Learning offer, 
highlighting specific courses to help staff to meet the new Civil Service competencies.  Our 


 


immediate aim is to specifically promote the Civil Service Learning app to all staff, so they 
can use Civil Service Learning ‘on the move’ by December 2012. 


 

Secondments and the Fast Stream – In our preparations for the launch of our new 
secondments programme, we will work to identify digital opportunities by summer 2013. We 
will look at how these could fit with Fast Stream deployments.  We do not have digital 
transactional services delivery projects within DCMS, but will work with our arm’s length 
bodies and other departments to identify any opportunities.  We have one member of staff 
out on secondment to GDS, and this is something that we feel is of benefit to the department 
and will look to repeat in the future if possible. 


 

Civil Service Jobs site – We will continue to advertise DCMS vacancies on the Civil 
Service online Jobs Portal.   


 

Public appointments – We already publicise all public appointments online on DCMS, 
Cabinet Office and ALB websites as well as using Twitter and other social media channels to 
promote them.  We maintain a public appointments database used to record personal details 
of appointees and to track when their terms are coming to an end.  We are currently looking 
at upgrading the database to use more up-to-date technology, and make it accessible online.   


 

5.3   Procurement 


 

DCMS is fully engaged with and committed to all current developments in government 
procurement including developments around the use of digital tools.  In particular, 
DCMS is currently in the process of changing the way procurement is delivered in the 
Department and aims to build a departmental pipeline for all procurements, enabling 
businesses to invest in capability and resources as necessary.   


 

We advertise all opportunities over £10k on Contracts Finder and use the Delta e-sourcing 
system, ensuring that all such opportunities are available online.  Looking forward we will 
introduce and embed LEAN procurement principles across all procurements in the 
Department, including utilising extensive pre-procurement market engagement.  We will 
break contracts into lots to encourage SME’s and seek to take advantage of the market’s 
latest offerings and innovations. 


 

Where competing for digital services, we have sought the advice and guidance of GDS on 
routes to market, and we seek to use existing Government Procurement Service contracts 
where these exist, including the G-Cloud store.  We are currently considering the 
opportunities presented by the Small Business Research Initiative – to help provide 
innovative companies with an early opportunity to work with us to provide solutions.   


  

5.4   Case study – the correspondence team   


 

What was the challenge? 
In September 2009 the department was working to address its poor correspondence 
performance – only 58 per cent of MPs letters were going out in 20 working days.  In May 
2010, to meet the demands of the digital age and the administration reductions required, we 
declared a departmental ambition to deliver correspondence to a deadline of 48 hours. 


 

What did you do to make the process digital by default? 
To deliver the massive step to 48-hour turnaround we were forced to consider radical 
changes in the way we processed work.  Significantly we introduced a paperless system for 
correspondence, developing new bespoke software designed for Ministers to clear letters 
and PQs electronically, and responses to letters are now sent by default via email.  New 
tracking systems for correspondence were also implemented – and a fast-track system for 
common queries, where a response is approved by Ministers on a subject area and letters 
are sent out on their behalf with an electronic signature, was introduced.  The public are 
encouraged to send any enquiries through the website.  


 

Was any cultural change required and how did you approach this? 
The appetite for improvement was backed by Ministers and the DCMS Board, who 
supported changes to working practices and the cultural transformation needed to raise the 
importance of correspondence in the department.  To maximise efficiency the team now 
manage workloads on a daily basis, analysing peaks and troughs using trend data going 
back three years and monitoring performance on a weekly basis. Weekly reports on 
performance and a topical report to raise awareness of public concerns are displayed on the 
intranet and on every floor in the building to help keep the rest of the department up to date.  
The use of a “word-cloud” to show the current themes in correspondence has been very 
effective in communicating public concerns in one simple diagram: 


   

http://www.culture.gov.uk/contact_us/default.aspx


 

What was the result? 
This has enabled the department to reply to over 60 per cent of correspondence in 48 hours, 
88 per cent in 10 working days.   Over the past two years the use of digital technology has 
contributed to the resource savings within this area.   


 

5.5  Gaps and key next steps 


 

Gaps: 
This strategy recognises that there is more we could do to provide staff with the tools and 
capabilities to make digital by default a reality.  Whilst we have a dedicated digital resource 
within our communications team, we recognise that there is more work required to spread 
that knowledge to others within the department, particularly policy officials.   


 

Therefore we have worked to provide a new digital training offer for staff as outlined above.  
This is a new approach for us, so will take some work but we believe that it will pay dividends 
in terms of helping to create that all-important cultural change towards a digital by default 
DCMS.   


 

Key next steps: 
 Employees able to use Civil Service learning ‘on the move’ – by December 2012 
 Engage staff to get input to IT and other changes, and to achieve buy-in – by 

February 2013  
 Full release of new intranet – by March 2013 
 Migration to GOV.UK complete – by March 2013 
 Start offering secondments with a digital element where appropriate – by summer 

2013 
 Digital masterclasses – from summer 2013 
 Continue to promote Civil Service Learning and advertise DCMS vacancies on the 

Civil Service online Jobs Portal – ongoing  


  

PART 6:  The 14 actions 


 

Principles and actions 

Principle 1 – Improve departmental leadership 

A1 Departmental and transactional agency boards will include an active digital 
leader. 

DCMS response: 


 

DCMS has appointed a departmental digital leader at Executive Board level.  The 
digital leader has taken ownership of this strategy, championing the importance of the 
digital by default agenda internally.  He will continue to provide that senior level push to 
ensure that all areas of the department are thinking digitally – whether that is in policy-
making, through the change programme, within our communications with the public or 
more widely.   


 

A2 Services handling over 100,000 transactions per year will be redesigned, 
operated and improved by a suitably skilled, experienced and empowered 
Service Manager. The cross-Government Digital Strategy requests “Service 
Managers will be in place for new and redesigned transactions from April 2013”. 

DCMS response: 


 

DCMS does not provide transactional services – therefore we will not be appointing 
any Service Managers.  As you will see in other areas of this strategy, not least from 
the case studies at Annex A, our arm’s length bodies have embraced the digital 
agenda, and with that they have highlighted the crucial importance of both senior 
leadership and appropriate in-house digital skills.  DCMS will continue to encourage 
this progress. 


 

Principle 2 – Develop digital capability throughout the civil service 

A3 All Departments will ensure that they have appropriate digital capability in-house, 
including specialist skills. 

DCMS response: 


 


Principles and actions 


 

In DCMS we recognise that embedding digital by default will require staff to have the 
opportunity to learn digital skills as part of their individual learning plans.  We have 
identified a number of potential opportunities that we will look to provide in the future.  
These can be found in section 5.2 HR and skills.  


 

A4 Cabinet Office will support improved digital capability across departments. 

DCMS response: 


 

DCMS is keen to work with the Government Digital Service and the Government 
Communications Network to ensure that our staff have access to the most up-to-date 
digital skills and knowledge.  We are actively working to identify digital learning 
opportunities – examples of that work can be found in section 5.2 HR and skills. 


 

Principle 3 – Redesign transactional services to meet a new Digital by Default 
service standard 

A5 For “transactional departments” three exemplar services will be selected. 
Redesign starting April 2013, implemented March 2015 (to be included in 
relevant business plans). Following this, departments will redesign all services 
handling over 100k transactions a year. 

DCMS response: 


 

As outlined within our strategy, DCMS is very much in the lead on electronic 
communications and internet policy.  Therefore whilst we do not provide 
transactional services, please see our executive summary for an overview of our 
departmental digital vision. 


 

A6 From April 2014, all new or redesigned transactional services will meet the 
Digital by Default service standard. 

DCMS response: 


 

As outlined within our strategy, DCMS is very much in the lead on electronic 
communications and internet policy.  Therefore whilst we do not provide 
transactional services, please see our executive summary for an overview of our 
departmental digital vision. 


 

Principle 4 – Complete the transition to GOV.UK 




Principles and actions 

A7 Corporate publishing activities of all 24 central government departments will 
move onto GOV.UK by March 2013, with agency and arm’s length bodies’ online 
publishing to follow by March 2014. 

DCMS response:  


 

We have participated fully in the process running up to the launch of GOV.UK, and are 
excited about the potential of this new platform.  DCMS does not offer transactional 
services, so we have relatively little content on the citizen- and business-facing 
sections, but are on schedule to transfer our content to the “Inside Government” 
section of GOV.UK in March 2013.  The nature of the business of DCMS’ arm’s length 
bodies means that they fall within exempt categories – however we are nonetheless 
looking to work with them on their digital developments.  


 

Principle 5 – Increase the number of people who use digital services 

A8 Departments will raise awareness of their digital services so that more people 
know about them and use them 

DCMS response: 


 

We have worked hard to engage with the public and encourage them to interact with us 
digitally, both in formal consultations and in day-to-day digital communication activity. 
We will use the lessons learnt from projects as diverse as the Communications Review 
and London 2012 to feed into a programme of continuous improvement, aiming to be at 
the forefront of Whitehall digital communication.  As set out in 2.3 Demand stimulation 
DCMS is also working to stimulate demand and increase use of digital services.  In 
addition, DCMS is responsible for national library policy.  Please see 2.4 Libraries for 
details of how libraries across the UK are helping people to access digital services.  


 

Principle 6 – Provide consistent services for people who have rarely or never 
been online 

A9 We will take a cross-government approach to assisted digital. This means that 
people who have rarely or never been online will be able to access services 
offline, and we will provide additional ways for them to use the digital services. 

DCMS response: 


 

DMCS has participated in this agenda through active membership of the assisted 
digital stakeholder group.  In addition, we are working to encourage local projects to 
integrate assisted digital into their demand stimulation campaigns.  Please see 2.3 
Demand stimulation for more details.  Finally DCMS are responsible for national library 


 


Principles and actions 

policy, and we believe that libraries can play a key part in delivering assisted digital 
across government.  Please see 2.4 Libraries for more details. 


 

Principle 7 – Broaden the range of those tendering to supply digital services, 
including more small and medium sized enterprises 

A10 Cabinet Office will offer leaner and more lightweight tendering processes, as 
close to the best practice in industry as our regulatory requirements allow. 

DCMS response: 


 

DCMS is fully engaged with and committed to all developments in government  
procurement including around the use of digital tools.  We are in the process of 
changing the way procurement is delivered in the Department, aiming to build a 
departmental pipeline, enabling businesses to invest in capability and resources as 
necessary.  Please see section 5.3 Procurement for more details. 


 

Principle 8 – Build common technology platforms for digital by default services 

A11 Cabinet Office will lead in the definition and delivery of a new suite of common 
technology platforms which will underpin the new generation of Digital by Default 
services. 

DCMS response: 


 

Although DCMS does not directly deliver any transactional services, we look forward 
to cooperating with GDS to define any common tools that will help improve our 
service to users in other areas.   


 

Principle 9 – Remove unnecessary legislative barriers 

A12 Cabinet Office will continue to work with departments to remove legislative 
barriers which unnecessarily prevent the development of straightforward and 
convenient digital services. 

DCMS response: 


 

Whilst DCMS does not provide transactional services, we are committed to ensuring 
that our legislation is fit for a digital world.  In line with our commitment to being digital 
by default, we will ensure that we develop legislation that, where relevant, supports 
straightforward digital by default services.  In particular we are looking at a range of 
measures to remove red tape in support of the rollout of broadband.  Please see 2.2 
Reducing red tape for more details.   


 


Principles and actions 

Gambling Bill: 
Another example is work currently underway on the Gambling (Licensing & Advertising) 
Bill – ensuring the regulatory regime is adapted in line with advancements in digital 
technology.  Participation in remote gambling is steadily increasing and DCMS is 
committed to strengthening the regulation of remote gambling to ensure that effective 
consumer protection measures are afforded to all British-based consumers, including 
those using digital forms of remote communication.  


 

Under the current regulatory arrangements set out in the Gambling Act 2005, only 
gambling operators with key equipment located in Great Britain are required to be 
licenced by the Gambling Commission. Consequently, consumers based in Great 
Britain face different consumer protection arrangements, and have to deal with a myriad 
of different regulators, depending on where the remote gambling they are taking part in 
is regulated. This problem is growing as more countries permit online gambling. 


 

DCMS’ reforms allow for the amendment of the Gambling Act 2005 so that remote 
gambling is regulated predominantly on a point of consumption basis.  


 

Principle 10 – Base service decisions on accurate and timely management 
information 

A13 Departments will supply a consistent set of management information (as defined 
by the Cabinet Office) for their transactional services. 

DCMS response: 


 

DCMS does not offer transactional services directly to the public, so the extent to which 
we can provide data is limited.  However, we are fully in concert with the new, data-
driven approach of GDS and will cooperate fully in collating and returning appropriate 
data to the Cabinet Office.  Please see our executive summary for an overview of our 
departmental digital vision.  

Principle 11 – Improve the way that the government makes policy and 
communicates with people 

A14 Policy teams will use digital tools and techniques to engage with and consult the 
public. 

DCMS response: 


  

DCMS has a strong record in digital engagement work, from the Communications 
Review project that has brought stakeholders and the public into the debate about the 
regulatory framework for the communications industry, to the delivery of London 2012 – 
the first Digital Games.  Please see Part 3 for further details. 

http://www.official-documents.gov.uk/document/cm84/8497/8497.asp
http://www.official-documents.gov.uk/document/cm84/8497/8497.asp
http://dcmscommsreview.readandcomment.com/
http://dcmscommsreview.readandcomment.com/


 

ANNEX A:  Arm’s length body case 
studies 


 

Case study 1 – English Heritage – Digital Fluency Initiative 


 

What was the challenge? 
After a review of the results and benefits realisation of the previous English Heritage Digital 
Strategy it became clear that there were many individual successes.  For instance we had 
achieved an overall increase in traffic of 59 per cent through the redesign of the main 
website, launched new social media channels, launched a new iPhone and Android app and 
improved our e-commerce capabilities.  However the take-up of digital and the realisation of 
its potential was uneven across different parts of the organisation.  The situation could be 
best described by using a language analogy: staff were, in many cases, successfully 
“translating” previously off-line projects into digital, but they were not yet all thinking digital 
first. Digital delivery was often thought of only at the end of projects, at which point it was 
more expensive and less effective than if it were built into the project from the start. As such, 
the organisation could be said to not yet be “fluent” in digital, a level when translation will no 
longer be required. 


 

What was your approach to becoming digital by default? 
To become fluent in digital and so be “digital by default”, English Heritage launched a new 
digital strategy in the summer of 2012, putting the achievement of digital fluency right at its 
heart. 


 

This would be achieved through delivering a number of key objectives, for example:  

• Making sure that digital delivery was embedded in all projects from the start 
• Making sure all digital projects are carried out in a way that is informed by real user 

needs, which is ensured through rigorous user testing 
• Reducing fragmentation of the digital brand by reducing the number of separate 

English Heritage websites, and improve interlinking between those that remain 
• Offering more of our rich content online – including archives, collections and research 

– and structuring content in such a way that traffic flows from traffic-rich parts of our 
websites, like our property and visitor info pages, to this content, giving the user a 
richer context to their visit 


 


Was any cultural change required and how did you approach this? 
The new strategy recognised that a significant transformation was required internally within 
English Heritage to achieve digital fluency, including changes such as: 

• Offering training in new digital technology to all staff at the right level – from entry 
level familiarity-type training to more advanced training in specific technologies 
required for their job 

• Reviewing job descriptions for staff and departmental plans to make sure digital 
targets were embedded at every level 

• Improving co-ordination of all digital activity via a central Digital Board dealing with 
strategy and a Digital Working Group running the projects 

• Making sure digital skills were a key part of HR processes such as performance 
reviews and the hire of new staff 

• Opening up access to social media tools like Facebook to all staff by default, 
supported by training and clear policies and guidance for how it should be used 


 

What was the result? 
It is still early days, only six months into the three year strategy period. However, there have 
already been some changes and tangible results.  The new Digital Board and governance 
structures have been set up and well bedded-in over the past year through the process of 
developing the strategy itself.  


 

The improved communication between different departments represented at this Board has 
led to a more collaborative approach, where new initiatives are made to fit in with existing 
online assets rather than launched separately, and particular improvements in one area are 
being copied and applied elsewhere. This is a significant step forward from the situation in 
the past where each department or team who had the funding would likely have launched 
their own independent website, with few links to all other digital assets. 


 

We have also kicked off a number of collaborative projects that involve multiple departments 
working together, including a customer relationship management strategy and a review of e-
Commerce. 


 

Apart from improved co-ordination and collaboration, the planned training courses for staff 
are now being developed, a social media working group has been set up and plans are 
being put together for the opening up of access to social media channels like Facebook to all 
staff. 


  

Case study 2 – British Library Newspaper Programme 


 

What was the challenge?  
The British Library holds one of the world's finest collections of newspapers, spanning three 
centuries and including 52,000 local, regional, national and international titles. The British 
Library Newspaper Programme is a strategic programme to secure the long-term future of 
the national newspaper collection. 


 

Each year our Newspaper Library at Colindale is used by 30,000 researchers in subjects 
ranging from family history and genealogy to sports statistics, politics and industrial history. 
However, this vast resource is held mainly in hard copy and microfilm, necessitating a trip to 
the north London site for people wishing to use the collection. The long-term future of the 
collection was also being compromised by less than desirable storage conditions at 
Colindale. For both of these reasons, the Newspaper Programme had to involve a large-
scale digitisation of newspapers, to ensure their preservation electronically and widen 
access to the newspaper collection for researchers. 


 

What was your approach to becoming digital by default? 
At the heart of our vision is a belief that everyone who wants to do research should have 
access to the rich resource of content held by the British Library. Our ambition is for users to 
be able to download, share and re-use public domain digital content for the benefit of the 
economy and society. 


 

Given this ambition, digitisation is an important way for us to increase access to our content. 
We sought a commercial partner for the digitisation of newspapers to bring innovation and 
commercial know-how into the partnership and share risks and costs – marrying our 
ambitious digital agenda with careful management of limited resources. 


 

brightsolid, a subsidiary of DC Thomson, was selected following an EU procurement 
process.  brightsolid had previously delivered the highly successful 1911census.co.uk 
project in partnership with The National Archives, and owns the leading family history 
resources findmypast.co.uk and genesreunited.co.uk.  brightsolid took on the commercial 
and technical risks of the project, with no direct costs to the British Library. 


 

Was any cultural change required and how did you approach this? 
To a large extent, major culture change was not necessary as the Library has a track record 
of entering into commercial partnerships to advance its vision for digital access. Our previous 
partnerships with organisations like Microsoft and Google had prepared the Library well for 
launching a major digitisation project for the newspaper collection. 


 

What was the result?  
brightsolid’s digitisation team, based at the Newspaper Library at Colindale, now digitises up 
to 8,000 pages of historic newspapers every working day, with 18 staff working on the 




project; the British Library saved in excess of £1m by not taking on the establishment and 
staffing of the digitisation suite itself.  The value of the digitisation itself is estimated at 
around £1 per newspaper page.  The suite will digitise up to 40 million newspaper pages 
over the next decade, with around seven million digitised so far – making potential total 
savings of up to £40m. 


 

The digitised collection can be accessed in the British Library’s Reading Rooms, so the use 
of the newspapers by researchers no longer poses a risk to their condition, and the Library’s 
readers can still access the material, now with the benefit of a search function, free of 
charge.  The British Newspaper Archive website offers access to more than 5.25 million fully 
searchable pages – with a free search facility – featuring around 200 newspaper titles from 
every part of the UK and Ireland. The site can be used at a range of prices including a 
seven-day subscription for £9.95.  

http://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/


  

Case study 3 - Equality and Human Rights Commission publications 


 

What was the challenge? 
We produce a range of publications to support our work promoting equality and human 
rights.  In the past we had sent out these publications in paper form.  Therefore the 
challenge was to achieve a “digital by default” approach by moving to electronic 
dissemination. 


  

What was your approach to becoming digital by default? 
Our approach was to consult stakeholders via a virtual survey, track customer journeys and 
use data from Google analytics to find out when and where people were requesting paper 
publications.  This then allowed us to convert hard copy publication requests into digital 
downloads via various easy to use formats.  We developed mechanisms to direct customers 
to the website via messaging, use of QR codes and specific digital journeys from the 
research outlined above, to prompt and encourage people to download rather than request 
printed copies.  In turn we were then able to achieve the twin aims of providing an even 
better service to customers whilst reducing printing and publication storage costs. 


 

Was any cultural change required and how did you approach this? 
We did some internal communications and provided training to stakeholder-facing staff.  This 
meant that they could help educate stakeholders and point out the benefits of the digital 
approach and all of the formats available to them – e.g. easyread, accessible word and pdf – 
and other “digital advantages” like the fact that the site recommends related articles and 
allows stakeholders to feed back their comments and thoughts. 


 

We also spent time liaising with internal project leads to advise them of the digital approach 
and to consider this as our default position rather than assuming we would always print – this 
is of course a cultural change and is on-going.  


 

What was the result?  
Downloads increased by 30 per cent, print costs reduced by 60 per cent and we reduced 
fulfilment costs from £130k a year to £24k a year.  We still do print some documents where 
we are physically launching a publication at an event, or to accommodate reasonable 
adjustments, but the “digital by default” approach and the resulting outcomes speak for 
themselves. 

http://www.equalityhumanrights.com/publications/




Case study 4 – Historic Royal Palaces’ (HRP) digital strategy 


 

What is the challenge?  
The challenge is to pull together an overarching strategy that will see HRP enhance the 
delivery of its cause through the use of digital technology.  This could be through accessing 
an extended audience or using digital technology to enhance the visitor experience.  We 
recognise that there is a whole new generation that we are not currently engaging as much 
as we could, and that the vast majority of people now interact with the world digitally.  Our 
work is at an early stage – so far we have focused on gaining the senior buy-in necessary to 
take a digital approach. 


 

What is your approach to becoming digital by default?  
For us becoming digital by default is an organisational change. There is a lot of great work 
being delivered at the moment but it lacks an overarching purpose with senior level sign-off.  
We have worked internally with trustees and the Executive Board to agree an overarching 
purpose, which is: 


 

“Exploit digital throughout the organisation to enhance the visitor journey and extend the 
reach of our Cause4 beyond our physical palaces, whilst also creating an efficient working 
environment for HRP employees.” 


 

With this agreed at a high level (trustee level) we are now working on pulling together a set 
of organisational outcomes.  These could be along the lines of; 

• Increase retail turnover by xx% through the sales of digital apps 
• Extend the reach of our cause to the internet through the generation of rich content 
• Use technology to enhance our office systems and improve the efficiency of the 

organisation 


 

The outcomes will underpin the delivery of the purpose.  We are also working on a vision 
statement that is more aspirational.  An internal engagement piece is also underway to 
ensure we build organisational commitment and awareness. 


 

Is any cultural change required and how will you approach this? 
A key element of this work will be to evolve the organisational culture.  The required shift will 
be multi-dimensional and revolve around our core principles and supporting strategy.  The 
challenge is that for many digital is seen as something to fear.  We need to work with all 
individuals to develop not only their competence but also confidence in the use of digital and 
the associated devices and tools.  


  

4 Our Cause: to help everyone explore the story of how monarchs and people have shaped society, in some of 
the greatest palaces ever built. 

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XMF6a9mvhZ0&feature=youtube_gdata_player
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3SuNx0UrnEo&feature=youtube_gdata_player


  

What results have you seen so far and what overall outcomes are you aiming for? 
The existence of a digital strategy is raising the awareness of the work already carried out to 
date which is a good outcome. We are also seeing more senior team engagement which is 
critical.  We are expecting to develop a three year plan which will result in a step change of 
capability for the organisation and a real change in the way we use digital technology to 
support our Cause. 


   

Case study 5 - English Heritage – Stonehenge  


 

Background: 
Stonehenge is one of the most important and loved ancient monuments in the world. 
However, everyone agrees its landscape setting is far from ideal and that visitor facilities are 
inadequate.  After several attempts a new scheme, spearheaded by English Heritage and 
supported by a wide range of partners, is finally about to be realised.  


 

The Stonehenge web pages are currently collected in a single section of the corporate site 
and received over a million views last year.  However they do not currently deliver a level of 
impact that matches the monument’s status as a British icon, convey our aspiration for the 
site or afford it the profile it deserves as a leading visitor attraction.  


 

With a new visitor centre proposed, new world-class visitor facilities, greater access to the 
wider landscape and museum-quality interpretation, a new website for Stonehenge is an 
essential part of communicating the breadth and depth of the changes on site. 


 

In addition a new online ticketing system will be introduced to manage the expected rise in 
visitor numbers and improve the visitor experience. 


 

Our biggest challenges: 

• To do justice to our aspirations for Stonehenge and the new visitor experience 
• To integrate and optimise pre-booked/online ticketing opportunities 
• To recognise and integrate deeper content opportunities working with a huge amount 

of source content (and internal stakeholders), and how we present this for a consumer 
audience 

• Maintaining existing webpages whilst developing the new website and planning the 
migration between the two 

• Working to integrate links to third party strategic partners  


 

How we approached becoming digital by default: 
We approached putting digital at the heart of the development project by: 

• Driving online ticketing and booking 
• Visitor journey planning 
• Marketing and communications planning 
• Interpretation – joining up the online and offline journey with the customer experience 

now starting online before their visit to the attraction 
• Member offer – including bringing modern digital features to our members’ magazine 
• Education offer – bringing together teacher resources and interactive planning tools in 

one digital space 


 

http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/daysout/properties/stonehenge/?utm_source=stonehenge&utm_medium=redirect&utm_campaign=redirect


 

We also looked for ways to bring the experience to life online including moving images and 
interactive elements and developed smarter user journeys with buy-in of key stakeholders.  
This has helped them understand why we are structuring their content in a certain way and 
not creating departmental silos on the page.  Finally we are evolving the existing pages in 
line with the development of new website to manage customer expectations and carry clear 
communication. 


 

Our approach to cultural change: 
Significant cultural change is required for this project to succeed. We have started by making 
sure all stakeholders are comfortable and informed through joined-up communications.  This 
has ensured that all stakeholders feel invested in the online project.  We are also 
communicating with customers and local stakeholders through news stories linking back to a 
dedicated project space on the existing webpages. 


 

Results: 
Although it is too early to show comprehensive results, early benefits include: 

• Greater collaboration between departments 
• Greater understanding of audience and user journeys 
• Greater understanding of e-ticketing therefore greater buy-in for the need to make the 

ticketing system more efficient 
• Time saved on stakeholder negotiations because of joined up communications and 

new culture of cooperation 
• Identifying and optimising opportunities for cross-selling and creating an integrated 

sales approach 
• Wider member support for the project 




ANNEX B:  DCMS’ arm’s length bodies 

DCMS is responsible for 42 arm’s length bodies – the vast majority of the DCMS budget 
goes to these bodies.   


 

8 Strategic Grant/National Lottery Bodies:  

• Arts Council England 
• British Film Institute [also delivery – runs cinemas and film festivals] 
• English Heritage [also delivery – runs heritage sites] 
• National Heritage Memorial Fund / Heritage Lottery Fund 
• Olympic Lottery Distributor 
• Sport England 
• UK Sport 
• Visit Britain 


 

24 Delivery Bodies:  

• 15 museums and galleries including the ‘nationals’ 
• British Library 
• Churches Conservation Trust - jointly funded by the Church Commission   
• Historic Royal Palaces 
• Horserace Betting Levy Board 
• Olympic Delivery Authority 
• Public Lending Right 
• Sports Ground Safety Authority 
• The Royal Parks 
• UK Anti-Doping 


 

5 Advisory Bodies:  

• Advisory Council on Libraries 
• Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art and Objects of Cultural Interest 
• Theatres Trust 
• Treasure Valuation Committee 
• Visit England 


   

5 Regulators and tribunals: 

• OFCOM 
• Equality and Human Rights Commission 
• Horserace Betting Levy Appeal Tribunal for England and Wales 
• Gambling Commission 
• National Lottery Commission 


 

DCMS also manages the Government’s relationship with the statutory broadcasters 
Channel 4 and S4C (Welsh Fourth Channel Authority) and the BBC. 


                                  

2-4 Cockspur Street 
London SW1Y 5DH 
www.culture.gov.uk 




	Ministerial Foreword
	PART 1:  Introduction
	PART 2:  Digital Infrastructure
	PART 3:  Using digital by default to deliver better policy
	PART 4:  Digital by default best practice
	PART 5:  A digital by default culture
	PART 6:  The 14 actions
	ANNEX A:  Arm’s length body case studies
	ANNEX B:  DCMS’ arm’s length bodies

