




Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action




                                             


                   											

Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action -

Contents 




Ministerial Foreword ........................................................................................... 3


	

The case for fuller working lives ........................................................................ 5


	

What we know about early labour market exits ................................................ 9


	

Health conditions and disability....................................................................... 10


	

Carers ................................................................................................................. 13


	

Back to work support........................................................................................ 15


	

Skills and workplace factors ............................................................................ 18


	

Financial security and incentives .................................................................... 21


	

Next Steps...........................................................................................................24


	

Moving Forward................................................................................................. 25


	

References: ........................................................................................................ 26


	

This document outlines the business case for fuller working lives. Further facts, 
figures and research are in the accompanying publication: “Fuller Working Lives – 
Background Evidence”, which includes full details of methodology, data sources 
and citations. 

Some of the policies referred to in this document are applicable across the whole of 
the UK and many to England only. The devolved administrations have their own 
policies with regard to devolved matters. 




                                     


   


                                                           


     


    Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action 

Ministerial Foreword 




We live in changing times; we’re living longer and can expect many more years of 
healthy life. But despite this, too many people are leaving work prematurely. 
Unplanned exit from the labour market can have catastrophic consequences for 
individuals’ living standards into old age, and comes at great cost to the economy, 
business and society as a whole. 

So we want to take action to prevent this. We have already been working to reform 
legislation. Just three years ago it was perfectly legal in this country to sack someone 
for turning 65, no matter how good they were at their job, or how long they wanted to 
continue. The removal of the default retirement age now means most people have 
that choice. Automatic enrolment in a workplace pension will continue to help more 
workers to save for their retirement. This and the introduction of a new State Pension 
from 2016 will ensure people approach retirement with more confidence and 
certainty. 

These measures help everyone to take responsibility for their retirement income, to 
move away from the idea of a cliff-edge retirement that is inevitable at a given age, 
and ensure they plan for a retirement that is based on personal circumstance and 
choice. 

For some, retirement is something to look forward to, something they’ve worked hard 
to achieve, a time to spend more time doing more of the things they love: taking up 
new hobbies, volunteering in the community or simply taking it easy. For others, 
without adequate financial planning, it can become a time of boredom, loneliness and 
poverty. 


3 

                                             


  

        


          

Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action -

We need to act now and focus in the first instance on preventing individuals’ 
catastrophic withdrawal from the labour market, and where we cannot, support older 
workers to re-enter the world of employment. We owe it to those people who might 
otherwise be left behind. People like the person in their 50s who wants to work, but 
cannot because they have caring responsibilities, or the worker who can no longer do 
their strenuous manual job because they have a bad back.  

It’s time to change the conversation about extending working life from one about 
working “until you drop”, to one about a fuller working life, that means working as 
long as is necessary to create the future you want. The business case is compelling, 
and this document sets it out clearly for individuals, employers and the State. It also 
provides a framework within which all the key players can bring about the changes 
we need to ensure adequate income in retirement, better wellbeing in later life, a 
more productive labour market, and increased economic activity.  

Steve Webb Minister of State for Pensions 

Esther McVey Minister of State for Employment 


. 4 

                                             


    			


Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action -

The case for fuller working lives 




People leaving work before State Pension age is a significant problem: 

- Out of 10.2 million people aged 50-State Pension age, 2.9 million (28 per 
cent) are out of work 

- Over half of men and women have already stopped working by the year 
before they reach State Pension age1 

Life expectancy is increasing and the structure of our society is changing. By 2030, 
the number of people in England aged over 65 will go up by 50 per cent, and the 
number of people aged 85 and over will double. One in three of the children born 
today will live to be 1002. 

This is both a huge opportunity and a huge challenge for Government and will impact 
on every aspect of society. To ensure we are ready for the challenges an ageing 
society will bring, we are taking action on employment, welfare, pensions, health and 
social care. We want to keep people well and living independently for as long as 
possible and working longer is one way for people to ensure they have a healthier 
future with adequate income in retirement.  

One of the first actions this Government took was to ensure employers can no longer 
force employees to retire just because they reach the arbitrary age of 65. The 
removal of the default retirement age means the vast majority of people now have a 
choice about when to retire. This brings the UK in line with many other countries, 
encouraging responsible retirement planning and enabling people to work as long as 
they want to. 

There are more over 50s in employment than ever before. Latest labour market 
data shows 4,860,000 men and 4,140,000 women over 50 are now in work3, 
increases of 465,000 and 469,000 respectively over the last four years. However, 
people leaving work before State Pension age is still a significant problem. 

On average, men leave the labour market earlier now than they did in the 1950s and 
1960s4, and often this is not a planned early retirement, but people forced out of work 
by circumstances beyond their control.  Of the 2.9 million people aged 50-State 
Pension age who are out of work, only 0.7 million see themselves as “retired”, yet 1.7 
million think it is unlikely that they will ever work again; and more than half of men 
and women have already stopped working before they reach State Pension age. 
Many of these are sick or disabled, caring for loved ones, or have given up looking 
for work after losing a job5. This early exit from the labour market can have 
serious implications for the health, wellbeing and incomes of individuals and comes 
at a significant cost to the economy, business and society as a whole. 

Demographic change and increasing life expectancy is making this problem more 
acute, and people will need to work longer to fund their retirement. The average time 


5 

                                             


       


Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action -

a man spends in retirement is still increasing, from 20 to 22 years since the late 
1990s, and for women from 25 to 26 years6. 

The chart below demonstrates vividly that there is a rapidly growing number and 
proportion of older people coming into the labour market in the coming decade: 
Office for National Statistics projections suggest there will be 700,000 fewer people 
aged16-49, but 3.7 million more people aged 50-State Pension age driven by 
increases to the State Pension age and demographic change. 

Projected changes to population (2012-2022) 

Population 16-24 

Population 25-49 

Population 50-59 

Population 60-SPA 

-1,000,000 

-500,000 


0 

500,000 

1,000,000 

1,500,000 

2,000,000 

2,500,000 

3,000,000 


Projected change (2012-2022) 


Source: ONS principal population projections for the UK (2012 - based) 

Currently the UK employment rate for 55-64 year-olds is around 60 per cent and, 
whilst this has been increasing for the past 10-15 years, the recent improvement has 
been relatively modest compared to many other nations. Several countries achieve 
employment rates of around 70 per cent or above7, so there is significant room for 
improvement. 

Early labour market exit can be catastrophic for individuals  




Leaving work before State Pension age makes it much more difficult to maintain 
living standards into retirement. A third of people who stopped work aged 50 to State 
Pension age between 2008 and 2010 saw their overall household income 
immediately drop by more than half8. There is also a loss of potential workplace 
pension income, because those leaving the labour market early stop paying in, and 
their former employer stops contributing too. 


6 

                                             


             	

Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action -

So, in addition to the immediate financial impact, people spending less time in work 
in their 50s are at higher risk of low income later in retirement9, and those leaving 
work involuntarily are also more likely to be on low incomes or rely on means-tested 
benefits as pensioners10.

We estimate that there are currently around 12 million adults below State Pension 
age heading towards an inadequate retirement income11, and around 40 per cent 
of these are expected to spend less than 35 years in work.  Retiring before State 
Pension age can substantially reduce private pension savings, spreading a smaller 
pension pot over a longer retirement, and could mean receiving less than the full 
State Pension amount12. Spending longer in work is key to providing adequate living 
standards in retirement. 

Case study: How early retirement can reduce private pension wealth 

David earns £28,900 a year13 and saves into a defined contribution private pension 
at a combined contribution rate of 8 per cent.  Working from age 25 until his State 
Pension age of 65 he could expect to accumulate a private pension pot of £128,000 
(in current prices terms). If he stops working at age 55, his private pension pot 
would be over a third smaller – approximately £81,000 – as he stops contributing, 
and taking his pension early means the fund has less time to grow.  His wealth would 
also be spread over a longer retirement: an expected 32 years when retiring at age 
55 compared to an expected 22 years when retiring at State Pension age14. 

Furthermore, there is evidence that work is generally good for physical and 
mental health and well-being. Research suggests that unplanned early labour 
market exit can be harmful to overall well-being, particularly where there is less social 
interaction in retirement15. 

Early labour market exit damages public finances and the wider 
economy


	

There is a widespread belief that increasing the employment of older people would 
limit opportunities for younger people, but there is a broad span of evidence to 
suggest that this is not the case16. In fact, the evidence from a number of countries 
suggests the contrary, that increasing employment rates amongst older workers 
does not lead to fewer jobs for younger workers, and increases the total size of 
the workforce. 


7 

(This case study is for illustrative purposes only)




                                             


                   	

Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action -

Government spends around £7 billion on out-of-work benefits for claimants aged 50-
State Pension age and more than 80 per cent of this is on incapacity-related benefits 
(£6 billion)17. In 2011 the National Institute of Economic and Social Research 
(NIESR)18 showed that increased employment of older workers would increase 
tax revenues and overall economic output. Our updated analysis suggests that 
halving the employment gap between older people aged 50-State Pension age and 
those in their 40s could have seen income tax and National Insurance receipts one 
per cent (just under £3 billion) higher and nominal Gross Domestic Product (GDP) up 
to one per cent (£18 billion) higher in 201319. 

Early labour market exit can be damaging for business


	

Evidence suggests that employers who fail to retain their older workers are losing 
important skills from their workforce, and the premature loss of older workers can 
lead to loss of output and higher recruitment costs for employers. Despite some 
outdated stereotypes there is no systematic evidence that older workers are less 
productive than younger workers20. 

Looking to the future, keeping more older people in work will be crucial to meet 
future labour demand. In the 10 years from 2012 to 2022, employers expect a 
significant number of new jobs to be created in the UK economy21, and the 
combination of more older people and more new jobs means that the labour market 
and our attitudes towards older workers must evolve to meet the challenge. 

“Changing demographics in the workplace mean that later life workers are 
now the fastest growing age group in the labour market. Yet despite the 
growing numbers of mature workers, their contribution to business and the 
wider economy often goes unsung. It might surprise people to learn that at 
McDonald’s we employ over 1,000 people aged 60 and above. These 
employees play an important role in our business and, as the research 
shows, they make a huge impact on customer satisfaction.” 

David Fairhurst Chief People Officer, McDonald’s Europe 


8 

                                             


            

Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action -

“They’re like gold-dust. Their experience and flexibility would be hard and 
costly to replace. At the same time we do also have a 16 year old apprentice 
mechanic who is shaping up well and is very keen. Life is full of conundrums, 
but the bottom line is that I manage my human resources for the best return. 
It’s better for my business to keep our older workers, many working flexibly, 
than to recruit replacements. It’s all about long-term survival, even more so in 
the current climate.” 

AT Brown Coaches Director Ewen MacLeod on older workers 

What we know about early labour market exits 
If someone has planned adequately and is financially secure, no-one should 
begrudge them an early retirement.  The Government needs to focus on the major 
causes of unplanned early labour market exit that can be so damaging to finances, 
wellbeing and health. 

The interplay of factors that lead people to feeling forced to stop work vary from 
person to person. However, we know the major factors that influence decisions to 
leave work are22: 

 Health conditions
 Disability
 Caring responsibilities
 Redundancy
 Workplace factors
 Financial security

We also know that many factors can be specific to certain occupations or industries, 
and some industries feature more prominently than others given high concentrations 
of older workers in particular sectors. For example, half of economically inactive older 
men previously worked in one of just four sectors: manufacturing, construction, 
transport, and wholesale/retail. And two thirds of economically inactive older women 
previously worked in education, health/social care, wholesale/retail, and public 
administration23. Older people from protected groups24can also be at risk of poor 
labour market outcomes, and it is important that no-one is left behind. 


9 

                                             


                	 	 	 

Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action -

Health conditions and disability


 

“Let's make the workplace fit for humanity as it is, not some perfect view of 
humanity” 

Liz Sayce, CEO Disability Rights UK 

Almost half of people aged 50-State Pension age have a long-term health 
condition, a quarter have more than one long-term condition and a quarter are 
disabled. Many people who develop a health condition can manage their condition 
and need no additional support, but there are currently over 1 million people aged 50 
-State Pension age who are not working because of sickness or disability25, and over
a million over 50s claiming Incapacity Benefit or Employment and Support Allowance
(45 per cent of the total), whereas over 50s make up only 27 per cent of the adult
population below State Pension age26.

While there is no single thing that can help older people who develop health 
conditions or impairments stay in work, evidence points to the need to focus on 
awareness of disability, the prevention of work-related conditions and a focus on a 
healthy workplace, effective management of sickness absence, availability of flexible 
working options, effective line-management and matching responsibilities to 
capabilities. 

The feedback we received from stakeholder engagement events suggested a need 
to prioritise actions, focus on early intervention and the creation of a healthy 
workplace environment. Stakeholders felt that investment in health and wellbeing 
programmes can have long-term benefits for business and employees. 

What Government is already doing 
Government is already working in partnership with a range of stakeholders on the 
following areas:  

 Changing attitudes to disability and long-term health conditions. The
Disability Confident campaign aims to help employers who are unsure about
the benefits of employing disabled people, or who worry about the logistics,
discover for themselves the talents and value that disabled people bring to
business27.

 The Disability and Health Employment Strategy published in December
2013 looks at how Government can best support disabled people and people
with health conditions in the labour market and how partnership working with
employers and other stakeholders can make a difference.

 We have introduced the Personal Independence Payment (PIP), which is
available to those both in and out of work, to support disabled people who face
the greatest barriers in society.


10 

                                             


              		 	 	 	 	 		 

Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action 	 -

Actions Government will be taking forward 




	 A new Health and Work Service: A lack of occupational health support for 
employers, particularly small and medium enterprises (SMEs), means many 
employees do not get the support they need to stay in and return to work28, so 
in late 2014 the Government will introduce the Health and Work Service. Once 
an employee has reached four weeks of sickness absence they will be 
referred to the service by their GP for an assessment by an occupational 
health professional, who will look at all the issues preventing the employee 
from returning to work. Employers, employees and GPs will also be able to 
access independent and objective advice via a phone line and website on 
issues preventing a sustained return to work, and on how to prevent sickness 
absence from occurring. 

	 Learning what works to support older people with health conditions back 
to work: We are currently running Randomised Control Trials for 
Employment and Support Allowance claimants with long-term health 
conditions, comparing the effectiveness between three methods of support for 
two years either from a Work Programme provider, a health care professional 
or an increase in Jobcentre Plus Work Coach support. Around 2,000 to 4,000 
people are expected to participate and nearly half are expected to be older 
claimants. This is a major opportunity to learn more about what works for this 
group. 

	 Many disabled people rely on assisted living technologies (ALT) to give them 
greater control over their everyday lives, and ALT in turn has the potential to 
help carers feel more confident about combining employment and their 
support role. But research shows that many of these technologies are not 
being adopted and used to their full potential. The current assisted technology 
market is failing to match growing and projected demand which is expected to 
grow rapidly over the coming years owing to demographics and the pressures 
on state health and social care budgets. We are therefore looking at the 
potential for inventors and small and medium enterprises to work with 
disabled people to improve existing assisted living products, or develop 
new ideas. 

	 The Psychological Wellbeing and Work Project will run pilots to: 
o	 Examine whether offering Improving Access to Psychological Therapies 

(IAPT) treatment and employment support can offer better outcomes for 
claimants with common mental health conditions. 

o	 Test telephone-based psychological wellbeing and employment-related 
support from specialist providers for some benefit claimants, with the 
aim of understanding whether employment-focused talking therapies 
can improve claimants’ chances of gaining sustainable employment.  

o	 Test early access to online mental health assessments and 
computerised Cognitive Behavioural Therapy to see if this improves 
employment and health outcomes for those with, or at risk of 
developing, common mental health problems 


11 

                                             	


           	 	 

Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action -

 New guidance toolkit for employers: The Government will build on the
existing Age Positive employer guidance to develop additional accredited
guidance and toolkits where gaps have been identified, to help employers
support older workers in the workplace. We will do this in partnership with the
Confederation of British Industry (CBI), Chartered Institute of Personnel and
Development (CIPD), Employers Network for Equality and Inclusion (ENEI),
Advisory Conciliation and Arbitration Service (ACAS), Trades Union Congress
(TUC), Institute of Directors (IoD), Federation of Small Businesses (FSB) and
others. We will take in to account relevant research and advice, for example
guidance being written by the National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence (NICE) on workplace policy and management practices.
Information will focus on the business benefits of employing older workers,
and on what works in terms of healthy workplaces in different sectors
and occupations.

 Public Health England (PHE) in partnership with Greater Manchester Public
Health Network is developing a new national strategy for publication in 2015.
It will look at ways for the healthcare profession to support older people to
remain active in work, self-employment and participation in civic society,
by seeking to reduce the number of people who feel unable or unsupported to
work because of ill health or declining health. As well as considering how best
to maximise the number of healthy years an individual has after retirement. It
will also focus on actions and develop and test recommendations with local
people and service providers to reduce the numbers of people who leave work
because of health issues after the age of 50 years. They are also considering
additional measures to reflect these priorities in the PHE outcomes framework

Discovering their line managers were reluctant to agree to changes to 
working practices because they didn’t know what was “reasonable”, and 
were worried about setting precedents and getting into trouble with their 
managers, Lloyds decided to produce guidance not just covering physical 
adjustment such as equipment, but also non-physical adjustment which 
covers for example the way someone performs a job - hours worked, 
working pattern and training. 

They discovered that the vast majority of adjustments required were of the 
non-physical type - over 76 per cent.  

As a result Lloyds now ensure all their line managers are fully trained in all 
aspects of adjustment. They believe this ensures all colleagues work 
effectively so they can contribute towards the long-term success of their 
teams and business. 

Lloyds Banking Group 


12 

                                             


       

Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action -

Carers 
A quarter of women and a sixth of men aged 50-64 have informal caring 
responsibilities for a sick, disabled or elderly person29. People in late middle-
age are often caught between the different generations of family members requiring 
care: parents and in-laws, spouses or partners, children or grandchildren.   

People with multi-generational caring responsibilities are often referred to as 
“sandwich carers”. While the number is relatively small, there is an increasing 
incidence of people having dual caring responsibilities for both older and younger 
people30 and difficulties managing these responsibilities alongside work can lead to 
premature labour market exit.  

Many people with caring responsibilities can and do balance work and care, but the 
more intense the caring, the more difficult this becomes.  12 per cent of economically 
inactive people aged 50-State Pension age are caring for a sick, disabled or elderly 
person for 20 or more hours per week, compared to only 3 per cent of workers31, and 
recent estimates conducted for the Carers in Employment Task and Finish Group 
suggest that 315,000 adults below State Pension age are out of work, having left 
work to care for someone32. Our ageing population means that demand for 
informal carers is likely to increase in future so this is an issue we cannot ignore. 

A range of actions can help more carers stay in employment, for example, ensuring 
that care and support services meet the needs of carers, ensuring that carers who do 
stay in work benefit financially, and that employers value carers and recognise their 
need for flexibility. Innovation in areas such as assistive technology can also play an 
important role. 


13 

                                             


                		 	 

Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action -

What Government is already doing  

We understand and value the work of carers in society. There is no doubt that we 
could not manage without the dedication and hard work they undertake. In 
recognition of this, the Care Act33  builds the system around people’s wellbeing, 
needs and goals. It sets out new rights for carers; emphasises the need to prevent 
and reduce care and support needs, and introduces a national eligibility 
threshold for care and support. Reliability and quality of care is crucial to prevent 
premature labour market exit. Without trust in the care offered to their loved ones, 
people feel obliged to leave paid employment and do it themselves. For the first time, 
there will be a duty on local authorities to meet the eligible needs of carers, including 
their wishes to stay in employment, as well as a duty to develop the diversity of the 
care and support market. 

‘Recognised, valued and supported: next steps for the Carers Strategy’34 published 
in 2010 sets out the Government’s priorities for carers and identifies the actions 
being taken to ensure the best possible outcomes for carers and those they sup port, 
including enabling those with caring responsibilities to fulfil their educational and 
employment potential. The Action Plan for the National Carers Strategy is 
currently being updated and will be published soon.  It will set out the Government’s 
commitments to carers over the next few years. 

Actions Government will be taking forward 

 We want to find out more about how adult carers can be supported to remain
in paid employment so, working with the Social Care Institute for Excellence,
the Government will commission a two-year project to develop five pilots.
The pilots will investigate the take up and use of an assistive technology
fund to support carers who are in employment, and will support and
encourage people to set up companies that exist ‘on the boundary’ of
homecare and auxiliary services. The approach would support the
development of a care market for self- funders who will require support
services outside the remit of traditional care services.

 Gloucestershire and West of England Jobcentre Plus District is also
commencing work to identify and understand the particular barriers to
employment for carers in Bristol and South Gloucestershire, with the aim
of designing specific interventions to support carers into work


14 

                                             


                     

Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action -

 Rolling out Universal Credit with its improved support for carers (see section 
on Financial security and incentives). 

Back to work support 
Redundancy can often lead to early labour market exit.  Around a quarter of 
economically inactive people aged 50 and over were made redundant from 
their last job35 .  Older people are not significantly more likely than younger people to 
be made redundant, but they are much less likely to find work again afterwards. Our 
analysis shows that 47 per cent of unemployed older people had been out of work for 
a year or more compared to 40 per cent of 25-49 year olds, and only 33 per cent of 
unemployed 18-24 year olds. And 27 per cent of unemployed people aged 50 to 
State Pension age end up economically inactive a year later compared to only 19 per 
cent of people aged 25-4936. Effective back-to-work support is crucial to ensure that 
older jobseekers are able to get back into work quickly and avoid becoming long-term 
unemployed, or economically inactive. 

What Government is already doing 

The Jobcentre Plus Offer delivers back-to-work support to claimants across all 
work-related benefits through a flexible model that focuses on outcomes and 
personalised support. 

The Rapid Response Service, managed by Jobcentre Plus, provides support to 
people affected by redundancy or other workforce management measures, for 
example voluntary release schemes. The service aims to work with employers, and 
provides timely and targeted support for them and their employees to help people 
move rapidly into alternative employment. Examples of support include: 

 matching people facing redundancy to known job vacancies; 
 helping people to construct a CV; 
 helping people to enhance their jobsearch skills;  
 helping people to identify their transferable skills and training needs;  
 providing job-focussed training to help people develop vocational skills, and  

helping to meet discretionary costs e.g.travel to work expenses. 

The Flexible Support Fund is a locally managed budget allowing local Jobcentre 
Plus offices to make decisions about the type and style of support which is 
appropriate to meet the needs of the local labour market. This local approach and 
flexibility can work well for older claimants and examples of the range of activities to 
support older claimants include: use of work psychologists to support work coaches 
to identify barriers and improve interviewing techniques with older claimants, access 
to conversion courses to convert outdated or obsolete qualifications into modern 
certification, supporting claimants to develop their IT and digital skills, and working 


15 

                                             


        


Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action -

with DWP’s National Employer Service Team to develop links with employers to 
challenge their perceptions of older workers and promote the benefits of a multi-
generational workforce. It can also be used to set up bespoke interventions for older 
claimants, such as sector-based work academies. 

To spread good practice we have developed an internal best practice guide to help 
Jobcentre Plus work coaches target support where it is most effective. To promote 
this, we have re-launched an internal intranet site that sets out the advice, tools and 
support available to Jobcentre Plus work coaches to help older claimants get back 
into work. 

Sector-based work academy 
Doreen was made redundant from a large printing firm a couple of years ago. 
Since then, she has had lots of temporary short-term contracts, has been on 
and off JSA, and has combined work with caring for her elderly mother.  
Doreen’s role looking after her mum was intense. She would spend whole 
nights there, organising medication and delivering personal care. She wanted 
more stability from a job, and realised she could get paid for caring for others 
too. Doreen was referred to a care sector-based work academy (sbwa). She 
was successfully selected, and on completion of the training was offered a 
permanent job. 

The Work Programme  
Some unemployed older people will need the more intensive support available 
through the Work Programme. The Work Programme offers tailored support to 
those who are at risk of becoming long-term unemployed and is delivered by 
providers who are free to design support based on individual and local need.  

Last year, the Government launched the Work Programme ‘Building Best Practice 
Group’, which is considering the best ways of addressing the particular needs of 
claimants, including older workers. The group will report back to Ministers later in 
2014. 

Self-Employment 

Self-employment can match very well with the needs of older people. The flexibility it 
allows can fit around other commitments and starting a business can make the most 
of years of experience or untapped talent. The New Enterprise Allowance is a 
successful scheme that supports people who wish to move off benefits and into self-
employment by providing access to business mentoring and financial support.  The 
scheme has been very successful with older claimants. By the end of December 
2013 9,260 people aged 50 and over had started a new business with the help 
of the New Enterprise Allowance since April 201137. 


16 

                                             


          		 	 	 

Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action 	 -

New Enterprise Allowance (NEA) 
Heather had recently been made redundant after 10 years employment as a 
Business Manager. Being over 50 she was worried it would be difficult to 
get another job. She had some sound business ideas on how she could turn 
her hobby, knitting and sewing, into a business and was prepared to invest 
her redundancy payment into the venture.     
We decided to go down the NEA route way. She received valuable 
mentoring from an NEA provider to develop her business plan and was 
soon in a position to begin trading. The NEA was crucial in maintaining 
cash flow in the early weeks. 
The business is now a success and is continuing to grow, as she is always 
introducing new ideas. Heather has achieved what she never though she 
would and has turned her hobby into a source of livelihood and become her 
own boss. 

Actions Government will be taking forward 

We want to learn new, effective ways of helping older claimants back to work and 
remain in work. The Government is doing this through a number of trials: 

	 A Randomised Control Trial to test the impact that up to six months 
adviser-led in-work support can have, with claimants aged 25 and over who 
leave JSA and move into work. This is an important opportunity to understand 
more about the effectiveness of supporting this group as they make their first 
steps back into work. 

	 The Supervised JobSearch Pilots will test the effect of claimants (both Pre-
and Post-Work Programme) being mandated to attend full-time provision. 
The aim of the pilots is to explore the impact on claimants of all ages of daily 
attendance, supervision and support for jobseeking.  

 We are testing new and tailored provision for older jobseekers in some 
Jobcentres using the Flexible Support Fund. In the West of England, Weston 
College will be offering an Age Positive course for older jobseekers, which if 
successful may be rolled out to other areas. 

th	 DWP will also hold an ‘Older Claimants’ fortnight from 9 -23rd June 2014 
that will focus attention on supporting older people to find a job. This will 
include a range of internal and external communication activities to fully 
demonstrate the benefits to business. 


17 

                                             


       


Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action -

Skills and workplace factors 
Fewer older people engage in work-based training and they are less likely to 
voluntarily change jobs than younger workers38. This can leave those who find 
themselves out of a job at a disadvantage. A focus on training, development and 
active career planning is crucial to ensure older workers have the skills to remain 
competitive in the jobs market.  For people who find themselves out of work, we need 
to make sure that back to work support reflects the needs of older jobseekers. 

Evidence from interviews with jobseekers looking for work through Jobcentre Plus 
suggests that more 50+ claimants said they were not confident their skills were 
up to date compared to 18-24 year olds39. Furthermore, older jobseekers are less 
confident that an employer would offer them an interview, suggesting that confidence 
and real or perceived age discrimination are still issues in the recruitment process.   

Workplace factors are known to be very important in retirement decisions. 
Reorganisation and technological shocks can provide an involuntary “push” out of 
employment and occupational stress, repetitive or boring work, lack of autonomy and 
lack of flexibility in terms and conditions can all play a part in an individual’s decision 
making in terms of leaving or staying in the labour market40. These can be 
particularly important for people with health conditions or caring responsibilities, and 
it is important that significant workplace-based barriers are addressed. 

What Government is already doing 

The Government has established a simplified skills system in England. Training 
providers now have greater freedom to tailor training to the needs of the local 
community and economy. 

Funding is available to help adults train or re-skill. Professional and Career 
Development loans are deferred repayment bank loans supported by Government 
which can help pay for professional and vocational courses that help adults with their 
career development or helps them to get into work. In addition, individual training 
providers such as City & Guilds also offer a limited number of grants and bursaries 
and Learndirect offers a range of free and low cost training. 

The Government-funded Mid-life career review project was announced in July 
2012 and has been undertaken by the National Institute for Adult Continuing 
Education (NIACE), in partnership with the National Careers Service and others. One 
of its aims is to prevent early labour market fall out, as well as early consideration of 
work and retirement planning issues. An initial evaluation report has been 
published41 and work continues to fully evaluate the outcomes. 

People on JSA, people in the work-related activity group in ESA, and those on 
Universal Credit mandated to training are able to access fully funded training to help 
them into work. This training can consist of qualifications and units up to level 2, even 
if the individual already holds a qualification at level 2, from the Qualifications and 
Credit Framework (QCF) for example in basic skills or employability. 


18 

                                             


               		 	 	 	 	 

Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action 	 -

In 2011/12, 21.1 per cent of adult learners were aged 45-59 and 8 per cent were 
aged 60 and over. In 2012/13 12 per cent of apprenticeship starts were by those 
aged 45-59 and 0.6 per cent by those aged 60 and over. 

Older people are also well represented among those participating in Government 
funded community learning: in 2012/13 48 per cent of community learning learners 
were aged 45 and over while 16 per cent were aged 65 and over.42 

We know that we cannot bring about the changes needed without the help of 
employers and business networks. Employers want to learn what works from similar 
businesses and networks that they respect. Our Age Positive  initiative provides 
guidance and case studies to employers and business organisations about 
employing older workers and the business benefits of adopting flexible approaches to 
work and retirement. We continue also to work with leading business and age expert 
organisations through the Age Action Alliance's Healthy Workplaces  group to 
develop practical resources to help employers effectively manage the health and 
productivity of an ageing workforce. 

On 10 June Government hosted a conference on introducing flexible working into the 
workforces of smaller employers. 

Actions Government will be taking forward 

	 We will extend the right to request flexible working to all employees in June 
2014 and will work with business to ensure they understand the benefits of a 
flexible workplace. ACAS is producing a code of practice which will explain the 
simple steps employers need to take to respond to employees who wish to 
take up flexible working. 

	 The newly formed Centre for Ageing Better is pleased to be working with 
Business in the Community exploring opportunities to change the labour 
market view of older workers and to develop solutions that meet the needs 
of older people and business. 

	 We will incorporate lessons learned from the Mid-life career review pilots and 
integrate the ‘50+ delivery model’ into existing partner practice, to ensure older 
workers can access an in-depth career review for the first time.  

	 We will develop a communications strategy to ensure that the business 
benefits of fuller working lives are better understood by both individuals and 
employers, and that both existing good practice and any new tools reach a 
wide audience using business networks and representative bodies.  

	 We will work with the Older Workers’ Champion to ensure the issue of 
working longer and the business benefits are both in the public eye, and more 
specifically, well known by business. 


19 


https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-work-pensions/series/age-positive�
http://ageactionalliance.org/theme/healthy-workplaces/�
https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-work-pensions/series/age-positive
http://ageactionalliance.org/theme/healthy-workplaces/




                                             


                  		 

Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action 	 -

	 We will hold a national event for Local Enterprise Partnerships (LEPs), to 
make the business case for local action for the retention of older workers and 
work with the West of England and other interested LEPs to develop local 
initiatives to support older workers in the workplace.  

A pub company with more than 900 outlets throughout the UK, J D 
Wetherspoon’s customer base is very broad, a fact which it is keen to reflect in 
its workforce. The company removed its retirement age in 2006, a move which 
ensures that it can retain valuable skills and experience and give staff the 
choice of working for longer. 

J D Wetherspoon has found it beneficial to attract diverse age ranges by 
offering flexible hours. This enables the employee to strike a balance between 
work and family or other commitments and the business to cover its core 
hours. For example, lunchtime is a particularly busy period for the company’s 
outlets and it has found that some older workers - who might be looking to 
work for a few hours a week - are adaptable and happy to work at this time. 
Older staff are welcomed at all levels of the business, from part-time bar work 
to managerial posts. Feedback from pubs which employ older workers 
suggests they are particularly stable, with low absence, a strong work ethic 
and a commitment to the business. Training is also available at all levels and J 
D Wetherspoon have a number of older employees who have progressed to 
manager level. 

J D Wetherspoon 

Mid-Life Career Review 

“It’s given us focus to address how we can support an older workforce. 
We’ve had staff who’ve been with us for a long time...so we must be doing 
something right. But we want to make sure that continues. Older people bring 
so many benefits to an organisation. It’s the experience. There’s just so much 
they bring. But if they don’t feel valued or supported then we’ll lose them’”. 

Mid-Life career review learning advocate 


20 

                                             


      

Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action -

Financial security and incentives 

The incentives provided by the benefits, pensions, tax and National Insurance 
systems, as well as an individual’s specific financial circumstances, play a large part 
in any decision to stop, or carry on working43. Finances are rarely the only factor on 
which people base their decisions, with other factors such as health, caring, a dislike 
of their job or redundancy usually taking precedence for people who stop working 
before State Pension age44. However, ongoing financial security is important for 
everyone.   

At the point where a retiree decides to leave the labour market, it is important that 
they understand the financial implications of this for the whole of their retirement, not 
just in the short term. For example, the prospect of receiving an initial lump sum upon 
retiring may be attractive, but consideration also needs to be given to whether the 
residual income or capital will be sufficient for the longer term.   

The UK tax-benefit system contains few structural disincentives for older people to 
stay in work, and there are major changes being implemented that will remove some 
of the potential disincentives that we know exist.  

What Government is already doing 

The Government has put in place a number of financial incentives to ensure work 
pays. Principally, Universal Credit will ensure that work, and more work, always 
pays. Universal Credit has more generous work allowances than is true in the 
fragmented benefit system that precedes it, a smoother income taper and greater 
requirement to seek or prepare for work. Thus it improves work incentives, including 
incentives to earn more through increased working hours or better paid work. This is 
true for jobseekers, people claiming for health or disability reasons and carers. 

Most carers under State Pension age wish to stay in touch with the jobs market, not 
just for their financial well-being, but also to enhance their own lives and the lives of 
those for whom they care. The carer element in Universal Credit provides better 
flexibility for carers to combine work and caring. While Carer’s Allowance ceases 
when the claimant earns more than £102 per week, there is not a similar cliff-edge 
effect in Universal Credit, which withdraws the benefit smoothly as individuals earn 
more, thus improving the ability of carers to combine paid work with caring 
responsibilities. 

The introduction of Universal Credit sits alongside the raising of the personal tax 
allowance for workers born after 6 April 1948. 

In addition, employees over State Pension age are exempt from paying National 
Insurance contributions and individuals are able to continue working alongside 
claiming their pension. 

The necessary increase in the State Pension age influences expectations around the 
length of working life. We have legislated to bring forward the planned increase in 


21 

                                             


     

Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action -

State Pension age to 67 and to provide for a regular review of State Pension age 
once every Parliament. 

The new State Pension due to be introduced from 6 April 2016 for anyone 
reaching State Pension age after that date is a simpler, flat rate pension which will be 
set above the basic level of the means test. It will therefore provide a clearer 
foundation for private income from savings and earnings. In steady state, to 
receive the full weekly rate of the new State Pension, an individual will need 35 
qualifying years of National Insurance contributions or credits, with a pro-rata 
entitlement for people with fewer qualifying years. 

The increase in the qualifying age for Pension Credit45 may also encourage 
people to stay in the labour market. Mixed age couples (where one partner is 
below the Pension Credit qualifying age and one is above it) will in future claim 
Universal Credit rather than Pension Credit. As a result, the younger partner will 
retain their link to the labour market and, should the older partner be in paid 
employment, he or she will see improved returns on earned income. 

We are also taking action on private pensions to encourage people to save for their 
retirement - there are already millions more people newly saving (or saving more) 
into a workplace pension because of automatic enrolment with more than 3.3 
million workers having been enrolled since October 201246. It is vital that everyone 
gets a good deal from their pension scheme and has confidence in them and so we 
are taking action to ensure that workplace schemes offer good value for money. In 
March this year we announced measures to protect members of workplace defined 
benefit schemes from high and unfair charges, introduce full transparency of costs 
and charges, and ensure that schemes are well-governed47. Under Universal Credit, 
100 per cent of private pension contributions will be disregarded when calculating 
earnings, meaning there is a greater financial incentive to save for retirement as 
compared to current out of work benefits where the disregard is limited to 50 per 
cent. 

The recent Budget announcements on pension flexibility provide an opportunity for 
people to extend their working lives. Individuals with defined contribution pensions 
will in future no longer have the limited choice of facing a retirement ‘cliff edge’ 
whereby there is a specific moment where they buy their income for retirement or 
chose a seemingly complex financial product.  Instead, they will be able to use their 
pension pots more flexibly, mixing employment and non-employment sources of 
income, and potentially choosing to phase their retirement more gradually. In 
recognition of increasing longevity and the expectation that individuals should remain 
engaged with the labour market for longer, we have also proposed to raise the 
minimum age at which individuals can access their private pension, under the tax 
rules. The Government has proposed to increase the normal minimum pension age 
from 55 currently to 57 from 2028 and from then on it will rise in line with the State 
Pension age so that it is always ten years below it. 

Through the Public Service Pensions Act the Government has made a number of 
changes to support public service workers to stay in the labour market for longer. For 
example, we have abolished the requirement, present in some existing 


22 

                                             


                    		 	 	 	 

Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action 	 -

schemes, that if a member wishes to return to work after retiring, he or she 
must forfeit part of their pension. This will also incentivise public service workers 
to continue working for longer or to return to work after retiring. We have taken steps 
to increase the take up of flexible and partial retirement: the new provisions will allow 
many members to take part of their pension while continuing to work and while 
continuing to accrue further pension benefits. The move to Career Average Revalued 
Earnings schemes, where pensions are accrued on the basis of earnings in each 
year of service, will allow those public service workers who wish to continue working, 
but at a lower grade and on a lower salary, to do so, without it having as much of a 
detrimental impact on their pension benefits as if they had been in a final salary 
pension scheme. 

Actions Government will be taking forward 

	 Bringing forward the planned increase in State Pension age to 67, in 

reflection of increased life expectancy. 




 Rolling out Universal Credit with its improved work incentives, more generous 
treatment of pension contributions and better support for carers. 

	 Raising the age at which people can access Pension Credit and changing 
the rules around access to benefits for mixed age couples to increase the 
incentives for the younger partner to stay in work, and improved returns on 
earned income for both partners. 

	 Introducing the new State Pension in April 2016 so people can be clearer 
about what they need to save to supplement their State Pension. 

 Continuing the roll-out of automatic enrolment, through which we expect to 
get 6-9 million people newly saving or saving more in a workplace pension 
and we are taking measures to make sure workplace schemes offer value for 
money for savers. 

	 Increasing flexibility in the way individuals can access their pension pots. 

 Conducting further work to understand any major financial (dis)incentives. 
We would welcome views and contributions on this, in addition to those we 
have already received from our stakeholder engagement events during the 
preparation of this Framework. 


23 

                                             


               	 	 	   


Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action 	 -

Next Steps


 

Governance 

We will set up a governance structure to review and direct progress of the 
implementation of actions outlined in the Framework and identify further priority 
actions. This body will include representatives from the relevant Government 
Departments, representatives of employers and employees, and employers 
themselves. We will consider the potential role of representatives of the medical and 
caring professions in this context. We will also continue to involve the UK Advisory 
Forum on Ageing in the development of policies on fuller working lives, to ensure a 
voice for older people. 

Test and learn 

The trials we have committed to will increase our understanding about what works to 
prevent premature labour market exit, but this is just the beginning. We want to make 
learning about what support is most effective for older people a core part of what we 
do. We will work across Government and with stakeholder organisations to ensure 
we build our knowledge. For example we will: 

	 Partner with the Medical Research Council (MRC) on a major programme of 
research. £5.8 million has already been invested by research councils in 8 
research projects which are running from 2013 to 2016 on a range of issues 
including the health risks and benefits of extending working life; late-career 
transitions and initiatives to get over 50s back into employment. 

	 Continue to engage with LEPs to ensure they understand the business case 
for fuller working life and discuss with them the potential for future work. 

Monitoring Progress 
In this Framework for action we have outlined measures which will: 

 Offer more support to help keep people in work, particularly people with health 
conditions, disabled people, or those who are caring for a loved-one. 

 Help us to make better use of back to work support for older people. 

From autumn 2015 we will periodically outline progress made and the scale of 
cultural change still required. In particular we intend to: 


24 

                                             


         		 		 

Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action 	 -

	 Publish labour market data on an annual basis showing how the position of 
older workers in the UK economy is changing; in particular ensuring that the 
employment rate of people aged 55-64 keeps pace with increases across the 
group of nations represented in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development (OECD).  Between now and 2020, if we are achieving our 
desired outcomes on fuller working lives, we should expect to improve our 
placing in the league table of OECD nations on older people’s employment.  
We will also monitor inequalities for groups who are at risk of early labour 
market exit, to ensure that the gaps are closing – for example, but not limited 
to, people with a health condition or who are disabled, women, carers, people 
in low skilled occupations and other protected groups48. 

	 Provide progress updates against the actions identified in this document. 

	 Provide updates on what works for older workers, including the formal 
evaluation of local and national initiatives linked to the Framework, and the 
outputs of our work with stakeholder organisations. 

Moving Forward 
The dialogue that Government has had with stakeholders has been invaluable. We 
would like to thank those who have contributed. The ideas and views discussed have 
been instrumental in developing the Framework and actions. We want to continue to 
expand this partnership working to ensure that what we do makes a difference and 
has the impact we seek. Government cannot and should not work in isolation - 
employers, trade bodies, trade unions and individuals all have a part to play to bring 
about the changes needed. 

As we move forward to implement the actions set out in this Framework, we welcome 
your comments and ideas. We are particularly keen to hear from those interested in 
helping us progress particular actions. Please contact us at: 
FULLER.WORKINGLIVES@DWP.GSI.GOV.UK 


25 


mailto:FULLER.WORKINGLIVES@DWP.GSI.GOV.UK




                                             

                                            


  

Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action -

References: 
1 DWP analysis using the Labour Force Survey (see Background Evidence Section 



2a).


2 Office for National Statistics (ONS) principal population projections, 2012-based, 

and estimates of cohort life expectancy. 

3 ONS labour market statistics Jan-Mar 2014. 

4 DWP calculations based on data from Blondell and Scharpetta (1999), ONS 

Pension Trends, and ONS cohort-based life expectancy (see Background Evidence 

Section 3a). 

5 DWP analysis using the Labour Force Survey (see Background Evidence Section 



2a).


6 DWP analysis based on the difference between the Average Age of Labour Market 

Exit, and cohort life expectancy at 65 (see Background Evidence Section 3a). 

7 OECD employment statistics (2012) (see Background Evidence Section 3b). 

8 DWP analysis of the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing (see Background 

Evidence Section 2c). 

9 Bardasi and Jenkins (2002) (see Background Evidence Section 2c). 

10 Glaser (2009) (see Background Evidence Section 2c). 

11 This definition is based on the income that someone would need to maintain their 

living standards into retirement.  See DWP (2013) The Framework for the Analysis of 

Future Pension Incomes for more detail.    

12 Individuals will need 35 years of National Insurance contributions from work or 

credited activity to claim a full State Pension from 2016.  People leaving work and not 

moving to a credited activity risk having a smaller amount of State Pension. 

13 The median male earnings in the Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings 2013 were 

£28,900.

14 DWP analysis using I-Pen modelling (see Background Evidence Section 2c and 

Annex F for details).

15 Waddell and Burton (2006), Dave et al (2008) (see Background Evidence Section 



2c).


16 See for example Eichhorst et al (2013) (further evidence and citations in 

Background Evidence Section 3c). 

17 DWP analysis (see Background Evidence Section 2e and Annex G for details). 

18 Barrell et al (2011) (see Background Evidence Section 2e). 

19 DWP analysis (see Background Evidence Section 2e and Annex H for details). 

20 Yeomans (2011) (see Background Evidence Section 2d). 

21 Industrial forecasts produced by the UK Commission for Employment and Skills for 

2012-2022 (see Background Evidence Section 2d). 

22 Irving et al (2005) (see Background Evidence Section 4a). 

23 DWP analysis using the Labour Force survey, relating to people who had left work 

in the last 8 years (see Background Evidence Section 4f). 

24 Equality Act protected 

characteristics:http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2010/15/contents 

25 DWP analysis using Labour Force Survey (see Background Evidence Section 4b). 

26 Statistics from DWP tabulation tool (see Background Evidence Section 2e). 

27 See https: //www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-disability-confident-campaign 

28 Black and Frost (2011) 


26 

www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-disability-confident-campaign




                                             

                                                                                                                                        


           

Fuller Working Lives – A Framework for Action -

29 Figures for England only, based on the 2011 census (see Background Evidence 

Section 4c).

30 Ben-Galim and Silim (2013) (see Background Evidence Section 4c). 

31 DWP analysis using the Family Resources Survey 2010/11 (see Background 

Evidence Section 4c). 

32 The Employers for Carers and Department of Health Task and Finish Group (2013) 

(see Background Evidence Section 4c).

33 See http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/bills/cbill/2013-2014/0168/14168.pdf


 

34 See https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/recognised-valued-and-
supported-next-steps-for-the-carers-strategy

35 DWP analysis using the Labour Force Survey (see Background Evidence Section 



4d).


36 DWP analysis using 5 quarter longitudinal Labour Force Survey (2010-2011) (see 

Background Evidence Section 4d). 

37 DWP official statistics (see Background Evidence Section 4d). 

38 McNair (2011) (see Background Evidence Section 4d). 

39 Coulter et al (2012) (see Background Evidence Section 4d). 

40 Meadows (2003) (see Background Evidence Section 4d). 

41 See http://www.niace.org.uk/sites/default/files/project-docs/midlife_career_review_-
_findings.pdf


 

42 Source: Individualised Learner Record (ILR)


 

43 Banks et al (2014) (see Background Evidence Section 4e). 

44 Irving et al (2005) (see Background Evidence Section 4a). 

45 Rising in line with women’s State Pension age and then the increase in State 

Pension age for both men and women from 2018. 

46 The Pensions Regulator’s automatic enrolment monthly registration report. 

47 DWP (2014) Better Workplace Pensions: Further measures for savers.


 

48 Equality Act protected 

characteristics:http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2010/15/contents 


27 

http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/bills/cbill/2013-2014/0168/14168.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/recognised-valued-and-supported-next-steps-for-the-carers-strategy
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/recognised-valued-and-supported-next-steps-for-the-carers-strategy
http://www.niace.org.uk/sites/default/files/project-docs/midlife_career_review_-_findings.pdf
http://www.niace.org.uk/sites/default/files/project-docs/midlife_career_review_-_findings.pdf




	Ministerial Foreword
	The case for fuller working lives
	What we know about early labour market exits
	Health conditions and disability
	Carers
	Back to work support
	Skills and workplace factors
	Financial security and incentives
	Next Steps
	Moving Forward
	References:




