




State of the Nation 2015: 
Social Mobility and Child 

Poverty in Great Britain

2015December 2015




State of the Nation 2015: 
Social Mobility and Child 
Poverty in Great Britain

Presented to Parliament pursuant to section 8B(6) of the  
Child Poverty Act 2010

December 2015




About the Commission

The Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission is an advisory, non-departmental public 
body established under the Child Poverty Act 2010 (as amended by the Welfare Reform Act 
2012) to assess progress towards improving social mobility and reducing child poverty in the 
United Kingdom. Its members are: 

•	 The Rt. Hon. Alan Milburn (Chair). 

•	 The Rt. Hon. Baroness Gillian Shephard (Deputy Chair). 

•	 Paul Cleal, Partner at PwC. 

•	 Paul Gregg, Professor of Economic and Social Policy, University of Bath. 

•	 Douglas Hamilton, Director of the RS Macdonald Charitable Trust. 

•	 David Johnston, Chief Executive of the Social Mobility Foundation. 

•	 Catriona Williams OBE, Chief Executive of Children in Wales.  

The Commission is supported by a Secretariat comprising: Paul Johnston, Kathryn Laing, 
Peter Brant, Jack Feintuck, Jodie Smith, Frank Soodeen, Claire Battersby, Gene Ward and 
Catherine Olsen-Saaler.

The functions of the Commission include:

•	 Publishing an annual report assessing improvement in social mobility in the United 
Kingdom, progress towards the 2020 child poverty targets and the implementation of the 
UK’s child poverty strategy, and describing the Scottish and Welsh strategies;

•	 Providing advice to ministers on matters relating to social mobility and child poverty (which 
must be published);

•	 Undertaking social mobility advocacy.

© Crown copyright 2015

You may re-use this information (excluding 
logos) free of charge in any format or 
medium, under the terms of the Open 
Government Licence. To view this licence, 
visit www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-
government-licence/ or email:  
psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk. Where we 
have identified any third-party copyright 
information you will need to obtain 
permission from the copyright holders 
concerned.  

Any enquiries regarding this publication 
should be sent to the Social Mobility and 
Child Poverty Commission, Sanctuary 

Buildings, Great Smith Street, London 
SW1P 3BT. This publication is available for 
download at: www.gov.uk/smcpc

Print ISBN: 9781474125635 
Web ISBN: 9781474125642

Printed in the UK by The Stationery Office 
Limited on behalf of the Controller of Her 
Majesty’s Stationery Office

ID 29101508  11/15

Printed on paper containing 75% recycled 
fibre content minimum. 

http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/
mailto:psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk
http://www.gov.uk/smcpc




Contents


i

Foreword iii

Social mobility overview 1

Chapter 1: Building the right foundations 9

Chapter 2: Schools – the engine of social mobility 27

Chapter 3: Improving life chances for non-graduates 59

Chapter 4: Fair access to university and the professions 83

Child poverty overview 111

Chapter 5: Tackling low pay and in-work poverty 119

Chapter 6: Reducing persistent poverty 145

Chapter 7: Social mobility and child poverty in Scotland 167

Chapter 8: Social mobility and child poverty in Wales 185

Annex: Key social mobility and child poverty indicators in  
England, Scotland and Wales 201




Foreword


iii


Foreword

The Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission is an independent 
statutory body which examines what is happening to child poverty and 
social mobility in the United Kingdom. This is the third State of the Nation 
report that the Commission presents to Parliament. In this report we 
assess: what the UK, Scottish and Welsh Governments are doing (our 
remit does not cover Northern Ireland); what progress is being made; and 
what we think will happen in the future. We also examine the contribution 
many others could make including employers and professions, 
schools and universities, parents and charities. We make a number of 
recommendations for action.

This is our first annual report since the 2015 UK General Election. On the morning after the 
election the Prime Minister set a One Nation agenda for this Parliament. Britain, he said, 
should be “a place where a good life is in reach for everyone who is willing to work and do the 
right thing”. His would be a government for working people – it would ensure that those who 
made an effort were fairly rewarded. It would be a government that offered opportunity to all – 
no matter where they came from.

The Commission warmly welcomes this One Nation commitment and the Prime Minister’s 
recognition that lower poverty and higher mobility are essential if Britain is to fulfil its potential, 
be at ease with itself and be confident about the future. In this report we take the Prime 
Minister’s aspiration as our benchmark. A One Nation society is one where opportunities 
are shared equally and are not dependent on the family you were born into, the place where 
you live or the school you attend. It is a society where being born poor does not condemn 
someone to a lifetime of poverty. Instead it is a society where your progress in life – the job 
you do, the income you earn, the lifestyle you enjoy – depends on your aptitude and ability, 
not your background or your birth.   

These are the hallmarks of a truly open, fair and meritocratic society. They are a long way 
from the Britain in which we live. In this report we explore in detail the gulf between where 
Britain is today and where the Prime Minister would like it to be. We do so not as a counsel of 
despair, but in order to set out the scale of the One Nation challenge facing the country and 
to provide the yardstick against which future progress can be judged.  

Over many decades, successive governments have sought to boost social mobility and 
reduce child poverty. Contrary to today’s prevailing climate of cynicism about politics, those 
efforts have produced real results. Child poverty has fallen by a third since 1997.1 There 
are fewer children in workless households than at any time in two decades.2 Employment 

1 Institute for Fiscal Studies, Incomes in the UK, 2015
2 Office for National Statistics, Working and Workless Households 2015, 2015




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


iv

is at record levels3 and educational inequalities, though wide, have slowly narrowed.4 More 
working class youngsters are benefiting from higher education than at any point in history.5  
Britain today has the fastest growing economy in the G7.6 

It is also welcome that social mobility has become a new holy grail of public policy. It is 
a priority for government and in turn it has become a priority for many schools, colleges, 
universities and employers. Increasingly, many early years services, local authorities and 
voluntary organisations have also stepped up to the plate and made the social mobility 
agenda their own. These are solid foundations on which a One Nation agenda can be built.

There are many reasons to be optimistic about the future. Nonetheless, it is obvious that 
the progress to date has been too limited and too slow. In our report last year we warned 
that without a dramatic change in approach to how governments, employers and educators 
tackled child poverty and social mobility, Britain would become a permanently divided nation.  
Nothing we have seen in the last 12 months has made us change our view. In this year’s 
report we expose some of the deep divides that characterise modern Britain. 

There is a growing social divide by income and by class. Looking at earnings, the income 
share of the top 10 per cent has increased from 28 per cent to 39 per cent since 1979 and 
the income share of the top 1 per cent has more than doubled from 6 per cent to 13 per cent 
over the same time period. Looking at wealth, the wealth share of the top 10 per cent has 
increased from 59 per cent to 66 per cent since 1991 and the wealth share of the top 1 per 
cent has increased from 19 per cent to 23 per cent over the same time period.7 At the very 
bottom of society there are more than one million children living a life of persistent poverty.8  
They are excluded from sharing in the many opportunities that life in modern Britain affords. 

This form of social exclusion at the very bottom of British society finds an echo in the 
exclusive social make-up of those at the very top. Those who rise to the top in Britain today 
look remarkably similar to those who rose to the top half a century ago. In the professions, 
71 per cent of senior judges, 62 per cent of senior armed forces and 55 per cent of Civil 
Service departmental heads attended independent schools – compared to just 7 per cent of 
the population who had a private education.9 Of course, the best people need to be in the 
top jobs – and there are many good people who come from private schools and who go to 
top universities. But there can be few people who believe that the sum total of talent resides 
in just 7 per cent of pupils in the country’s schools. The warning from the former Conservative 
Prime Minister Sir John Major applies to all parts of these islands – in every single sphere of 
British influence the upper echelons of power are held overwhelmingly by a small elite.

But, as we document in this report, social differences do not always follow common 
assumptions. Scotland, for example, has the smallest number of children living in poverty 
among the constituent nations of the UK10, the lowest prevalence of low pay11 and far more 

3  Office for National Statistics, Labour Market Statistics November 2015, 2015. 73.7 per cent of 16 to 64-year-olds were in 
work in Q3 2015

4  For example, children eligible for free school meals were 55 per cent as likely as their peers to get five good GCSEs including 
English and maths in 2013–14 compared to only 39 per cent as likely in 2004–05. Department for Education, GCSE and 
Equivalent Attainment by Pupil Characteristics 2014, 2015; Department for Education and Skills, National Curriculum 
Assessment, GCSE and Equivalent Attainment and Post-16 Attainment by Pupil Characteristics in England, 2005, 2006

5  Higher Education Statistics Agency, Widening Participation of Under-represented Groups, 2015. An estimated 103,000 
young people from working-class backgrounds (defined as NS-SEC 4-7) from the UK began a higher education course at 
university in 2013–14 compared to, for example, 77,000 a decade earlier in 2003–04

6  International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook Database: October 2015, 2015. The UK grew faster in 2014 than the 
USA, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and Canada

7  Data taken from Reed, H., ‘Piketty, Chris Giles and Wealth Inequality: it’s All About the Discontinuities’, The Guardian, 29 
May 2014, which is based on Piketty, T., Capital in the 21st Century, 2014

8 ONS, Persistent Poverty in the UK and the EU, 2008-2013, 2015
9 Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, Elitist Britain, 2015
10 Department for Work and Pensions, Households Below Average Income, 2015
11  Office for National Statistics, Estimates of Employee Jobs Paid Less Than the Living Wage in London and Other Parts of the 

UK, 2015




Foreword


v

young people from deprived areas going on to higher education.12 Wales has relatively high 
poverty rates and few poorer children leaving school with good qualifications, despite having 
more mothers with dependent children in work than most other parts of the UK.13 14  England 
has a higher proportion of poorer children leaving school with good qualifications than the 
other nations of the UK.15

These national differences are amplified at a more local level. A North:South divide has long 
been recognised. But that is only the tip of the iceberg when it comes to the fissures that 
have opened up in our country. It is only 100 miles from Norwich to St Albans, but they 
are like two different countries. On average, men live three years longer in St Albans than 
in Norwich, while women live nearly two years longer. The average salary in St Albans is 
£32,595 compared to £19,382 in Norwich. There are nearly twice as many professional jobs 
in the former compared to the latter. Unemployment in Norwich is almost double that of St 
Albans. While 75.9 per cent of children leave school with five A–C grade GCSEs in St Albans, 
only 43.8 per cent do so in Norwich. Not surprisingly, children in Norwich are over three times 
as likely to be in low-income families as children in St Albans.16 

There are also big divides by gender and ethnicity. At school boys perform significantly worse 
than girls. In 2014, boys’ GCSE results were 10 percentage points worse than girls’ with 52 
per cent of boys achieving five good GCSEs compared with 62 per cent of girls. The best 
results were achieved by Chinese girls (79 per cent) and the worst by black Caribbean boys 
(39 per cent). In the world of work, the educational attainment gap between boys and girls is 
reversed, with men getting paid more than women, especially after the age of 30.  

So, social mobility is not just an issue about those at the very bottom of society or those at 
the very top. It affects the whole of our society and every part of our country. Middle England 
as much as Wales or Scotland. Rural communities as well as urban ones. At every level  
ours is a small country characterised by a large divide. We are a long way from being a One 
Nation Britain.  

That is not to say that social mobility never happens. It does. There are countless stories of 
people succeeding against the odds. But that is the point – they have to swim against the 
tide in order to get on. Today’s Britain does not provide a level playing field on which people 
can aspire to succeed. While educational attainment by children from disadvantaged families 
has improved over the last two decades, the gap between them and their more fortunate 
peers has improved only marginally.17 The number of disadvantaged children going to 
university has increased but they have much less chance of going to the most sought-after 
universities than their privately educated peers.18 Employment has grown considerably  
since 2010, yet despite recent improvements in real earnings, the number of workers who  
are low paid has also increased.19 In recent times, more people are once again getting on to 
the housing ladder but home ownership rates among the under-25s have halved in just  
20 years.20

The divisions in our nation run deep and, arguably, they are deepening. Unsurprisingly, the 
proportion of people believing that poverty and inequality are one of the most important 

12 Higher Education Funding Council for England, POLAR – Participation of Local Areas, 2015
13 Office for National Statistics, Families in the Labour Market 2013, 2014
14 Welsh Government, Achievement and Entitlement to Free School Meals, 2014
15  Department for Education, GCSE and Equivalent Attainment by Pupil Characteristics: 2014, SFR 06/2015, Welsh 

Government, Academic Achievement and Entitlement to Free School Meals, 2014 and data for Scotland provided by the 
Scottish Government 2014; Adults Qualifications – Office for National Statistics, Annual Population Survey, 2014

16 HM Revenue and Customs, Personal Tax Credits: Children in Low Income Families Measure: 2013, 2015
17  Department for Education, GCSE and Equivalent Attainment by Pupil Characteristics 2014, 2015; Department for 

Education and Skills, National Curriculum Assessment, GCSE and Equivalent Attainment and Post-16 Attainment by Pupil 
Characteristics in England, 2005, 2006

18 Higher Education Statistics Agency, UK Performance Indicators in Higher Education, various years
19 Resolution Foundation, Low Pay Britain 2015, 2015
20 Institute for Fiscal Studies, Living Standards, Poverty and Inequality in the UK: 2014, 2014




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


vi

issues facing the UK has increased threefold since 2007.21 Those public concerns find 
echoes across the political spectrum. It is welcome that all the main political parties now 
advocate a Britain that is less elitist and more equal.

It seems that Britain may have reached an inflection point. If the trends of recent decades 
continue we will become a society that is ever more divided. If, on the other hand, the One 
Nation aspiration can be translated into real action, Britain could become the most open, fair 
and mobile society in the modern world. In this report we assess whether the desire for a 
different sort of society is being matched by policies capable of delivering it. Our conclusion 
is that, despite many welcome initiatives, the current policy response – by educators and 
employers as much as governments – falls well short of the political ambition. The gap 
between rhetoric and reality has to be closed if the Prime Minister’s One Nation objective is to 
be realised.

In the chapters that follow we examine how, across the lifecycle of individuals, the policy and 
practice of governments, educators and employers has to move up a gear if we are to make 
progress towards Britain becoming a One Nation society. 

Early years

A One Nation early years system would be one where every child whatever their background 
was school-ready by the age of five. But less than half of the poorest children in England 
are ready for school by then compared to almost two-thirds of other children, while a deep 
gender divide means girls from the poorest families do almost as well at age five as boys from 
better-off families. The North East and rural areas in the west of England do particularly badly 
in under-fives development. It is welcome that policies introduced by successive governments 
to create comprehensive early years services are continuing and, arguably, accelerating 
under this Government, but efforts to improve the school-readiness of the poorest children 
are uncoordinated, confused and patchy. Meanwhile, the complexity of the childcare funding 
system is hampering efforts to increase maternal employment.

It is welcome that the Government is increasing the childcare support it offers parents but a 
genuinely One Nation early years system needs a new scale of ambition. So we recommend 
that Government should end the strategic vacuum in the early years by introducing two 
clear, stretching, long-term objectives: to halve the development gap between the poorest 
children and the rest at age five; and to halve the gap in maternal employment between 
England and the best-performing nations, both by 2025. To help more parents to parent well 
the Government should establish an innovation fund designed to test new ways of improving 
parenting skills; to increase the take-up of free childcare it should radically simplify the multiple 
streams which finance it; and to improve pre-school development a national definition of 
school readiness should be established and the Government should unite all those involved in 
the early years behind delivering it.

Schools

A One Nation schools system would ensure that every child had the chances and choices to 
fulfil their potential, regardless of birth, background or geographical location. Schools are the 
cornerstone of efforts to improve social mobility and in some parts of the country – London 
especially – they are breaking the link between demography and destiny. But schools where 
poor children do well are the exception rather than the rule and there are some areas – 
Portsmouth and Bracknell Forest – where no pupils eligible for free school meals went on to 
a top university. Overall, children who receive free school meals are nearly half as likely to get 
five good GCSEs as their better-off peers and fewer than one in six get two or more A levels. 
Poorer children remain more likely to attend weaker schools, especially at secondary level.  

21  Ipsos-Mori, Issues Index, 2015. This records the proportion of respondents who named poverty and/or inequality as one of 
the most important issues facing Britain today.




Foreword


vii


The Government is doing a lot to make schools engines of social mobility and there are 
welcome efforts to drive up standards by toughening exams and by focussing on a core 
curriculum. But we recommend that the Government should set its sights higher and aim for 
poor children elsewhere to do as well as they currently do in Inner London by 2030, which 
would reduce the educational attainment gap between the most disadvantaged children 
and everyone else by two-thirds. That would mean adopting a new zero tolerance approach 
to schools whose results remain below the floor standards for a five-year period by making 
wholesale changes in the leadership of such schools and requiring them to become part 
of an academy chain. A prestigious new fellowship of Change Leaders – Heads who have 
previous experience of successfully turning around schools – should be created to lead 
efforts to put failing schools on the path to success. Finally, we recommend that pay for new 
teachers should be improved and fees for Initial Teacher Training should be scrapped while 
the National Teaching Service should be turbo-charged with local trials of better incentives 
– including a new help-to-buy scheme exclusively for teachers – to get more of the best into 
the worst schools in disadvantaged areas.

Non-graduates

A One Nation vocational education system would be one which abolished the ‘16+’ divide 
between youngsters who go on to university and those who do not. Today non-graduates 
tend to come from low income backgrounds and often end up in low pay, low-progression 
careers. There is a jungle of qualifications, courses and institutions which students find hard 
to penetrate. Quality is variable and there is little or no visibility about outcomes. Nor is the 
system working as well as it should for the economy with skills shortages in precisely those 
areas – construction, technical and scientific skills – that vocational education is supposed 
to supply. Unlike higher education, where the cap on student numbers has been lifted, there 
is more demand for apprenticeships than there are places and a dramatic under-supply 
of higher-level apprenticeships. Meanwhile, while it is welcome that youth unemployment 
is falling, there remains no solution to the phenomenon of young people not in education 
employment or training (NEET).

There is a welcome government focus on improving the life chances of non-graduates with 
major commitments to expand apprenticeships, embed a system for those who did not get 
good English and maths GCSEs to re-take them and develop new vocational routes from 
school to work. But the non-graduate track into employment remains too low a priority. We 
recommend that new apprenticeships should be targeted at higher-level courses and by 
2020 there should be 30,000 young people a year starting a higher apprenticeship. A new 
UCAS-style website should be created for vocational education within two years so that 
young people can see what progression, employment and earnings opportunities they are 
likely to get. Failing further education colleges should become further education academies 
along the lines of the initial city academies with an external business sponsor. Finally, by 2020 
the Government should reduce the NEET rates of 16–18-year-olds to around 55,000 young 
people (3 per cent or less) in line with the best performing Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) countries, underpinned by a new social investment fund 
worth around £50 million.

Higher education/professions

A One Nation higher education and professional employment system would be one where 
access to the top jobs and the best universities is fair and based on aptitude and ability, not 
background or birth. Substantial effort has been made by some universities and firms to 
increase the socio-economic diversity of their intakes but young people from poor families are 
still far less likely to go to university, attend a top institution or access certain elite professions.  
Law and professional service firms are doing most to improve social mobility; engineering and 




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain



viii


construction firms least. Privileged youngsters are disproportionately likely to attend selective 
universities and seven of 10 recruits in some elite accountancy firms still come from an 
independent or selective school.

It is welcome that the Government has set a challenging target of doubling the number of 
students from areas where participation is low. This will involve increasing by around 12,000 
the number of students from such areas. There is little chance of success unless universities 
work together to focus more outreach activity on the schools and the places where HE 
access lags behind. A £40 million fund taken from universities’ widening participation 
budgets should fund this vital effort. Professional employers similarly need to up their game. 
We propose that top professional firms should follow the lead of those making the greatest 
progress in opening up opportunities by changing recruitment processes and we urge the 
Government to make public sector internships transparent with a new interns.gov.uk website.

In-work poverty

A One Nation country would be one where work offered a guaranteed path out of poverty 
and where hard-working parents who worked the number of hours society expects would be 
able to deliver reasonable living standards for their families. But today 1.5 million children are 
in poverty because their working parents do not earn enough to secure a basic standard of 
living and the risk of absolute poverty for working families after housing costs has increased 
over the last decade. The percentage of UK full-time employees in low pay is 20.5 per cent 
and rising, compared to an OECD average of 17.1 per cent. We are also not as good as 
other countries in getting households to work as many hours as they reasonably might. 
Four out of 10 children in working poor households live in families where parents might be 
expected to enter work or work more hours. 

The Government is aiming to tackle this issue by creating a higher pay, lower tax, lower 
welfare society, where the balance of responsibility for supporting living standards shifts 
away from the state towards employers and individuals themselves. There are some positive 
aspects to this approach, but also many risks. Many families will find it very difficult to 
increase their earnings enough to make good the cuts in state support even if they benefit 
from the welcome introduction of the National Living Wage. While its focus on tackling low 
pay and increasing parental employment is encouraging, recent changes to Universal Credit 
will make many working families significantly worse off.

So we recommend that the Government should, as the public finances improve, revitalise 
employment incentives in Universal Credit. Employers should take more responsibility for their 
employees’ living standards with change led by a vanguard group of ‘One Nation Employers’ 
who act as a beacon for others. The Government should set a clear objective for the UK to 
become a Living Wage country by 2025 at the latest, and work with business to develop a 
comprehensive pay, progression and productivity plan that aligns Government programmes 
behind that goal. This will mean putting the UK on a par with the best performing countries 
in Europe by halving the proportion of people who earn less than two-thirds of median hourly 
pay to 10 per cent of employees.

Persistent poverty

In a One Nation country child poverty would be a transient experience and would not inflict 
lasting damage into adulthood. But today as many as one in six children spend large parts 
of their lives living in households which are persistently poor. The one million children in this 
situation are often those from families characterised by ill health and low skills rather than 
simply by parental addiction or broken relationships.

The Government’s focus on getting these families into work is right, but to succeed it will 
need to focus harder on tackling the multi-causal nature of the persistent poverty problem.  




Foreword


ix

The way the welfare-to-work system currently operates is incapable of meeting the needs 
of these families. So we recommend that Government should set a goal of making the UK 
one of the top five OECD countries for having the fewest children in workless households – 
so that by 2020, 500,000 fewer children live in households where no one works. This new 
national effort should be led by a refocused and rebranded Troubled Families programme with 
a remit to offer personalised help to get persistently poor families into secure employment. A 
new drive to improve the skills of the persistently poor should give personal learning accounts 
to long-term unemployed adults so they have more responsibility for raising their skill levels.

If we are serious about healing the social divisions that scar our nation then a new scale of 
ambition and action is required at every level. A wind of change needs to sweep through our 
country. As a nation, we should refuse to accept that child poverty – particularly when it is 
persistent – is inevitable. We should not be prepared to see people in work earning below 
the poverty line. We should not tolerate early years services that do not prepare children for 
school. We should take action when schools and colleges fail to raise attainment and training 
levels for the poorest. And we should be prepared to shine a spotlight on those universities 
and professions that refuse to throw open their doors to a far wider pool of talent.

In our view, poverty and mobility are two sides of the same coin. Without less of the former 
it is hard to imagine a society with more of the latter. Social justice cannot just be about 
establishing a new floor below which no one should be allowed to fall. It also has to be about 
unleashing people’s aspiration to succeed. To have a good life, not just a better one. Not just 
to leave school with good results but to get into a good university. Not just to get a job but 
to progress in a career. Not just to have affordable housing but to own a home. Social justice 
means people having more of an equal opportunity to move up and get on.

This may be our last report on the current legal basis. Legislation before Parliament will 
change our terms of reference so that we lose our child poverty remit. This is part of the 
Government’s wider intention to move its focus from the targets enshrined in the 2010 Child 
Poverty Act towards improving life chances. It has long been obvious that the existing child 
poverty targets are not going to be met. In fact they will be missed by a country mile. That  
is a matter of deep regret. A country that is the fifth richest in the world should not have  
2.3 million children officially classified as poor. The Commission has long argued that a 
more rounded way of measuring poverty – taking greater account of causal risk factors 
– is sensible. The life chances of children, the poorest especially, depend on many things 
including good parenting, childcare, education and employment. For that reason we think 
the Government is right to want to measure worklessness and educational attainment as 
part of its new focus on improving life chances. But it is not credible to try to improve the life 
chances of the poor without acknowledging the most obvious symptom of poverty, lack of 
money. Without the specific inclusion of an assessment of income, these new measures are 
inadequate. And unless the Government sets a clear target for improving the life chances of 
the poorest families its agenda for healing social division in our country will lack both ambition 
and credibility. It will end up measuring life chances but not working towards a clear goal of 
improving them. 

Abolishing the legal targets does not make the issue of child poverty go away. It remains a 
deep scar in the fabric of our nation. The issue is less how child poverty is measured and 
more how it is tackled. Far more needs to be done to make sure that the poorest families 
share in the proceeds of economic growth. That is why we look to decision-makers at every 
level to make Britain’s welcome economic recovery the basis for a sustainable social recovery.  
Economically, there is a growing sense of confidence about our ability to grow and prosper 
as a nation. That confidence is borne not just of the UK’s recovery from recession but from 




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


x

a belief that we possess the essential attributes needed for success in the future – an open 
economy, a flexible workforce, a spirit of innovation and enterprise.

It is hard to find the same level of confidence about our social prospects as a nation. Instead 
there is growing unease – even tension – about the lack of fairness in our society, a sense 
that our best days lie behind us not ahead. It feels like Britain faces an existential crisis about 
what sort of society we want to be.There is much talk of less elitism and more equality, of 
less poverty and more mobility. But willing the ends without the means is a recipe for more 
division, not less. It is the job of employers, educators and policymakers to reconcile the ends 
they aspire to see with the means they are willing to deploy. It is the Commission’s job to 
assess whether they are doing so. Our conclusion in this report is that there are some signs 
of progress but they do not nearly go far enough or fast enough to address the gulf between 
the divided Britain of the present and the One Nation Britain we aspire to become.




Social mobility overview


1

Social mobility overview

Britain’s social mobility problem

Britain has lower levels of social mobility than most other comparable 
countries. In Britain, income persistence between fathers and sons is the 
strongest of all Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD) countries. In other words, ours is a country where the class and 
income of children when they grow up is more related to the class and 
income of their parents than elsewhere in the developed world.

In a society with high levels of mobility, origins would not determine 
destinations. Instead, how far a person progressed in terms of income, 
employment or social class would be based on ability and ambition  
alone – but today, despite most people moving up or down the class and 
income ladder at some point in their life, four times as many professionals 
in their 40s are from professional families than from working-class families 
(39 versus 10 per cent).1 There is a class ceiling in British society and it 
inhibits the life chances of hundreds of thousands of children – those from 
the poorest households the most.

1 Goldthorpe, J.H., Understanding – and Misunderstanding – Social Mobility in Britain, 2012




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


2

How socially mobile is Britain – and are things getting better  
or worse?

Measuring mobility

Social mobility is measured in terms of social class or income.

Social class looks at whether individuals are in the same or different social classes 
to their parents. Social class is usually described using the National Socio-Economic 
Classification. In its simplified form there are eight classes ranging from higher 
managerial, administrative and professional occupations to long-term unemployed.

Income mobility considers the relationship between the income of parents and that of 
their children in adulthood.

Social mobility can be measured in absolute or relative terms.

Absolute mobility is the class or income position of an adult compared to their 
parents. For example, if the child of a shop assistant becomes a university professor, 
they have experienced absolute upward mobility.

Relative mobility is a measure of the class or income outcomes of different groups 
in society when compared to each other. It assesses the likelihood of achieving a 
particular adult class or income outcome, given where an individual starts out. For 
example, if children of working-class parents are, on average, much less likely to end 
up in professional employment than children of professional parents, relative social 
mobility is low.

Post-war Britain has seen high levels of absolute social mobility. Around 80 per cent of 
individuals born in the early 1980s (and who are in their 30s today) are in a different social 
class to that of their parents. This is the most recent point on a trend of rising absolute 
mobility, up from around 75 per cent for those born in the 1940s.2 However, much of this 
social mobility is short-range, with relatively few from working-class backgrounds entering 
managerial or professional occupations and vice versa. 

Many people also experience absolute income mobility. For example, of those born in 1970, 
63 per cent of those with parents in the poorest 25 per cent escape low income as adults. 
However, most of this mobility is short-range and only one in seven reached the top 25 per 
cent as adults. Looking at those with parents in the richest 25 per cent, almost half –  
45 per cent – remained there as adults.3  

In the post-war period upward mobility in class terms exceeded downward mobility; but 
today, moves up and down are split equally.4 This is largely due to changes in the structure 
of the economy – there are relatively more people in higher social groups, meaning the 
experience of downward mobility has become a more common one even though the chances 
of an individual in a given social class being downwardly mobile have hardly changed. British 
society is not rigid and many people do see improvements during their lives, albeit generally 
modest ones.

The situation in relation to relative social mobility is more complex and less positive. Relative 
class mobility rates for men have flatlined, whereas for women relative mobility appears to 
have improved. Comparing those born in the 1970s to those born in the 1940s, the odds 

2  Bukodi, E., Goldthorpe, J.H., Waller, L. and Kuha, J., The Mobility Problem in Britain: New Findings from the Analysis of 
Cohort Data, 2015

3 Blanden, J., and Machin, S., Recent Changes in Intergenerational Mobility in Britain, 2007
4  Bukodi, E., Goldthorpe, J.H., Waller, L. and Kuha, J., op. cit.




Social mobility overview


3

ratio5 of a man from a managerial or professional background remaining there as an adult 
compared to a man from a working-class background moving up so has stayed more or less 
the same, at around six. However, the same odds ratio for women has improved from nearly 
eight for women born in the 1940s to four for those born in the 1970s.6 So while the relative 
mobility rates of working-class women have caught up and overtaken that of men, it remains 
the case that those born in working-class families face challenges in breaking through the 
class ceiling to professional work.

In terms of income, relative social mobility appears to have declined. Of those born in the 
lowest income quartile in 1958, 31 per cent were in the poorest 25 per cent as adults; 
whereas of those from the poorest families in 1970, 38 per cent remain there as adults. 
Conversely, of those born in the highest income quartile in 1958, 35 per cent remained there 
as adults compared to 45 per cent of those born in 1970.7 Put simply, the link between 
parental and child income appears to be stronger for those born in 1970 compared to those 
born in 1958 (see Figure SM1).8 For cohorts born after 1970, most experts believe that 
mobility did not deteriorate further, but neither did it improve.9 

Figure SM1: Declines in income mobility: estimated income persistence between 
parents and offspring, comparing those born in 1958 to 1970


0510152025303540

22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50


Estimated intergenerational income persistence (%)Age


1970 cohort 1958 cohort


 

Source: P. Gregg, L. Macmillan and C. Vittori, Moving Towards Estimating Lifetime Intergenerational Economic Mobility in  
the UK, 2014

Note: The gap between the two lines reflects the decline in income mobility

The findings in relation to income mobility show that adults are more likely to be wealthy if 
their parents are wealthy, and that this connection has strengthened over time. The impact 
can be seen starkly when the employees of high-prestige occupations are examined. Recent 
entrants to law, medicine, accountancy and other professions are more likely to come from 
households with above-average income than previous cohorts entering these professions – 

5  An odds ratio is the odds of one group achieving a given outcome divided by the odds of a different group. For example, 
if there were three men from middle-class backgrounds who remained there as adults for every one who was downwardly 
mobile – odds of 3:1 – and only one man from a working-class background who was upwardly mobile for every three who 
were not – odds of 1:3 – the odds ratio would be 9

6  Bukodi, E., Goldthorpe, J.H., Waller, L. and Kuha, J., op. cit. These figures are the central point from a range of probabilities
7 Blanden, J., Gregg, P. and Machin, S., Intergenerational Mobility in Europe and North America, 2005
8  Gregg, P., Macmillan, L. and Vittori, C., Moving Towards Estimating Lifetime Intergenerational Economic Mobility in the UK, 



2014

9 Blanden, J., Gregg, P. and Machin, S., op. cit.




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


4

but they are also likely to have scored less well than their predecessors in IQ tests.10 These 
findings are supported by Commission research which identified that less able but better-off 
children are 35 per cent more likely to become high earners than bright but poor children.11  
Money speaks more than ever in a way that is economically inefficient and socially unfair.

These mobility findings also show that, despite major changes to the education system and 
labour market, working-class men born in 1970 are just as unlikely to make it to the top as 
working-class men born at the close of the Second World War. Predictions that the decline 
of traditional working-class jobs and the rise of white-collar professional work would herald 
an era of continual social progress have proved premature.12 13 However, the evidence for 
increasing female mobility suggests that change is possible. The challenge is to achieve 
across-the-board improvement.

What explains these trends?
There is an apparent conflict between on the one hand the findings that class mobility is 
flatlining for men and improving for women, and on the other the economic evidence that 
concludes income mobility is in decline. However, they are not inconsistent.

Firstly, income inequality in the UK between different social class groups has increased 
significantly since 1979. A given pattern of social class mobility today will therefore give rise to 
a stronger connection between adult and child incomes than in the past.

Second, income inequality within individual social class groups has also increased. As those 
from better-off social backgrounds are more likely to be found in the highest earning jobs in 
each individual social class – and it is possible this polarisation by social background has 
increased over time – this will also explain some of the apparent disconnect between the 
economic and sociological evidence.

All of these findings are the product of three common social and economic drivers:

•	 Structural changes in the jobs market;

•	 The enduring and increasing impact of background on adult outcomes;

•	 Unequal access to higher education and professional jobs.

Changes in the jobs market

The increases in absolute class mobility – the finding that more people in Britain born in the 
post-War period end up in a different social class to their parents – was driven significantly 
by the changing face of the British jobs market. Over the last hundred years, an increase 
in professional jobs combined with declines in agricultural and traditional blue-collar work 
created openings for individuals of all backgrounds in higher social classes. Baby boomers 
benefited from the expansion of professional employment, and therefore their children were 
born in professional families. This in part could explain why young adults today may be less 
likely to experience upward social class moves, and more likely to experience downward 
moves.14 Unlike those born in the 1940s, those born after the 1970s do not benefit from the 
same rate of expanding professional jobs as their parents.

10 Macmillan, L., Social Mobility and the Professions, 2009
11 Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, Downward Mobility, Opportunity Hoarding and the Glass Floor, 2015
12  Erikson, R., Goldthorpe, J.H., and Portocarero, L., Intergenerational Class Mobility and the Convergence Thesis: England, 

France and Sweden, 2010
13  Bukodi, E., Erikson, R., and Goldthorpe, J.H., The Effects of Social Origins and Cognitive Ability on Educational Attainment: 

Evidence from Britain and Sweden, 2013
14  Bukodi, E., Goldthorpe, J.H., Waller, L. and Kuha, J., op. cit.




Social mobility overview


5

The improvement in relative class mobility observed for women is not yet fully understood, 
neither is the exact reason why their relative mobility appears to be better than that of men. 
The change since the 1940s is likely to be due to several social changes that developed in 
parallel. These could include a general rise in women in work, an increase in middle-class 
women returning to work following childbirth, and perhaps more women achieving highly at 
university, unlocking jobs in the senior occupational classes.15 If these are the main drivers of 
increased relative mobility for women, it is possible some further progress can be made; but 
the most dramatic changes in labour market participation are already likely to have happened.

The effect of background on outcomes

The second driver of changing social mobility is the enduring and increasing effect of social 
background on outcomes. The decline in income mobility observed for those born in 1970 
compared to those born in 1958 is in part a result of how family resources can be increasingly 
deployed to affect a child’s outcomes. When comparing young men assessed as most 
able, those from the most privileged backgrounds are found to be twice as likely to achieve 
upper secondary qualifications – a key driver of success in the labour market as an adult – 
compared to the least privileged. This effect was unchanged between cohorts born in 1946, 
1958 and 1970. However, the connection between low cognitive ability and outcomes has 
weakened between those born in the 1950s and 1970s, suggesting that social background 
now has a greater effect on whether a child struggling in school will make progress. This is 
more pronounced in Britain than in other northern European countries (Figure SM2).16 

Figure SM2: Strength of the link between individual and parental earnings across  
OECD countries


Percentage Denmark Austria Norway Finland Canada Sweden Germany Spain France USAItaly Great Britain01020304050

Source: OECD, Economic Policy Reforms: Going for Growth 2010, 2010

Note: The height of each bar measures the extent to which sons’ earnings levels reflect those of their fathers

15  Erikson, R., and Goldthorpe, J.H., Has Social Mobility in Britain Decreased? Reconciling Divergent Findings on Income and 
Class Mobility, 2010

16 Erikson, R., and Goldthorpe, J.H., Trends in Class Mobility: The Post-war European Experience, 2006




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


6

Arguments have been made that genetics play a major role in the connection between 
background and origins. Genes may play a part in determining social success, but doing well 
at school, in exams and job interviews requires a wider suite of reasoning and interpersonal 
skills than those that may be passed down from parent to child. Perhaps as much as 80 
per cent in the change in income persistence between the 1958 and 1970 cohorts can be 
explained by a combination of non-cognitive skills, cognitive traits, attainment and labour 
market attachment.17 Non-cognitive skills have a big part to play in changes to mobility, 
accounting for as much as 10 per cent of persistence of top job status between parents 
and children.18 The role of genetics in these important drivers of success is unlikely to be 
substantial, and certainly not the main factor.19 

Unequal access to education and professional jobs

The third explanation for changing mobility patterns – specifically in relation to the growing 
correlation between the income of parents and their children – is unequal access to the 
best education and professional jobs. From the 1960s onwards, rising participation in 
higher education has not been equally shared. Between the 1980s and 1990s participation 
increased by 26 percentage points for the top fifth (20 to 46 per cent), 15 percentage points 
for the middle (8 to 23 per cent) and by only three percentage points for the least advantaged 
(6 to 9 per cent). Combined with increasing wage differentials between those in high-skilled 
and low-skilled jobs and the opening up of pay differences within occupations, differing rates 
of access to higher education could account for some of the declines in income mobility.20 21 22      
Increasing the total stock of education in a population in itself does not automatically lead to 
more social mobility; what matters is whether attainment between individuals from different 
class origins widens or narrows.23 

It is possible that unequal access to the best professional positions also underpins the 
increasing connection between the income of parent and child. Of all adults in professional 
employment today, earnings are higher for those whose parents were also in professional 
employment. The finding that income persistence between parents and children has 
increased is not just a matter of those from privileged backgrounds getting a greater share 
of top jobs. Even when those from working-class backgrounds get professional jobs, they 
are likely to earn less than their colleagues who started off in professional families.24 Causes 
could include those from better-off backgrounds having the knowledge to seek work in elite 
firms and the characteristics to fit in.25 Conversely, research by the Commission suggests that 
some elite firms may be selecting candidates on the basis of middle-class characteristics, 
unintentionally or otherwise reinforcing wider trends.26 

17  Blanden, J., Gregg, P., and Macmillan, L., Accounting for Intergenerational Income Persistence: Noncognitive Skills, Ability 
and Education, 2007

18 Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, Social and Emotional Learning: Skills for Life and Work, 2015
19  Jerrim, J., Vignoles, A., Lingam, R. and Friend, A., The Socio-economic Gradient in Children’s Reading Skills and the Role of 

Genetics, 2014
20 http://www.oecd.org/unitedkingdom/OECD-Income-Inequality-UK.pdf
21  Schmidt, J., Shierholz., H. and Mishel, L., Don’t Blame The Robots: Assessing the Job Polarisation Explanation of Growing 

Wage Inequality, 2013
22 Lindley, J. and Machin, S., The Quest for More and More Education: Implications for Social Mobility, 2012
23 Sturgis, P. and Buscha, F., Increasing Inter-generational Social Mobility: Is Educational Expansion the Answer?, 2015
24 Laurison, D. and Friedman, S., Introducing the Class Ceiling: Social Mobility and Britain’s Elite Occupations, 2015
25 Scherger, S. and Savage, M., Cultural Transmission, Educational Attainment and Social Mobility, 2010
26 Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, Non-educational Barriers to the Elite Professions Evaluation, 2015

http://www.oecd.org/unitedkingdom/OECD-Income-Inequality-UK.pdf




Social mobility overview


7

Conclusion
The social and political changes of the latter 20th century led to much progress. Increased 
participation in education and the opening up of elite universities and the professions all 
added to opportunity for some. Yet the ‘dice-roll’ of birth continues to have an overbearing 
effect on life chances. We live in a society where people can, and do, move up and down the 
class and income scale, but being born to a less privileged family is still far too likely to mean 
disadvantage as an adult.

There is hope of progress. As we chart in the main chapters of this report, the gaps between 
disadvantaged young people and others are wide but many are closing, albeit too slowly. The 
social mobility agenda will need to be pursued with consistency and clarity if improvements in 
schooling and access to higher education are to translate into better social outcomes. 

It is not good enough to cross our fingers and hope. If we do, evidence suggests that those 
with family resources will outcompete everyone else for the places at the best universities 
and the jobs which bring greatest reward. Adopting and incubating practice that supports 
social mobility is the task of a wide range of institutions. Government, families, schools and 
businesses among others should recognise the fundamental inequality of opportunities that 
exist, and take steps to address them. Urgent action is required if a One Nation Britain is to 
be secured.

Housing and social mobility

Housing is a key engine of social mobility. Children need a reasonable home 
environment if they are to develop and learn well. Whatever sector they live in, their 
accommodation needs to be appropriate for the number of people in their household, 
in a reasonable condition and not constantly changing. However, housing is also 
important for other reasons. Home ownership is the main way that we hold and  
hand down wealth, so for most people, owning their own home is a key part of 
achieving a good life.

Nonetheless, in 21st-century Britain, home ownership is increasingly difficult to achieve. 
25-year-olds born in the mid-1980s are now half as likely as those who were born in 
the mid-1960s to own their own home.27 A combination of rising prices and higher 
rents is making it harder to assemble the large deposits required to get on the housing 
ladder. For couples with children, a decade of saving (and more than two decades in 
London) is not enough to buy even an average-priced family home unless they can get 
help from their parents.

The Government is committed to reversing the trend of declining home ownership 
(down from its 2001 peak of 69 per cent).28 It has pledged to build a million new homes 
by 2020, including 200,000 new starter homes at 80 per cent of market rate for  
first-time buyers under 40, 135,000 new Help to Buy shared ownership homes and 
10,000 Rent to Buy homes. It has introduced a new London Help to Buy scheme that 
will offer interest-free equity loans of up to 40 per cent of the value of the property. This 
is in addition to the Help to Buy ISA which tops up personal savings towards deposits. 
From next year, people renting from housing associations will also gain a discounted 
route to home ownership as the Right to Buy scheme is extended.

Despite these measures, the Government is unlikely to hit its million new homes target. 
In 2013/14 around 140,000 permanent dwellings were completed, an increase on the 
previous year but less than in any year in the 20 years from 1990–2010.29 This figure 
also falls short of annual demand, estimated at between 230,000 and 300,000 new 

27 Institute for Fiscal Studies, Living Standards, Poverty and Inequality in the UK: 2014, 2014
28 Office for National Statistics, A Century of Home Ownership and Renting in England and Wales (Full Story), 2013
29 House of Commons Library, Housebuilding: Social indicators, 2015




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


8

units a year.30 The mismatch between supply and demand means that for many – 
especially those on low incomes in areas where prices are high and supply is sluggish 
– costs to buy or to rent will continue to rise in the short to medium term.

The Government’s liberalisation of the planning system does seem to be having an 
impact, with the number of planning permissions for new homes reaching 240,000  
last year (up from 158,000 in 2011). But strong headwinds continue to hold back 
progress: business models that depend on restricting supply, the continuing 
unavailability of sufficient amounts of land and skilled workers, and lack of 
housebuilding materials all increase the challenge. These will need to be addressed 
more systematically if the Government is to deliver levels of home ownership at or 
above the 70 per cent mark.

30 House of Commons Library, Housing Supply 2015–2020: Key Issues for the 2015 Parliament, 2015




Chapter 1: Building the right foundations


9

Chapter 1: Building the right foundations

•	 Fewer than half of the poorest children in England are ready for school 
at age five, compared to almost two-thirds of other children. A deep 
gender divide means girls from the poorest families do almost as well at 
age five as boys from better-off families.

•	 The North East and rural areas in the west of England are blighted by 
particularly low pre-school development.

•	 Policies introduced by successive governments to provide 
comprehensive childcare services appear to be accelerating under  
this government.

•	 But the challenges to be overcome are significant – and three stand 
out in particular. First, opportunities are being missed to influence 
parenting, the biggest driver of the child development gap. Second, 
efforts to improve the school-readiness of the poorest children are 
uncoordinated, confused and patchy. And third, the complexity of the 
childcare funding system is hampering efforts to increase maternal 
employment.

•	 Government should end the strategic vacuum in the early years by 
introducing two clear, stretching, long-term objectives – to halve the 
development gap between the poorest children and the rest at age five 
and to halve the gap in maternal employment between England and the 
best performing nations, both by 2025.

•	 To help more parents to parent well, an innovation fund should be 
established to test new ways of improving parenting skills.

•	 The take-up of free childcare should be increased (and its costs 
decreased) by radically simplifying the multiple streams which  
finance it.




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


10

1.1 Introduction
A child’s development in the first five years of life is crucial to their future success. The 
scars of weak development in the earliest years are carried through school, adulthood and 
employment and affect a child’s own behaviour as a parent. The weeks and months to age 
three, in particular, are vitally important as children go through significant developments in 
their cognitive, linguistic, social, emotional and motor development skills.

The period between 15 and 18 months is especially important for vocabulary growth, which 
is a key predictor of later attainment at school.1 By age five, a large amount of the gap in 
educational attainment visible throughout the school years between disadvantaged children 
and their better-off peers has already opened up. Fewer than half of the poorest children in 
England reached a good level of development by age five in 2014, compared to almost two-
thirds of other children.2 And on average, that large gap between poorer children and their 
wealthier peers will increase over the school years as poorer children make less progress.3 

Above all, it is parents who, in these earliest years and beyond, shape their child’s future 
opportunities. What parents do has far greater effect than any intervention at primary 
or secondary school. It is for this reason that successive governments have built up an 
infrastructure of support to help parents. From antenatal care to maternity and paternity 
leave, to children’s centres and funded childcare, there have been significant developments in 
universal publicly funded services designed to give children the best start in life.

The uncomfortable truth, however, is that family background remains highly consequential for 
children’s futures. Parents’ wealth and education not only go a long way towards explaining 
the gap observed at the start of school, but they also go on to determine future outcomes 
over and above their child’s ability. Research for the Commission has shown that for many 
children, family background is a far greater determinant of future success than ability. Children 
from wealthier families who are assessed at age five as having low cognitive ability are 
significantly more likely to become high earners as adults than children from poor families 
assessed to be high ability at age five. In fact, low-ability children from wealthy families were 
35 per cent more likely to be high earners as adults than high-ability children from poorer 
families.4 

At their well-designed, evidence-based best, services to help parents and their children in 
the earliest years can help all families and give an extra boost to those who need them most. 
The key areas where services can make the biggest difference to social mobility is in getting 
mothers into work and in narrowing the child development gap at the start of school, so that 
children from all backgrounds commence their school life on an equal footing. This is why 
high-quality early education, available particularly to poorer children who would otherwise lose 
out on development, can pack a double punch by delivering both outcomes. 

In this parliament, the Government has committed to an expensive and potentially ground-
breaking addition to early years services with the doubling of the current free childcare 
provision for three- and four-year-olds. Increased devolution and new local structures, which 
bind local authorities and public health officials together, also provide welcome impetus to 
reform. But there is a concerning lack of clarity from the Government both about how it 
intends to capitalise on this – and importantly – what it wants to get from the £6 billion a 
year of funding it will be spending on childcare by the end of the parliament. This does raise 
concerns about the extent to which the pending reforms will fulfil their potential. They will 

1  Parker, I., Early Developments: Bridging the Gap Between Evidence and Policy in Early Years Education, Institute for Public 
Policy Research, 2013

2 Department for Education, EYFSP Attainment by Pupil Characteristics 2013 to 2014, National and Local Authority tables
3 Department for Education, GCSE and Equivalent Attainment by Pupil Characteristics: 2014, 2014
4  Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, Press Release, ‘New research exposes the “glass floor” in British society’, 

26 July 2015, https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-research-exposes-the-glass-floor-in-british-society, 18 November 


2015


https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-research-exposes-the-glass-floor-in-british-society




Chapter 1: Building the right foundations


11

only do so if the families who most need extra help are aware of, and are actually accessing, 
a coherent set of well-functioning services which help them to make the right choices about 
their own employment and about their child’s education.

1.2 Does today’s reality meet the One Nation vision?
The fundamental test for any early years system is the extent to which every five-year-old has 
a chance to fulfil their potential irrespective of family background. On this measure, England 
does badly: the variation in children’s development across income groups is shockingly wide. 
Nationally, the child development gap between the poorest children and their better-off peers 
opens up very early and increases as children progress through school. The gaps at school 
entry by social class are significant. Longitudinal research shows that at the point of school 
entry in England, low-income children are almost one year behind middle-income children 
on vocabulary tests.5 This creates a significant challenge for primary schools as they seek to 
ensure that all children, but particularly the poorest, make sufficient progress. 

Government data on the Early Years Foundation Stage Profile (EYFSP) shows that in 
2013/14, children eligible for free school meals were two-thirds as likely to achieve a ‘good 
level of development’ as other children at age five, with 45 per cent of poor children achieving 
this level of development compared to 64 per cent of other children.6 This means that over 
half of children from poor families are failing to reach a basic development standard by the 
end of their reception year at school.

One of the most concerning social mobility problems in the early years is the disparities in 
outcomes for poor children between different areas of the country. There are particularly 
intense clusters of poor pre-school development in rural areas in the west of England 
(Herefordshire, Gloucestershire, Bath & North East Somerset) and in the North East. By 
contrast, London is doing much better – there the gap in development between the poorest 
and the rest is 13 percentage points, compared to 22 percentage points in the North East 
(see Figure 1.2).  

Zooming in further, there were 39 top tier local authorities (over a quarter) in 2014 in which 
less than four in 10 poor children demonstrated a good level of development at age five. This 
is a significant improvement on the previous year, but still far from adequate. Most worrying 
were the five authorities – Blackburn with Darwen, Wigan, Halton, Stockton-on-Tees and 
Bath & North East Somerset – in which only one-third of poor children achieved a good level 
on this measure. These areas are storing up major problems for their primary schools. The 
progress of children who failed to meet key developmental benchmarks by five will need to be 
caught up before the levels of attainment expected for their age can be reached.

5 Waldfogel, J., and Washbrook, E., Low Income and Early Cognitive Development in the UK, Sutton Trust, 1 February 2010
6 Department for Education, EYFSP Attainment by Pupil Characteristics 2013 to 2014, National and Local Authority tables




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


12

Figure 1.1: Proportion of children eligible for free school meals reaching a good  
level of development at age five (2014) – highlighting the top 20 per cent and bottom  
20 per cent

Devon

Cumbria



Kent


Norfolk

Essex

Suffolk

North Yorkshire

Lincolnshire

Cornwall

Dorset

Wiltshire

Somerset
Hampshire

Northumberland

Shropshire

Durham

Lancashire

Surrey

Derbyshire


O

xfordshire



Glou

ceste

rshire

West Sussex

Herefordshire

East Sussex

Leeds

Staffordshire

Cambridgeshire

Leice
sters



hire Warwickshire Northamptonshire Nottinghamshire Hertfordshire

Worcestershire

East Riding
of Yorkshire

Buckingham
shire


Cheshire East


Bedford



York Doncaster

Rutland


Kirklees West

Berkshire


North Lincolns




hire


Bradford

Sheffield

Barnsley

Cheshire
West &
Chester

Wakefield


Central Bedfordshire

Calderdale

Isle of
Wight

Swindon

Rotherham

Peterborough

Medway


North Somerset

South
Gloucs

Milton
Keynes

Thurrock

Telford &
Wrekin

Derby

Poole

Bath & NE
Somerset

Torbay
Plymouth

North East
Lincolnshire

Leicester

Luton

Nottingham

Stoke-


on-

Trent

Brighton & Hove
Southampton

Kingston
upon Hull

Portsmouth

Blackpool

Southend on SeaBristol

Bournemouth



Kent

Surrey

Essex

Bromley

Hertfordshire

Havering

Barnet

Enfield


Bexley

Ealing

Brent

Harrow

Sutton

Merton


Hillingdon Croydon Hounslow

Thurrock


Redbridge

Greenw


ich

Newham


Lew

isham

Harin


geyhtebma L

Wandsworth S


outhwark

Camden


Waltham Forest Richmondupon Thames

Hackney

Westminster

Islington


Kingstonupon Thames Barking &Dagenham

Tower
Hamlets


Hamm &


 Fulham

Kens & Chelsea



City


Surrey

Wokingham

Oxfordshire

Hampshire

Buckinghamshire

Windsor & Maidenhead


Bracknell Forest

Reading

Slough

Warwickshire

Solihull

Birmingham

Staffordshire

Walsall

Dudley

Worcestershire

Coventry


Sandwell

Leicestershire

Wolver-
hampton

Lancashire

Wigan

Wirral

Calderdale

Bolton

Cheshire East

Oldham


Rochdale

Sefton



Bury Derb

yshire


Warrington


St Helens

Salford


Trafford

Stockp


ort

Halton

Liverpool

Tameside


Manchester Knowsley


Blackburn


with


Darwen

Cheshire West & Chester

Durham

North Yorkshire

Darlington

Gateshead


Sunderland Stockton-on-Tees


Hartlepool

NorthTyneside
South

Tyneside

Middles-
brough

Redcar &
Cleveland

Newcastle
upon Tyne

Isles of
Scilly

% of FSM pupils
achieving a good
level of development

Best 20%

Worst 20%

Data not available

Source: Reproduced by permission of Ordnance Survey on behalf of HMSO, 2015


 

% of free school meals 
pupils achieving a good 
level of development




Chapter 1: Building the right foundations


13

Figure 1.2: Percentage of children reaching a good level of development in the Early 
Years Foundation Stage 2014, according to pupil characteristics and location 


Percentage Free school meals (FSM)Non FSMAll Boys All Girls FSM Boys FSM Girls FSM White British Boys FSM White British Girls FSM Pakistani Boys FSM Pakistani Girls FSM Black Caribbean Boys FSM Black Caribbean Girls FSM London Non FSM London FSM North East Non FSM North East0102030405060708045645269365335523651426052653961

Source: Department for Education, EYFSP Attainment by Pupil Characteristics 2013 to 2014, National and Local Authority tables

There are also large child development gaps by gender. Most notably, girls far outperform 
boys in development checks at age five. Girls from the poorest families do almost as well 
at age five as boys from better-off families, with half reaching the expected standard. At 17 
percentage points, the gender gap in child development between the poorest boys and girls 
is almost as large as the gap between the poorest and other children (see Figure 1.2). 

There are some nuances within this overall picture. Boys do considerably worse in language 
tests than girls, while they do slightly better when it comes to numeracy.7 Looking at ethnicity 
and gender, the data shows that white British and Pakistani boys from poor families do 
particularly badly. Just over one-third of both groups achieved a good level of development 
by age five.8 

There are a number of possible explanations for this, including the different developmental 
patterns of boys and girls, and specific cultural influences which bear differently on girls and 
boys.9 What is perhaps most notable is that it is the poverty rather than the gender gaps that 
have the greatest labour-market consequences. In fact, the gender pay gap turns the gender 
development gap on its head, with men earning significantly more than women.

7  Kirstine, H., and Jones, E.M., ‘Ethnicity and gender gaps in early childhood’, British Educational Research Journal, 37:6, 
pp973-91, 2011

8 Department for Education, EYFSP Attainment by Pupil Characteristics 2013 to 2014, National and Local Authority tables
9  Kirstine, H., and Jones, E.M., op. cit.




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


14

Beyond these specific geographical, gender and ethnicity inequalities in the early years, there 
are three more general problems which this chapter will now focus on. 

Problem 1: Poor parenting is a significant contributor to the big child 
development gaps at age five, but public policy is failing to address it.

Parents from all backgrounds have high ambitions for their children and dedicate enormous 
time and resource to getting things right for them. Ninety-six per cent of mothers of seven-
year-olds want their children to attend university, even where they have no qualifications 
themselves.10 Parents’ engagement with their children makes a big difference to their future 
prospects. Children’s development is significantly better where their parents read to them 
frequently, where rules are enforced and bedtimes kept to, where there is a strong bond 
between parent and child, and where parents do not experience financial stress or mental 
health concerns.11  

Evidence of young children’s language skills provides perhaps the most specific insight into 
the impact that parenting can have. Language, that vital precondition to learning, is driven 
by conversation with and between adults, by reading and by other interactive activities that 
require comprehension and discussion.12 Of course, not every parent from the same social 
background is the same. Parents at all points in the income scale can, for a whole variety of 
reasons, struggle to provide the routines, structures and opportunities for development which 
would benefit their children. But the evidence shows that the poorer parents are, the more 
likely they are to struggle with this. Under half of children (45 per cent) from the poorest fifth  
of families were read to daily when they were three years old, compared with eight in 10  
(78 per cent) of children from the richest fifth.13 The aggregate effect of this is marked gaps in 
children’s cognitive development according to socio-economic group.14  

One important contributor to varying effectiveness in parenting is the networks families 
are able to draw on for help and advice. New and worrying research for the Commission 
shows that while three in 10 parents from all backgrounds feel isolated after the arrival of 
their first child, this isolation appears to be much more intense for those who are poorer. 
The Commission’s survey found that those with GCSE level or no qualifications were more 
than twice as likely as those with at least a degree-level qualification to report no contact 
at all with parents of similarly aged children (19 per cent versus 8 per cent). A comparable 
picture emerges from analysis of take-up of antenatal classes. Parents from the lowest socio-
economic group are more than twice as likely as parents from the highest socio-economic 
group not to take part in any classes at all (35 per cent versus 15 per cent), with a worrying 
28 per cent citing unavailability or inconvenience as a reason.15 These classes can be very 
rewarding: they prepare individuals for birth and parenthood, but perhaps more importantly 
they foster new friendships with other parents-to-be. The socio-economic gap in participation 
is a problem.

Further evidence from the same survey suggests that there is not a clear difference by socio-
economic group in attitude towards advice. A tiny proportion (5 per cent) of respondents 
indicated that they did not feel they required any advice, and the vast majority of the 
remainder cited the most valued source of support as their midwife or health visitor. 

10  Hansen, K., et al., Millennium Cohort Study: Fourth Survey, a User’s Guide to Initial Findings, 2nd Edition, Institute of 
Education: London, December 2010

11 Jones, E., Gutman, L., and Platt, L., Family Stressor and Children’s Outcomes, Department for Education, 2013
12  Thompson, S., and Ben-Galim, D., Childmind the Gap: Reforming Childcare to Support Mothers into Work, Institute for 

Public Policy Research, February 2014
13  Waldfogel, J., and Washbrook, E., Low Income and Early Cognitive Development in the UK, Sutton Trust, 2010
14  Dearden, L., Sibieta, L., and Sylva, K., The Socio Economic Gradient in Early Childhood Outcomes – Evidence from the 

Millennium Cohort Survey, Longitudinal and Life Course Studies, vol. 2, issue 1, pp19-40, 2011
15  Silversides, K., and Gulc, B., Experiences of Parenting in the Early Years by Social Background, Social Mobility and Child 

Poverty Commission, forthcoming. Almost half (47 per cent) of those with either just GCSEs or no qualifications had not 
undertaken classes, compared to 17 per cent of those with a degree or postgraduate qualification




Chapter 1: Building the right foundations


15

But middle-class parents reported seeking advice more regularly and from a wider range of 
sources than working-class parents.16 However, these findings strongly suggest that it is time 
to drop the still prevalent received wisdom that parenting should be beyond the public policy 
pale. Parents of all income brackets do want advice on parenting. Policymakers must of 
course tread carefully: parents are understandably protective of their autonomy in this highly 
personal area of life. But it is time for a more activist approach.

Unfortunately, there are large gaps in the evidence on how to improve parenting on a grand 
scale. While high-quality (generally US-based) interventions have been shown to be effective 
in improving parenting and child development outcomes,17 they are often intensive, hugely 
expensive, highly targeted and therefore difficult to replicate.18 When it comes to universal 
programmes for wider groups of parents, the majority of those that are well evidenced are 
designed to address specific issues, such as behaviour or language development, rather than 
more general approaches to improve parenting.19  

Over recent years, services for parents have shrunk in many areas of the country. Some 
areas have now stopped providing face-to-face antenatal classes, instead opting to put 
material online.20 Budgets in children’s centres have been squeezed.21 Between 2010/11 and 
2014/15, the removal of the ring-fence from the Early Intervention Grant to local authorities 
resulted in a 40.9 per cent real-terms fall in central funding for early intervention. The 
November 2015 Spending Review announced a 3.9 per cent annual real terms cut to the 
public health budget, which comes on top of a £200 million cut already announced in the 
Summer Budget 2015. Taken together, these cuts are highly likely to store up much more 
expensive problems for public services to deal with later down the line. They make sense 
only within a public finance model which cannot account for the savings accrued by early 
investment because savings benefit multiple departments, often not including the one which 
spent the original money. This is exacerbated by the political cycle, which disincentivises 
long-term investment, despite the considerable dividends it could reap for the public purse.22  

By its very nature, early intervention only pays a dividend over time, rendering the question of 
how to finance it a difficult one for policymakers. In the last decade, more use has been made 
of social impact bonds and payment-by-results models; flagship government initiatives like 
the Work Programme and the Troubled Families initiative have been funded on this basis.  
The Government’s devolution agenda could also herald a new dawn in this area by giving 
local authorities greater incentive to pool budgets and look long-term. If the devolution 
agenda could be twinned with an early-investment agenda, it could provide the foundation  
for real progress.

16  Ibid.
17  Barnes J., The Family-Nurse Partnership Programme in England: Wave 1 Implementation in Toddlerhood and a Comparison 

between Waves 1 and 2a Implementation in Pregnancy and Infancy, Department of Health, 2011
18  Like Perry Pre-School, which combined high-quality, low-ratio childcare with home visits to parents, and Nurse Family 

Partnership (Family Nurse Partnership in the UK), an intensive home-visiting programme starting during pregnancy until the 
child is age two

19  Education Endowment Foundation Early Years toolkit – https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/toolkit/
early-years/; and Early Intervention Foundation Guidebook – http://guidebook.eif.org.uk/programmes-library/
search?outcomes%5B%5D=10&min-age=4.00&max-age=20.00&rating%5B%5D=3&rating%5B%5D=4&submit=search&s=

20  http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-york-north-yorkshire-24265728; http://www.theargus.co.uk/news/11370236.
Criticism_over_antenatal_cuts/; and http://www.bexhillobserver.net/news/local/local-antenatal-classes-are-cut-1-6212640

21  Pre-School Learning Alliance, Pre-School Learning Alliance response to the Department for Education call for evidence on 
the cost of providing childcare, 2015

22  Chowdry, H., and Oppenheim, C., Spending on Late Intervention: How we can do Better for Less, Early Intervention 
Foundation, February 2015; Heckman, J.J., The Case for Investing in Disadvantaged Young People,  
http://heckmanequation.org/content/resource/case-investing-disadvantaged-young-children, 18 November 2015

https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/toolkit/early-years/
http://guidebook.eif.org.uk/programmes-library/search?outcomes%5B%5D=10&min-age=4.00&max-age=20.00&rating%5B%5D=3&rating%5B%5D=4&submit=search&s=
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-york-north-yorkshire-24265728
http://www.theargus.co.uk/news/11370236.Criticism_over_antenatal_cuts/
http://www.bexhillobserver.net/news/local/local-antenatal-classes-are-cut-1-6212640
http://heckmanequation.org/content/resource/case-investing-disadvantaged-young-children
https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/toolkit/early-years/
http://guidebook.eif.org.uk/programmes-library/search?outcomes%5B%5D=10&min-age=4.00&max-age=20.00&rating%5B%5D=3&rating%5B%5D=4&submit=search&s=
http://www.theargus.co.uk/news/11370236.Criticism_over_antenatal_cuts/




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


16

Problem 2: Efforts to ensure that children are school-ready are 
uncoordinated, confused and patchy.

School-readiness is an incredibly important milestone for young children. Dame Clare 
Tickell was right to describe the skills required as ‘skills for life’.23 So it is of great concern 
that children eligible for free school meals are two-thirds as likely as other children to have 
achieved a ‘good level of development’ at age five.24  

The early years system, which in theory prepares children for school, is well provided for. 
There are now more health visitors than five years ago, and they work within a clear structure 
for engagement with families. All three-, four- and disadvantaged two-year-olds should 
now receive 15 fully funded hours of early education. The delegation of responsibility for 
commissioning public health to local authorities has made it easier to join up traditionally 
segregated health and education work by, for example, getting health visitors to work from 
children’s centres. 

However, there is a striking lack of consensus about what the term school-readiness actually 
means and poor coordination in preparing young children to achieve it. Ofsted pointed out 
in a report last year that there is no nationally agreed definition of school-readiness and no 
set age of child to which it should apply.25 Effective measurement is also undermined by the 
fact that the current measurement regime for this age group, the EYFSP (which will become 
non-statutory in 2016) was designed to be conducted after children have been in school for a 
year. The Government’s new baseline tests – which will at least take place at the start rather 
than at the end of the reception year and begin this year – do not resolve these problems and 
add a major additional one. Unlike the EYFSP, the baseline test will not allow for comparisons 
to be made of the relative development of children from different backgrounds and regions. 
Without this, policymakers will be reduced to guessing what is going on, rarely a recipe for 
successful reform.

Any parent who has read about age-specific developmental milestones and compared them 
to their own child will recognise the flaws in a specific, skills-based assessment, because 
all children develop so differently. Indeed, there is considerable debate about the so-
called ‘schoolification’ of the early years as a precursor to school-readiness. However, it is 
reasonable to assume that as all children are required to commence compulsory schooling 
at age five, there are a set of understandings as well as cognitive, social and emotional skills 
that they will need to be able to cope – and thrive – in such an environment. The best early 
education providers and schools develop their own school-readiness definition, as well as 
determining an informal accountability system alongside parents and primary schools. But 
there are many that do not, a failure which is highly consequential for the child.26

The lack of a common-sense, clear, shared understanding of what constitutes school-
readiness between parents, public health officials (health visitors), local authorities, schools 
and early education providers is a wasted opportunity. Similarly, the fact that development 
is not evaluated until months after the child has entered school dilutes accountability and 
reduces the use of such a measurement. The need for change here is particularly urgent 
given that the free childcare offer for children is set to be doubled to 30 hours for the school 
term, in effect shadowing the school day for three- and four-year-olds. A focus on school-
readiness, combining a clear definition and a means of measurement which is reported 
nationally – whether by reforming and maintaining the EYFSP or by introducing a new 
approach – must be a priority for Government. In addition, the proposed gap in data for a 
start-of-school development measure is a concerning step backwards that would hinder 
efforts to focus parents, schools and early years providers on a highly important shared 
outcome.

23  Tickell, C., The Early Years: Foundations for Life, Health and Learning, an Independent Report on the Early Years Foundation 
Stage to Her Majesty’s Government, 30 March 2011

24 Department for Education, EYFSP Attainment by Pupil Characteristics 2013 to 2014, National and Local Authority tables
25 Ofsted, Are You Ready? Good Practice in School Readiness, 3 April 2014
26 Ibid.




Chapter 1: Building the right foundations


17

Problem 3: The complexity of the childcare funding system is suppressing 
take-up by parents and hampering efforts to increase maternal 
employment.

There are numerous benefits to increased maternal employment. These include 
improvements in the wellbeing of the mother, better child development, and reductions in the 
large maternal pay gap, which the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD) suggests is typically 21 per cent by the time a mother returns to full-time work 
(compared to 7 per cent between childless couples).27 For Government, higher maternal 
employment means higher tax revenue and lower spend on benefits and tax credits. But the 
UK maternal employment rate of 66 per cent, while at about the OECD average, continues to 
languish some way behind the best-performing western nations like Denmark and Sweden, 
which enjoy a rate of over 80 per cent.28 

A comparison of the childcare funding system in the UK and that in Denmark and Sweden is 
instructive. The system is simpler in much of Scandinavia – a progressive contributory model 
based on family income, rather than the English system combining free childcare, a voucher 
system and tax credits. It is also more affordable for parents. Denmark and Sweden prioritise 
public spending on services (like childcare) as opposed to cash benefits, with most recent 
OECD estimates suggesting that they spend two-and-a-half times more on services than they 
do on cash benefits, compared to the UK, where we spend just 50 per cent more on services 
than on cash benefits.29 The result, as the Institute for Public Policy Research (IPPR) has 
found, is that on average 10 per cent of families’ disposable income is spent on childcare in 
Denmark and Sweden, compared to one-third (and rising) for employed couples in the UK.30 
Although there is some research which suggests that lone parents in the UK face substantially 
lower childcare costs than the OECD average, the average full-time nursery bill for a child 
under two is now £11,000 a year in England and nearly £15,000 in London, according to the 
Family and Childcare Trust.31 32 Those costs simply price too many families out of the market 
altogether. 

New research for the Commission underlines this as a major issue. When asked about 
their attitude to returning to work, parents of children under four years old in the lowest 
socio-economic group were more than twice as likely to say they would like to be able to 
do so but were put off by the cost of childcare, compared with people in the highest socio-
economic group (67 per cent versus 32 per cent).33 Worryingly, 20 per cent of working-class 
respondents said they had no idea that any financial help was available to them and a further 
33 per cent of the same group said they were confused about what funding was available 
and where to get it. These figures were also significant for middle-class respondents at 17 per 
cent and 28 per cent, respectively.34

This is supported by other research which highlights the same issue. The IPPR found 
employment gains from a simpler, clearly communicated childcare system would not be 
significant for the middle classes, but that conversely there is huge potential to change 
employment outcomes for mothers at the bottom of the income scale.35 They estimated that 
a childcare offer that is more in tune with the needs of working-class parents and which gets 
mothers currently out of work into work could create a £750 million net positive fiscal impact 

27 http://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/05/childcare-expensive-mothers-want-work-trapped-home
28  OECD, OECD Family Database, Table 1.2, http://www.oecd.org/els/family/database.htm
29 OECD, PF1.1: Public spending on family benefits, last updated 19/09/2014
30  Thompson, S., and Ben-Galim, D., Childmind the Gap: Reforming childcare to support mothers into work, Institute for Public 

Policy Research, February 2014
31 Richardson, L., Can Parents Afford to Work? An Update, European Population Conference 2012, Stockholm
32 Family and Childcare Trust, Childcare Costs Survey 2015, February 2015
33  Silversides, K., and Gulc, B., Experiences of Parenting in the Early Years by Social Background, Social Mobility and Child 

Poverty Commission, forthcoming
34 Ibid.
35  Thompson, S., and Ben-Galim, D., op. cit.

http://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/05/childcare-expensive-mothers-want-work-trapped-home
http://www.oecd.org/els/family/database.htm




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


18

from increased tax revenue and decreased benefit expenditure. The IPPR estimates a further 
£700 million could result from encouraging mothers already in work to increase their hours.36 

1.3 How are these problems being addressed?

Support for parents

The final evaluation of the previous government’s parenting programme pilot, CANparent, was 
published in July 2014. Its findings identified some of the challenges in delivering voucher-
based universal parenting programmes.37 Providers including the Race Equality Foundation, 
City Lit, Parent Gym and Save the Children delivered programmes for parents in three pilot 
areas which sought to change the attitude of parents towards formal parenting advice. 
These initial pilots were succeeded by an amended programme, funded by the Department 
of Health, which ended in March 2015. The key change was a replacement of the voucher 
system by a joint funding structure combining contributions from public health, parents and 
the voluntary and community sector. The resulting evaluation should be published shortly.38 
Other than CANparent, there has been no explicit central-government-supported, universal 
programme which seeks to improve parenting. 

But this does not mean that there is no support available to parents. A range of (generally 
targeted) programmes have been developed by health and local authority partners, and the 
Early Intervention Foundation has supported 20 Early Intervention Places, with many areas 
offering specific support to parents. In addition, a £215 million suite of interventions and 
evaluations designed to support parents to give their children the best start in life, funded by 
the Big Lottery Fund, is currently under way in five areas of England.39 

The role of health in the early years has become more prominent since October 2015 when 
early years health services were integrated into public health structures and budgets and 
transferred to the responsibility of local authorities. This is illustrated in the NHS Five Year Plan 
(2014), which sets out proposals for local democratic leadership of public health, including 
the new statutory responsibility for local authorities to improve the health of their population.40  

Health visiting services are the most prominent element of this new transfer to affect the 
parents of young children, with a continued expectation that as well as general access to 
health visitors, five universal health reviews would be conducted up to age two to two-and-
a-half (the new integrated review), and there would be continued delivery of the Healthy 
Child Programme, which among other things coordinates immunisation and health and 
development reviews.41 Other services, like the Family Nurse Partnership, an intensive health 
visiting service for vulnerable young mothers from 20 weeks of pregnancy to the child’s 
second birthday, have also been transferred.42 

This new approach is yet to bed in and, although there is great potential in a public health 
approach focused on getting things right from the start, how these services really deliver for 
families in the context of fiscal restraint, is yet to become clear.

36 Ibid.
37 Department for Education, CANparent Trial Evaluation, Final Report, July 2014
38  Warwick University, http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/cedar/canuniversalparentingevaluation/, 30 November 2015
39 Big Lottery Fund, https://www.biglotteryfund.org.uk/betterstart, 18 November 2015
40 NHS England, Five Year Forward View, October 2014
41  NHS England, Health Visiting Programme, https://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/qual-clin-lead/hlth-vistg-prog/,  

18 November 2015
42 Family Nurse Partnership, Family Nurse Partnership Core Service Specification for 2015/16, 7 May 2015

http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/cedar/canuniversalparentingevaluation/
https://www.biglotteryfund.org.uk/betterstart
https://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/qual-clin-lead/hlth-vistg-prog/




Chapter 1: Building the right foundations


19

School-readiness

This chapter has already discussed the limitations of the current approach to school-
readiness. Because of these limitations, Government is failing to achieve what should be its 
prime objective for the early years, unifying parents, schools and providers around shared 
development goals. 

There are changes in the pipeline which have the potential to address these issues, some 
are new and others have been in the pipeline for some time. The Commission strongly 
welcomes the bringing together of the education and health reviews for two- to two-and-a-
half-year-olds into the appropriately named Integrated Education and Health Review. This 
review offers the potential for the high-quality developmental data resulting from health and 
education assessments to be shared between practitioners. The intention to reform the 
current Early Years Foundation Stage by making the profile assessment non-statutory and 
to introduce in its place a new reception baseline check (which started this year) is similarly 
a significant change for the system, with the Government having implemented a process 
by which schools can choose from a range of different providers of the new baseline tests. 
Government has been clear, though, that the reception baseline tests have been designed for 
school accountability purposes, rather than necessarily to resolve some of the problems set 
out above.

Childcare

There is a core early education offer of 15 hours per week of free childcare over 38 weeks 
of the year to all parents of three- and four-year-olds. This was extended during the last 
parliament to include around the 40 per cent most disadvantaged two-year-olds which 
includes children eligible for free school meals, children looked after by the local authority 
and two-year-olds from low income working families. Related to this, local authorities have 
a duty to secure sufficient childcare for working parents, and early education free of charge 
for eligible children.43 The Government specified that, as far as possible, early learning for 
two-year-olds should be delivered by providers who have achieved an overall rating of 
‘outstanding’ or ‘good’ in their most recent Ofsted inspection report and that all provision 
should be offered between 7am and 7pm in sessions no shorter than two and a half hours or 
longer than ten hours. As a minimum, parents should be able to take up their child’s funded 
place across three or five days of the week.44  

The end of the last parliament also saw the introduction of the Early Years Pupil Premium to 
help early years settings improve the education they provide for disadvantaged three- and 
four-year-olds. This was recommended by the Commission and others to recognise the 
importance of high-quality provision to address the child development gap. The funding 
provided is relatively modest, at 53p per hour or £302.10 for the full year if there is take-up of 
the full 15 hours, but the Commission welcomes the policy.45 

In addition, the last parliament saw the introduction of a new Tax-Free Childcare scheme, 
which has now been delayed to 2017, but will mean that working parents with a joint income 
of up to £200,000 (amended from £300,000 in the November 2015 Spending Review) will in 
effect be able to claim back 20 per cent of their childcare costs up to a total of £2,000 per 
child.46 This is an alternative to childcare vouchers, a tax-relief scheme that many parents 
make use of at present, but that excludes parents working for some smaller employers and 
those parents who are self-employed. Government also revised proposals for childcare relief 
under Universal Credit, so that from April 2016, recipients will be able to claim back 85 per 
cent of childcare costs.

43  Department for Education, Early Education and Childcare, Statutory Guidance for Local Authorities, September 2014
44 Ibid.
45  Department for Education, Early Years Pupil Premium: Guide for Local Authorities, https://www.gov.uk/guidance/early-years-

pupil-premium-guide-for-local-authorities, 18 November 2015
46 HM Treasury, Spending Review and Autumn Statement 2015, 25 November 2015

https://www.gov.uk/guidance/early-years-pupil-premium-guide-for-local-authorities




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


20

In terms of new proposals, the Government has made one notable addition to the suite of 
funded childcare policies by pledging to double the current early education offer for three- and 
four-year-olds from working families to 30 hours, from the current 15 hours. The conditionality 
associated with this policy was clarified at the November 2015 Spending Review and means 
that eligible families must have one parent working at least 16 hours and that joint parental 
income can be no more than £200,000 (with the same conditions announced for tax-free 
childcare).47 The Commission welcomes the provision of this additional funded childcare, in 
the main because there is a need for more, affordable childcare for working families in order 
for the UK to fulfil its potential on maternal employment.  

Although the Government specifically chose to deliver this new commitment through its 
current, Department for Education-led, free early education provision funding stream, it seems 
to be based on a quite different rationale. From its inception the Department for Education-
led early education policy has been explicitly aimed at child development, based on the good 
evidence that high-quality early education is beneficial for all children and especially the most 
disadvantaged.48 However, the language now being used to describe this policy, as well as 
the now clarified conditions for eligibility, place the emphasis on childcare rather than early 
education, with a clear focus on reducing cost pressures for working families and improving 
maternal employment. This is a tension that needs to be resolved, as one objective should 
not lose out to another.

1.4 How can more progress be made?
The Commission believes that there are three key ways in which the Government and others 
can make faster progress in narrowing the gap in early outcomes.

Support for parents

Adopting an exclusively childcare-centred approach to the early years leaves huge holes 
for a Government that seeks to give every child a fair chance in life. Government must go 
further to acknowledge the importance of children’s home lives in shaping their outcomes 
from the earliest age. Waiting until three, when they may or may not receive high-quality 
early education, risks wasting three vital years. Similarly, Government must ensure that 
it recognises the importance of parenting throughout childhood, including in the school 
years. Too often it seems that all attention is placed on schools as the mediator of the large 
attainment gap, when the vast majority of that gap is explained by home and individual 
factors.

School-readiness

There is an urgent need to end the strategic vacuum in the early years. A cross-cutting 
strategy which has an overall objective of achieving school- or life-readiness (as the Tickell 
review termed it), uniting the many departments, public bodies and providers active in this 
area is needed now more than ever. 

Successive governments have talked the early years talk but failed on substance, including 
in the last parliament where numerous reviews by high-profile experts did not catalyse real 
action or long-term planning. The Government’s proposal to double the fully funded childcare 
offer for three- and four-year-olds provides a potentially powerful tool to ensure the school-
readiness of large numbers of children and to increase maternal employment. But the policy 
will fail to improve school-readiness if the Government does not get the quality of the offer 
right. These concerns will be heightened if the Government does not reverse its plans to 

47 Ibid.
48 Education Endowment Foundation Early Years toolkit – https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/toolkit/early-years/

https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/toolkit/early-years/




Chapter 1: Building the right foundations


21

remove the national measure of child development. With funding for local authorities and 
public health set to become ever tighter, and with devolution increasing the potential for 
complexity, there is an even greater need for clear objectives and strong accountability on 
school-readiness which ties in all actors in this area, including parents, providers of childcare 
and early education, and primary schools.

Childcare

Government’s new proposal to double funded childcare provision for three- and four-year-
olds is a high-stakes policy. It could, in fact, amount to a fully funded universal childcare offer 
for working parents. However, other than the new announcements about eligibility (minimum 
number of working hours and an income cap) and the hourly rate (for which an additional 
£300 million per year was found in the November 2015 Spending Review), there has been 
little clarity about the principles that will guide the delivery of this new policy. These proposals 
are hugely expensive (with £1 billion a year earmarked by 2019/20, bringing total Government 
funding for childcare to £6 billion a year)49 but, if done right, could see significant gains reaped 
both in school-readiness and in maternal employment.50 The Commission takes the view that 
the following framework represents a bare minimum:

•	 Protection of a 15-hour high-quality offer in a good or outstanding setting for the 40 per 
cent most disadvantaged two-, three- and four-year-olds, irrespective of their parents’ 
employment status – using the Government’s current definition of the most disadvantaged 
40 per cent which applies to two-year-olds;

•	 The inclusion of incentives for providers, particularly to the 40 per cent most 
disadvantaged children, to offer provision beyond 9–5 Monday to Friday to support shift 
and flexible working patterns;

•	 Careful tracking of take-up of the offer among the 40 per cent most disadvantaged to 
better understand the reasons for low take-up – and to seek to address them;

•	 Genuine incentivisation of employment, by simplifying and joining up the offer of financial 
support to parents, including addressing the cliff edge between Universal Credit/tax credit 
funded childcare and tax-free childcare and the 30-hour offer.

There are a number of challenges the Government faces in delivering this framework, of 
which the most obvious is funding. Before the 2015 Spending Review, the IPPR estimated 
a funding gap of up to £1 billion by 2020/21,51 a criticism which the Chancellor partially 
responded to. But without clarity on the Government’s assumptions, it does still seem that a 
large shortfall remains, particularly if the key to this offer in terms of improving the attainment 
of the poorest children – high-quality early education, as opposed simply to childcare – is 
not to be watered down. It may be that Government is intending to rely on low take-up – an 
approach which would seem to run against its ambitions to boost maternal employment.52 

One remaining concern of the Commission is the extent to which the current childcare 
provision market for three- and four-year-olds can absorb the increased requirements of a 30-
hour offer without significant reform. There is a more specific problem in poorer areas, which 
have until now been characterised by a higher proportion of provision from the maintained 
sector, mainly schools and children’s centres.53 However, the schools sector faces particular 
capacity challenges and has warned that they are unlikely to be able to deliver the increased 

49 HM Treasury, Spending Review and Autumn Statement 2015, 25 November 2015
50 Ibid.
51  Cory, G., Extending the Early Years Entitlement: Costings, Concerns and Alternatives, Institute for Public Policy Research, 

October 2015
52  Nursery World, http://www.nurseryworld.co.uk/nursery-world/news/1154964/lower-staff-child-ratios-to-bring-down-costs-

says-dfe, 30 November 2015
53  Stewart, K., Do Poorer Children Receive Lower Quality Childcare?, http://www.lse.ac.uk/researchAndExpertise/

researchHighlights/socialPolicy/Childcare.aspx, 18 November 2015

http://www.nurseryworld.co.uk/nursery-world/news/1154964/lower-staff-child-ratios-to-bring-down-costs-says-dfe
http://www.lse.ac.uk/researchAndExpertise/esearchHighlights/socialPolicy/Childcare.aspx




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


22

hours.54 This is partly because many schools currently take two cohorts of children for 15 
hours each. They often do not have the space to double their numbers, as the change 
will require. It is also because schools have tended to cross-subsidise the funding of their 
early years provision from elsewhere in their budgets to ensure quality. The Commission 
welcomes the Government’s announcement in November 2015 of at least £50 million of 
new capital funding to support providers in the roll-out of the extended offer, which will be an 
important resource for providers who will struggle to deliver within current capital and funding 
constraints, but it is unclear that this will respond to providers’ concerns.55  

The role of the private sector in disadvantaged areas in delivering childcare is one that the 
Government must also consider carefully. Providers report that they sustain provision of 
funded childcare at a low rate by cross-subsidising from children whose parents pay for their 
care. There are fewer opportunities for this type of revenue in disadvantaged areas and the 
additional 15 hours funded at government rates will further reduce the potential for additional 
revenue.

Beyond the challenges of delivering a well-designed childcare system, it is also important to 
consider the extent to which such a system can increase maternal employment. In 2014, 
after the announcement of the Government’s new tax-free childcare funding, but before the 
proposal to double the funded childcare hours, the Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS) roundly 
criticised the complexity and effectiveness of current policy.56 Their critique centred on the 
fact that the new tax-free childcare policy introduced a third way by which childcare is funded 
in the UK (joining tax credit childcare funding and fully funded hours for two- to four-year-
olds). All three have different eligibility rules, different levels of support, and some perverse 
cliff edges. There is also a lack of clarity over the objectives of, and evidence for, the different 
schemes, particularly when it comes to maternal employment. These concerns combined 
add up to a real risk that precious financial resources may be being wasted in an inefficient 
and ill-targeted maze of schemes. The IFS called for a single funding scheme for Government 
to subsidise childcare, open to all parents where top-ups relate to parental income, age of 
children and work status of parents. It concluded:

  Given all these uncertainties, the case for extending universal provision of nursery 
education for pre-school children is in fact not easy to make. There is a danger that the 
current policy bidding war – welcome as it will be to many parents looking for additional 
support – will result in ill-targeted and inefficient use of scarce public resource. We have 
already stumbled a long way in the dark in this policy area. It is time to stop stumbling, 
shine a light on the policy landscape, and plot an effective route forward.57 

Government plans to spend £6 billion a year on childcare by 2019/20, suggesting the need to 
put a rocket behind a review of the overall funding system for childcare. While early childhood 
education and care has huge potential to deliver on Government’s One Nation aim, the risks 
of an ill-targeted, inefficient system are too important to ignore.

54 National Association of Head Teachers, An Early Years Place for All, The NAHT Childcare Bill Report, September 2015
55 HM Treasury, Spending Review and Autumn Statement 2015, 25 November 2015
56  Institute for Fiscal Studies, Green Budget 2014: Chapter 8 – State Support for Early Childhood Education and Care in 

England, 2014
57 Ibid.




Chapter 1: Building the right foundations


23

1.5 Conclusion and Recommendations
It is conceivable that this parliament could prove a revolutionary juncture in the history of 
early years policy. The Government’s commitment to large increases in fully-funded childcare, 
increased devolution and the new local structures which bind public health officials into 
early years care provide very significant opportunities to integrate efforts to narrow the gap 
in early child development and to boost the maternal employment rate. This would be an 
achievement of which a One Nation government could be proud.

But if that is the scale of the possible achievement, there are significant potential pitfalls 
along the way, many of which have been examined in this chapter. The recommendations 
which follow are aimed at avoiding the pitfalls and realising the potential – above all, ensuring 
that the £6 billion of public money spent by the state each year allocated to childcare and 
early education is spent wisely. This will require Government to end the damaging strategic 
vacuum in the early years. The cumulative effect of recent changes to policy here is to move 
ever closer to universal state-funded childcare for all three- and four-year-olds. But there is 
little sense of what ends the Government wishes this policy to achieve. This is particularly 
problematic given that it is managed by a range of government departments, and delivered 
in the main by local providers from a range of sectors. Childcare policy is split across the 
Department for Education, the Department for Work and Pensions and HM Revenue and 
Customs. Each works to differing objectives and with different target groups. There are similar 
concerns with wider early intervention policy, where good intention is not always translated 
into action. To correct these deficiencies, we make the following recommendations:

Recommendation 1: Set out a long-term early years strategy which binds 
all those involved in early years care together behind two clear, stretching 
objectives.

A universal state-funded childcare system could be a very significant policy tool with which 
to begin to deliver a genuinely One Nation Britain. However, if this is really Government’s aim 
then it needs to raise its sights and set a truly ambitious objective behind which all those 
involved in this area can unite. The Government should set out its ambitions in a long-term 
strategy for the early years, which has a specific focus on its objectives for childcare policy 
and explicitly sets out how the different Government departments and childcare providers 
from all sectors will contribute to achieving it. This will help drive a more rigorous focus on 
evidence-based policy, as well as improve the focus on the specific design of policies and 
accountability of providers. In the Commission’s view this ambition should be twofold:  

•	 To halve the child development gap by 2025 (currently better-off children do 42 per cent 
better than poorer children);

•	 To halve the gap in maternal employment between England and the best-performing 
nations (most recent OECD data records the UK maternal employment rate as 66 per 
cent, compared to over 80 per cent in Denmark and Sweden – currently these nations 
perform 24 per cent better than the UK), by 2025.58 

The pursuit of these long-term objectives should drive Government to be more evidence-
based in its approach to policy, as well as more focused in its design of specific policies  
and the accountability of providers. A clear ambition which focuses on the outcomes of 
children and their mothers will go some considerable way to realising the Government’s  
One Nation goal.  

58  Thompson, S., and Ben-Galim, D., Childmind the Gap: Reforming Childcare to Support Mothers into Work, Institute for 
Public Policy Research, February 2014




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


24

Recommendation 2: End the received wisdom that parenting is beyond 
the reach of public policy by establishing an innovation fund designed to 
road-test and evaluate policies which aim to help improve parenting skills.  

The lack of new, high-quality evaluation and innovative programmes to help a wide spectrum 
of parents to parent is striking. While previous parenting policies have not proved hugely 
successful, new evidence for this report shows that parents are hungry for advice at key 
points in their children’s development and that they do trust health visitors and midwives to 
deliver that advice. This suggests that there is scope to do more to help parents to parent, 
so it is now time to think differently about what support for parents looks like and how it is 
delivered. We shouldn’t give up just because it is difficult. 

The Commission recommends that Government create an innovation fund of £10 million, 
similar to the £30 million fund set up by the Department for Work and Pensions for NEETs 
(young people not in education, employment or training), to support payment-by-results 
programmes that enable disadvantaged young people to participate and succeed in 
education and training. This innovation fund to support parents should seek to receive 
bids for programmes which are both universal – to enable social mixing – and targeted, 
for example, at the 40 per cent poorest parents. They should be designed so that they are 
accessible and of particular benefit to disadvantaged parents. The key outcomes sought 
should be related to attachment, child development and school/life readiness. Key to this 
proposal is evaluation. The Government should designate a specific evaluation budget, 
amounting to 20 per cent of the total fund. They should task the Early Intervention Foundation 
and the Education Endowment Foundation with overseeing providers’ evaluation plans. No 
programme should be granted funding without clear, measurable outcomes and high-quality 
trial evidence should be collected from each.

Recommendation 3: Remove the damaging confusion that exists  
about the concept of school-readiness by introducing a single, national, 
easy-to-use definition, and unite all those involved in early years services 
behind it. 

There are many unknowns about the Government’s new 30 hours of funded childcare for 
three- and four-year-olds. The Government has clearly made assumptions about take-up, 
potential increases in maternal employment, provider mix and the delivery of the 30 hours that 
are not yet clear to the Commission. Whether, and the extent to which, the offer will reduce 
the large gaps in school-readiness that exist between the poorest children and the rest in 
England remains in doubt, particularly given the severe cost pressures. There is therefore 
a clear need to focus all those involved in delivering this policy on a specific objective to 
improve school-readiness. At a minimum, the Commission believes that the Government 
should:

•	 Develop a new definition of school-readiness to be achieved at the transition between 
early education and reception class, which seeks to engage parents, health professionals, 
early education providers and schools in this shared concept;

•	 The extent of school-readiness by social background should be reported by all local 
authorities in new league tables and action taken to address the gap in data left from 
making the EYFSP non-statutory. Either by reversing that decision, while focusing the 
EYFSP more explicitly on school-readiness and moving it to the start of the reception year, 
or by supplementing the new school-readiness definition proposed above with a simple 
new measurement tool;




Chapter 1: Building the right foundations


25

•	 Introduce a new stipulation that the 15 hours of high-quality early education for the most 
disadvantaged 40 per cent can only be funded in good or outstanding settings. Where this 
is not possible, local authorities should report publicly on the numbers of disadvantaged 
children in lower-quality provision; 

•	 Use area-based pilots to test the market’s response to the 30-hour offer, in particular how 
it affects the inclination and ability of the highest-quality settings in the poorest areas to 
deliver it according to demand. 

Recommendation 4: Increase take-up of free childcare, and decrease its 
cost by radically simplifying the multiple streams which finance it.

The Government’s highly fragmented childcare offer is failing on efficiency for the taxpayer 
and on maternal employment. In order to deliver more effectively on both, it must be simpler. 
Government’s inclination to tack on new additions to an already complex system further 
exacerbates the problem. We believe there is a long-term and short-term answer to this.

•	 In the short term: all parents entitled to Universal Credit and Child Benefit should receive 
a childcare entitlement statement, setting out the childcare support that they are (or 
are likely to be) entitled to from across the different schemes (tailored according to HM 
Revenue and Customs data about their income/tax). This document should stress the 
importance of the quality of early education and emphasise the choices that parents have. 

•	 In the long term: the Government should look to streamline its highly complicated 
childcare offer across the wide range of current funding schemes. This is likely to realise 
savings through increased efficiency and improve incentives to employment by making the 
net cost of childcare clearer to all parents.




Chapter 2: Schools – the engine of social mobility


27

Chapter 2: Schools – the engine of social 
mobility

•	 Schools are the cornerstone of efforts to improve social mobility and in 
some parts of the country – London especially – they are breaking the 
link between demography and destiny. 

•	  But schools where poor children do well are the exception not the rule 
and in two areas – Portsmouth and Bracknell Forest – no pupils eligible 
for free school meals went on to a top university.  

•	 Overall, poor children – even the brightest – do less well than their 
wealthier peers and the gap widens throughout school.

•	 Government is doing a lot to make schools engines of social mobility 
and there are welcome efforts towards tougher standards, a core 
curriculum and a greater focus on progress in accountability measures.

•	 But Government should set its sights higher and aim for poor children 
elsewhere to do as well as they currently do in Inner London by 2030, 
which would reduce the educational attainment gap between the most 
disadvantaged children and everyone else by two-thirds.

•	 It should adopt a new zero tolerance approach to schools which are in 
terminal failure. Those schools failing to perform for five consecutive 
years should face wholesale changes in their leadership and be required 
to become part of a high-performing academy chain.

•	 A prestigious new fellowship of Change Leaders – Heads who have 
previous experience of successfully turning around schools – should 
be created to lead efforts to put failing schools back on the path to 
success. 

•	 Pay for new teachers should be improved and fees for Initial Teacher 
Training should be scrapped. 

•	 The National Teaching Service’s efforts to get more of the best teachers 
into the worst schools in disadvantaged areas should be turbo-charged 
with local trials of better incentives – including a new help-to-buy 
scheme exclusively for teachers.




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


28

2.1 Introduction
Governments through the decades have recognised that schools are the cornerstone of 
efforts to improve social mobility. Indeed, for much of the past 30 years the English education 
system has found itself in the political cross-hairs. Schools have been subject to significant 
funding increases in the Blair years, combined with relative protection in the leaner Coalition 
years, as well as wide-ranging reforms to increase school autonomy and accountability, 
improve literacy, numeracy and standards for the most disadvantaged children, and most 
recently inject more rigour into the curriculum and qualifications.

There are now areas of the country as well as individual schools demonstrating the cumulative 
effect of these efforts, with some of this country’s highest achieving schools now operating in 
some of our poorest areas. The successful turnaround of large numbers of previously written-
off London schools has transformed the life chances of many of the capital’s children. Beyond 
London too, some schools see their poor pupils do better at GCSE than the national average 
for all children. The simple inevitability of richer children doing better than poorer has been 
disproven. 

But, there is still unfinished business. These turnaround schools and areas remain the 
exception. The English schools system is characterised by its patchiness and the continuing 
low attainment of many of the poorest children. While in 2014 there were nearly 60 non-
selective schools in which at least three in four disadvantaged children left school with five 
good GCSEs1 (above the national average for all children), there were nearly 600 schools 
where that figure was just one in four.2 As research for the Commission shows, the tragic 
cumulative effect of this is that low ability children from wealthy families catch up with bright 
children from poor families at school.3   

The attainment gap is not simply a matter of the poorest 10 or 20 per cent doing badly at 
school and the rest doing well. Attainment rises incrementally as deprivation reduces.4 This is 
very important to social mobility, because it means that lost potential continues some way up 
the income scale – disadvantage affects the attainment of more than just the poorest children 
eligible for free school meals. It is also extremely important for later opportunities in life, as the 
labour market increasingly rejects those who were not successful at school, a trend that is 
particularly strong for the poorest children.5 The lifetime returns of five or more good GCSEs, 
compared with no qualifications, is £283,000 for men and £232,000 for women. Even those 
who achieved five to seven low GCSE passes can expect increased lifetime earnings of 
£73,000 for men and £55,000 for women compared with those who achieved three to four 
low passes.6  

These figures pose a particular problem for the Government’s ambition to spread the recovery 
beyond the south-east. Schools in London enable 50 per cent more of their poorest children 
to obtain five good GCSEs compared with elsewhere.7 This exacerbates the opportunity 
gap between London and the rest of the country, wasting both vast individual potential and 
significant sums in lost productivity and competitiveness in areas that need these the most. 

1  Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, new analysis using the National Pupil Database – 2013–14 GCSE results by 
pupil characteristics, November 2015

2  Ibid.
3  Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, New Research Exposes the ‘Glass Floor’ in British Society, press release, 26 

July 2015, https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-research-exposes-the-glass-floor-in-british-society
4  Institute for Public Policy Research, Excellence and Equity: Tackling Educational Disadvantage in England’s Secondary 

Schools, June 2013
5  Lindley, J., and Machin, S., The Quest for More and More Education: Implications for Social Mobility, in Fiscal Studies, 

Institute for Fiscal Studies, vol. 33, no. 2, 2012, pp265-86
6  Department for Education, The Economic Value of Key Intermediate Qualifications: Estimating the Returns and Lifetime 

Productivity Gains to GCSEs, A levels and Apprenticeships, December 2014
7 Department for Education, GCSE and Equivalent Attainment by Pupil Characteristics: 2014

https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-research-exposes-the-glass-floor-in-british-society




Chapter 2: Schools – the engine of social mobility


29

There is growing consensus that the key ingredient in successful schools is a highly 
effective teaching workforce. And notably, Ofsted has judged teaching quality in the capital’s 
secondary schools to be higher than in any other region.8 Good teachers make a difference 
for all students, but make more difference for the most disadvantaged, because this group 
are least likely to fulfil their academic potential – a fact borne out by the experience in London, 
where the attainment gap is 10 percentage points smaller than in the rest of the country.9 
This is the direction in which we urge the Government to dedicate its education reforms 
in this parliament. The remainder of this chapter will develop this theme, first by assessing 
the country against the Government’s One Nation ideal, second by examining current 
government policy, and third by identifying in more detail the further action that is needed. 
Finally, we draw some specific conclusions and recommendations. 

2.2 Does today’s reality meet the One Nation vision?
The One Nation vision is one in which every child has the chances and choices with which to 
fulfil their potential, regardless of birth, background or geographic location. There are some 
good signs of progress towards that goal. Since 2005, children eligible for free school meals 
have become considerably more likely to achieve the key threshold measures at the end of 
primary and secondary school (see Figure 2.1). The attainment gap between the poorest 
and other children at primary school is now 18 percentage points, an improvement of 7 
percentage points since 2005.10 The extent to which children not eligible for free school meals 
are more likely to achieve a good level at the end of primary school than their poorer peers 
(those eligible for free school meals) has also reduced since 2005. Children not eligible for free 
school meals’ chances of achieving a Level 4 at Key Stage 2 reduced from 1.5 to 1.3 times 
more likely between 2005 and 2014 (Figure 2.1). At secondary school, these more affluent 
children are now 1.8 times more likely to gain five good GCSEs than their poorer peers, down 
from 2.5 times in 2005.

8 Ofsted Data View, quality of teaching as at 31/03/2015, http://dataview.ofsted.gov.uk
9 Department for Education, GCSE and Equivalent Attainment by Pupil Characteristics: 2014
10 Department for Education, National Curriculum Assessments at Key Stage 2, 2014 (revised)

http://dataview.ofsted.gov.uk




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


30

Figure 2.1: Attainment at 11, 16 and 19 in 2014, compared to 2005, according to free 
school meal (FSM) status 


Percentage0102030405060708090100

Level 4 or above 
at Key Stage 2 

(Reading, Writing 
and Maths) 2014

Level 4 or above 
at Key Stage 2 

(Reading, Writing 
and Maths) 2005

5 A*-C grades in 
GCSEs, including 

English and 
Maths 2014

5 A*-C grades in 
GCSEs, including 

English and 
Maths 2005

2 or more 
A levels 2014

2 or more 
A levels 2005

Gap = 18 
percentage points 

– Non FSM 1.3 
times more likely 

Gap = 27 
percentage points 

– Non FSM 1.8 
times more likely

Gap = 25 
percentage points 

– Non FSM 1.5 
times more likely

Gap = 28.5 
percentage points 

– Non FSM 2.5 
times more likely

Gap = 22.7 
percentage points 

– Non FSM 2.4 
times more likely

Gap = 22.6 
percentage points 

– Non FSM 2.6 
times more likely


6482487333.7




60.71947.5




15.9




38.5




14.337

FSM Non FSM

Source: Department for Education, National Curriculum Assessments at Key Stage 2, 2014 (revised), Department for Education, 
GCSE and Equivalent Attainment by Pupil Characteristics, 2014, Department for Education, Level 2 and 3 Attainment by Young 
People Aged 19 in 2014, Table 15a , 31 March 2015

Family income

The attainment gap between children from families with the lowest incomes and their better-
off peers remain large, both at Key Stage 2 and GCSE. The attainment gap also grows as 
children progress through school, with the gap at GCSE wider than the gap at Key Stage 
2 (see Figure 2.1). The higher the initial level of attainment,11 the wider this gap gets (see 
Figures 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4), demonstrating that beneath the headline indicators lies an even 
more worrying story. This is reinforced by another gap, in the abilities of children from different 
social backgrounds to achieve expected levels of progress during secondary school. This 
serves to highlight the absolute importance of detailed attainment tracking in order to fully 
understand where and how poorer children fall behind.

11  Level 4b rather than Level 4 at 11, EBacc (English Baccalaureate) rather than GCSE at 16, and A levels rather than Level 3 
qualifications at 19




Chapter 2: Schools – the engine of social mobility


31

Figure 2.2: 11-year-olds achieving Level 4 and Level 4b in 2013–14 


Percentage0102030405060708090100

Achieved at least Level 4 Achieved Level 4b

Gap = 22 percentage points – Non FSM 
1.4 times more likely to achieve 


64824971

Gap = 18 percentage points – Non FSM 
1.2 times more likely to achieve 

FSM Non FSM

Source: Department for Education, National Curriculum Assessments at Key Stage 2, 2014 (revised), 2014

Figure 2.3: 16-year-olds entered for and achieving the EBacc (English Baccalaureate) in 
2013–14 


Percentage01020304050

Achieved Entered

Gap = 20.7 percentage points – Non FSM 
2 times more likely to be entered 


9.7




26.62141.7


Gap = 16.9 percentage points – Non FSM 
2.7 times more likely to gain 

FSM Non FSM

Source: Department for Education, GCSE and Equivalent Attainment by Pupil Characteristics: 2014, 2015




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


32

Figure 2.4: Qualifications gained by 19-year-olds in 2013–14 


Percentage01020304050607080

2 + A Levels Any Level 3

Gap = 24.8 percentage points - Non FSM 1.7 
times more likely to gain



15.9




38.535.6




60.4


Gap = 22.6 percentage points – Non FSM 2.4 
times more likely to gain

FSM Non FSM

Source: Department for Education, A level and other level 3 results: 2013 to 2014 (revised), 29 January 2015

Perhaps most worryingly, poor children do not only start school at a lower base, but they 
also make less progress while they are there. The attainment of wealthier children accelerates 
during their school years, while it stalls for the poorest. This means that wealthier children 
exceed their educational potential, but the poorest do not get near to fulfilling theirs. The most 
recent data available shows that:

•	 57 per cent of the poorest pupils made the expected level of progress in English during 
secondary school, compared with 74 per cent of all other pupils;12

•	 46 per cent of the poorest pupils made the expected level of progress in maths during 
secondary school, compared with 69 per cent of all other pupils;13  

•	 Of the poorest children achieving the lowest levels in Key Stage 2 maths tests (at the end 
of primary school), 12 per cent went on to achieve a C or more in GCSE maths, compared 
to 20 per cent of wealthier children who got the same low level;14  

•	 Of the poorest children reaching the highest level in Key Stage 2 maths, 29 per cent 
translated it into an A or A* in GCSE maths, compared to 49 per cent of other children.15  

The progress gap increased in 2014, the last year for which data is available (Table 2.1). This 
coincides with the implementation of the Wolf reforms which, among other things, increased 
qualification requirements at GCSE. While this period saw a drop in the proportion of children 
of all backgrounds translating a good level of attainment16 at the end of primary school into 

12 Department for Education, GCSE and Equivalent Attainment by Pupil Characteristics: 2014
13 Ibid.
14  Defined as Level 3a and below. Ofsted and Department for Education, RaiseOnline, https://www.raiseonline.org/

documentlibrary/ViewDocumentLibrary.aspx (under Transition Matrices heading), https://www.raiseonline.org/
OpenDocument.aspx?document=381

15  Defined as Level 5. Ofsted and Department for Education, RaiseOnline, https://www.raiseonline.org/documentlibrary/
ViewDocumentLibrary.aspx (under Transition Matrices heading), https://www.raiseonline.org/OpenDocument.
aspx?document=381

16 Level 4b

https://www.raiseonline.org/documentlibrary/ViewDocumentLibrary.aspx
https://www.raiseonline.org/OpenDocument.aspx?document=381
https://www.raiseonline.org/documentlibrary/ViewDocumentLibrary.aspx
https://www.raiseonline.org/OpenDocument.aspx?document=381
https://www.raiseonline.org/documentlibrary/ViewDocumentLibrary.aspx
https://www.raiseonline.org/OpenDocument.aspx?document=381
https://www.raiseonline.org/documentlibrary/ViewDocumentLibrary.aspx
https://www.raiseonline.org/OpenDocument.aspx?document=381




Chapter 2: Schools – the engine of social mobility


33

five good GCSEs, the drop was more dramatic for poorer children. The resulting gaps in 
qualifications are marked: Six in 10 disadvantaged children who had gained a level 4b (so 
above the Government’s current threshold at Key Stage 2) went on to achieve five good 
GCSEs in 2014, compared to eight in 10 other children (see Table 2.1).  

The impact of these trends is demonstrated by research for the Commission which shows 
that high-ability children from disadvantaged families at age seven are overtaken by lower-
ability wealthier children by the time they take their GCSEs, with the fastest drop-off 
occurring between Key Stages 2 and 4.17 Secondary school marks a particularly risky time 
for disadvantaged children, with too many failing to fulfil the trajectory that their previous 
attainment would suggest.

Table 2.1: Students gaining at least Level 4b at the end of primary school who went on 
to gain five A*-C grades including English and maths at GCSE – 2011–14 

 2011 2012 2013 2014

Disadvantaged 63.2% 63.4% 64.6% 58.5%

Non-disadvantaged 81.8% 81.1% 82.4% 78.4%

Percentage point gap 18.6 17.7 17.8 19.9

Non-disadvantaged more likely to achieve 29.5% 27.9% 27.5% 34.1%

Source: Ofsted and Department for Education, Raise Online Transition Matrices for 2013/14, 2015

Gender 

Boys are doing worse than girls at every stage in education, from the Early Years Foundation 
Stage to A level. In 2014, boys’ GCSE results were 16 per cent worse than girls’, with 52 
per cent of boys achieving five good GCSEs compared with 62 per cent of girls.18 While this 
gap isn’t replicated in the labour market (where the gender pay gap remains the other way 
around), there is evidence of an increasing gender gap in the labour market for lower socio-
economic groups, with men more likely than women to have no qualifications at all.19 There 
are signs that the gender gap at school has widened over time, with an increase of nearly 
two percentage points between boys’ and girls’ results from 2006 to 2014.20  Commitment 
to homework is thought to be one explanation for the large gaps in attainment between 
boys and girls, but girls’ success in English is also a key differentiator, with little difference in 
performance in maths between genders. The particularly low performance of boys is clearly 
concerning, but the attainment of poor girls is also unacceptably low. 

Ethnicity

Of the group of children eligible for free school meals, white British boys are by far the lowest 
performers (of the major ethnic groups), with just 23.8 per cent gaining five good GCSEs 
(see Figure 2.5), compared with 30.8 per cent of black Caribbean boys. Of the 53,607 
children eligible for free school meals who did not achieve five good GCSEs in 2014, over 
20,000 (or 37 per cent) were white British boys (compared to the 32 per cent of white British 
boys eligible for free school meals overall). Disadvantaged white boys have been shown to 
have a particularly problematic time throughout secondary school, with research showing 
that, controlling for other characteristics, all ethnic minority groups make greater progress 

17  Commission for Social Mobility and Child Poverty, Progress made by High Attaining Children from Disadvantaged 
Backgrounds, June 2014

18 Department for Education, GCSE and Equivalent Attainment by Pupil Characteristics: 2014, 2015
19 Lindley, J., and Machin, S., The Quest for More and More Education, op. cit.
20  2005/06 results taken from GCSE and equivalent attainment by pupil characteristics in England: 2009 to 2010 – attainment 

gap on five A*-C grades including English and maths between boys and girls 8.3 percentage points in 2005/06 and 10.1 in 
2013/14




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


34

throughout secondary school than white students.21 There has been considerable debate 
about the particular barriers to attainment faced by poorer white children. At a recent select 
committee meeting on the attainment of white working-class boys, Baroness Professor Alison 
Wolf concluded:

  We do need to recognise that a lot of the low achievement that is concentrated among 
white working-class children is also related to where they live and, in many cases, to the 
fact that there are large parts of this country … where you have got an economy that is still 
bearing the scars of the end of manufacturing and industrial employment … A lot of the 
careers and jobs that were the bedrock of white working-class family life for many decades 
and generations have vanished and have not been well replaced.22 

When looking at the attainment of all children not just the poorest, black Caribbean children 
are the lowest-performing major group – 47.0 per cent gained five good GCSEs in 2014, 
compared with the national average of 56.6 per cent. The gender gap for black Caribbean 
children is also larger than for other ethnic groups, with girls doing comparably well. Notably, 
the rate of improvement in the attainment of black Caribbean boys from the poorest families 
has far exceeded the improvements for poor white British boys since 2006 (see the dotted 
lines in Figure 2.5).  

21  Wilson, D., Burgess, S., and Briggs, A., The Dynamics of School Attainment of England’s Ethnic Minorities, Centre for 
Analysis of Social Exclusion, January 2006

22  Education Select Committee, Underachievement in Education by White Working Class Children, 18 June 2014,  
http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201415/cmselect/cmeduc/142/14206.htm

http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201415/cmselect/cmeduc/142/14206.htm




Chapter 2: Schools – the engine of social mobility


35

Figure 2.5: Percentage of students achieving five A*-C grades in GCSE examinations 
(including English and maths) by gender, free school meal (FSM) status and selected 
ethnicity, 2006–14 

2005/06 2006/07 2007/08 2008/09 2009/10 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14


Percentage

Black Caribbean Boys
Black Caribbean Girls
White British Boys
White British Girls
FSM White British Boys
FSM White British Girls
FSM Black Caribbean Boys
FSM Black Caribbean Girls


010203040506070

Source: Department for Education, GCSE and Equivalent Attainment by Pupil Characteristics: 2014, 2015 and Department 
for Children, Schools and Families, Achievements at GCSE and equivalent for pupils at the end of Key Stage 4 by Pupil 
Characteristics, 2009/10 (with data back to 2005/06), 2010

Note: the reductions in performance in 2013–14 reflect the new methodology for calculating five A*-C recommended in the Wolf 
report, where there were limitations on the qualifications that count towards the five

Underlying these three gaps in attainment are three key structural problems that affect 
schools in England and prevent them from effectively tackling the attainment gap.

Problem 1: Despite progress in some English schools, the biggest 
weakness in the schools system is the large variation in standards. 

The quality of schools in England is highly variable. Schools that are apparently similar in 
terms of relative deprivation of area or disadvantage of intake can perform very differently.23 
This map (Figure 2.6) highlights the patchiness of the system across England for children 
eligible for free school meals, with the large urban centres that were once the weakest 
performing now among the strongest.

23 Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, Cracking the Code, September 2014




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


36

Figure 2.6: Proportion of children across England eligible for free school meals gaining 
five A*-C grades at GCSE, including English and maths, 2014 – highlighting the top 20 
per cent and bottom 20 per cent

Devon

Cumbria



Kent


Norfolk

Essex

Suffolk

North Yorkshire

Lincolnshire

Cornwall

Dorset

Wiltshire

Somerset
Hampshire

Northumberland

Shropshire

Durham

Lancashire

Surrey

Derbyshire


O

xfordshire



Glou

ceste

rshire

West Sussex

Herefordshire

East Sussex

Leeds

Staffordshire

Cambridgeshire

Leice
sters



hire Warwickshire Northamptonshire Nottinghamshire Hertfordshire

Worcestershire

East Riding
of Yorkshire

Buckingham
shire


Cheshire East


Bedford



York Doncaster

Rutland


Kirklees West

Berkshire


North Lincolns




hire


Bradford

Sheffield

Barnsley

Cheshire
West &
Chester

Wakefield


Central Bedfordshire

Calderdale

Isle of
Wight

Swindon

Rotherham

Peterborough

Medway


North Somerset

South
Gloucs

Milton
Keynes

Thurrock

Telford &
Wrekin

Derby

Poole

Bath & NE
Somerset

Torbay
Plymouth

North East
Lincolnshire

Leicester

Luton

Nottingham

Stoke-


on-

Trent

Brighton & Hove
Southampton

Kingston
upon Hull

Portsmouth

Blackpool

Southend on SeaBristol

Bournemouth



Kent

Surrey

Essex

Bromley

Hertfordshire

Havering

Barnet

Enfield


Bexley

Ealing

Brent

Harrow

Sutton

Merton


Hillingdon Croydon Hounslow

Thurrock


Redbridge

Greenw


ich

Newham


Lew

isham

Harin


geyhtebma L

Wandsworth S


outhwark

Camden


Waltham Forest Richmondupon Thames

Hackney

Westminster

Islington


Kingstonupon Thames Barking &Dagenham

Tower
Hamlets


Hamm &


 Fulham

Kens & Chelsea



City


Surrey

Wokingham

Oxfordshire

Hampshire

Buckinghamshire

Windsor & Maidenhead


Bracknell Forest

Reading

Slough

Warwickshire

Solihull

Birmingham

Staffordshire

Walsall

Dudley

Worcestershire

Coventry


Sandwell

Leicestershire

Wolver-
hampton

Lancashire

Wigan

Wirral

Calderdale

Bolton

Cheshire East

Oldham


Rochdale

Sefton



Bury Derb

yshire


Warrington


St Helens

Salford


Trafford

Stockp


ort

Halton

Liverpool

Tameside


Manchester Knowsley


Blackburn


with


Darwen

Cheshire West & Chester

Durham

North Yorkshire

Darlington

Gateshead


Sunderland Stockton-on-Tees


Hartlepool

NorthTyneside
South

Tyneside

Middles-
brough

Redcar &
Cleveland

Newcastle
upon Tyne

Isles of
Scilly

% of FSM pupils
achieving 5A*-C 
including English 
and maths

Best 20%

Worst 20%

Data not available

Source: Reproduced by permission of Ordnance Survey on behalf of HMSO, 2015

% of free school 
meals pupils 
achieving 5 A*-C 
including English 
and maths




Chapter 2: Schools – the engine of social mobility


37

Attending a good school is important for all children, but particularly so for the poorest 
because they are more likely to have more ground to make up and have been shown to 
make less progress overall.24 But in England, poorer children are more likely to attend weaker 
schools, which acts as a double disadvantage. A primary school age child living in one of the 
poorest areas of England is twice as likely as a child living in one of the wealthiest areas to go 
to a school which is less than good, according to Ofsted (22 per cent versus 10 per cent). 
At secondary level, the difference is larger still, with a child living in one of England’s poorest 
areas three times more likely to go to a school which is less than good, compared to a child 
living in one of the wealthiest areas (34 per cent versus 11 per cent). While there has been a 
notable improvement in primary schools since 2010, the quality of secondary schools in the 
poorest areas of England remains far too low.25 

Figure 2.7: Percentage of learners in good or outstanding schools, primary and 
secondary, by deprivation of area, change 2010–15 


Percentage0102030405060708090100

% of Learners in Good or Outstanding 
Primary Schools

% of Learners in Good or Outstanding 
Secondary Schools 


59827890

Most deprived End August 2010
Least deprived End August 2010
Most deprived End March 2015
Least deprived End March 2015


56846689

Source: Ofsted Data View, overall school effectiveness as at 31 March 2015

The fact that children in the poorest areas of England are far more likely to attend a weaker 
school is concerning, particularly because the relationship between disadvantage and 
attainment remains so strong in areas other than London. In London, some of the poorest 
areas are now home to England’s most impressive schools. Poor children living in deprived 
London boroughs such as Southwark, Newham and Hackney26 are likely to go to a school 
that is good or outstanding and to gain five good GCSEs at the end of secondary school. The 
old excuse of underperforming schools – that demography should dictate expectations – has 
been comprehensively undermined. This means that the Government’s lens should be firmly 
focused on the areas in which poverty and low attainment remain unforgivably linked. Looking 

24 Department for Education, GCSE and Equivalent Attainment by Pupil Characteristics: 2014
25 Ofsted Data View, overall school effectiveness as at 31/03/2015, http://dataview.ofsted.gov.uk
26 All among the 25 per cent most deprived areas of England

http://dataview.ofsted.gov.uk




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


38

at the effectiveness of all schools in an area shows some stark differences across England. 
Figure 2.8 shows the areas of England with the highest and lowest proportion of schools that 
are at least good according to Ofsted – some of the same areas are highlighted in Figure 2.6. 
This illustrates the ongoing, stand-out success of schools in many areas in London.




Chapter 2: Schools – the engine of social mobility


39

Figure 2.8: Proportion of schools across England rated good or outstanding according 
to Ofsted as at end December 2014 – highlighting the top 20 per cent and bottom  
20 per cent

Devon

Cumbria



Kent


Norfolk

Essex

Suffolk

North Yorkshire

Lincolnshire

Cornwall

Dorset

Wiltshire

Somerset
Hampshire

Northumberland

Shropshire

Durham

Lancashire

Surrey

Derbyshire


O

xfordshire



Glou

ceste

rshire

West Sussex

Herefordshire

East Sussex

Leeds

Staffordshire

Cambridgeshire

Leice
sters



hire Warwickshire Northamptonshire Nottinghamshire Hertfordshire

Worcestershire

East Riding
of Yorkshire

Buckingham
shire


Cheshire East


Bedford



York Doncaster

Rutland


Kirklees West

Berkshire


North Lincolns




hire


Bradford

Sheffield

Barnsley

Cheshire
West &
Chester

Wakefield


Central Bedfordshire

Calderdale

Isle of
Wight

Swindon

Rotherham

Peterborough

Medway


North Somerset

South
Gloucs

Milton
Keynes

Thurrock

Telford &
Wrekin

Derby

Poole

Bath & NE
Somerset

Torbay
Plymouth

North East
Lincolnshire

Leicester

Luton

Nottingham

Stoke


on

Trent

Brighton & Hove
Southampton

Kingston
upon Hull

Portsmouth

Blackpool

Southend on SeaBristol

Bournemouth



Kent

Surrey

Essex

Bromley

Hertfordshire

Havering

Barnet

Enfield


Bexley

Ealing

Brent

Harrow

Sutton

Merton


Hillingdon Croydon Hounslow

Thurrock


Redbridge

Greenw


ich

Newham


Lew

isham

Harin


gey Lambeth

Wandsworth S


outhwark

Camden


Waltham Forest Richmondupon Thames

Hackney

Westminster

Islington


Kingstonupon Thames Barking &Dagenham

Tower
Hamlets


Hamm & 

ulham

Kens & C
helsea



City


Surrey

Wokingham

Oxfordshire

Hampshire

Buckinghamshire

Windsor & Maidenhead


Bracknell Forest

Reading

Slough

Warwickshire

Solihull

Birmingham

Staffordshire

Walsall

Dudley

Worcestershire

Coventry


Sandwell

Leicestershire

Wolver
hampton

Lancashire

Wigan

Wirral

Calderdale

Bolton

Cheshire East

Oldham


Rochdale

Sefton



Bury Derb

yshire


Warrington


St Helens

Salford


Trafford

Stockp


ort

Halton

Liverpool

Tameside


Manchester Knowsley


Blackburn


with


Darwen

Cheshire West & Chester

Durham

North Yorkshire

Darlington

Gateshead


Sunderland Stocktonon Tees

Hartlepool

NorthTyneside
South

Tyneside

Middles
brough

Redcar &
Cleveland

Newcastle
upon Tyne

Isles of
Scilly

 % of students
attending a good 
or outstanding school

Best 20%

Worst 20%

Data not available

Source: Reproduced by permission of Ordnance Survey on behalf of HMSO, 2015




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


40

Bringing together the data set out in Figures 2.6 and 2.8, Figure 2.9 presents the results 
of a One Nation index of top-tier local authority areas by secondary school quality and 
the attainment of children eligible for free school meals at GCSE. The chart shows high-
performing areas (better than average secondary schools and above average GCSE results 
for poorer children) in the top-right corner, and the inverse, the weakest areas, in the bottom-
left corner. This bottom-left corner includes large industrial towns within the shadows of some 
of our major cities, such as Barnsley, Knowsley and Stockton-on-Tees. Here, nearly half of 
secondary schools require improvement or are in special measures and fewer than a quarter 
of poor children achieved five good GCSEs in 2014. It is in these areas, where parents have 
little or no choice of good schools and where the vast majority of poor children fail to achieve 
basic qualifications, that attention is most needed. Perhaps most strikingly, analysis in Table 
2.2 shows that there is no clear deprivation trend, with deprived areas present equally in both 
the top 10 and bottom 10. 

Figure 2.9: Secondary schools and social mobility – index based on performance by 
students eligible for free school meals and quality of schools by local authority area  


-60-50-40-30-20-10010203040

-40 -30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30 40

Variation from average – attainment of free school meal students at GCSE 
(5 A*-C grades including English and maths)


Variation from average – Proportion of schools rated good or outstanding according to Ofsted, as at 31 March 2015

Wandsworth Haringey Kensington 
and Chelsea

Westminster

Tower Hamlets

Rutland

Barnsley

Bradford

Knowsley

Isle of Wight

Source: Ofsted Data View, overall school effectiveness as at 31/03/2015, http://dataview.ofsted.gov.uk, and Department for 
Education, GCSE and Equivalent Attainment by Pupil Characteristics: 2014, 2015

http://dataview.ofsted.gov.uk




Chapter 2: Schools – the engine of social mobility


41

Table 2.2: Underlying data in rank order (from Figure 2.8) – top 10 and bottom 10 areas 
with Indices of Multiple Deprivation (IMD) rankings 

Index rank 
(based on FSM 
GCSE results 
and secondary 
school quality)

Area % FSM 
students 5+ 
A*-C grades 
inc. English and 
maths at GCSE 


2014


% Secondary 
schools good 
or outstanding 
(Ofsted – as at 
31 March 2015)

Indices of 
Multiple 
Deprivation 
(IMD) – Rank 
of average 
score (1 = most 
deprived)

1/150 Kensington & Chelsea 62.0 100 75

2/150 Islington 54.6 100 22

3/150 Southwark 52.4 100 33

4/150 Hounslow 49.7 100 80

5/150 Haringey 47.2 100 24

6/150 Westminster 62.6 90 45

7/150 Redbridge 49.3 89 91

8/150 Hammersmith & Fulham 46.1 90 68

9/150 Wandsworth 40.9 100 103

10/150 Kingston upon Thames 41.9 90 144

 Average IMD rank of top 10 areas 68.5

141/150 East Riding of Yorkshire 27.1 50 118

142/150 Cambridgeshire 27.5 47 134

143/150 Kingston upon Hull 27.0 50 3

144/150 Northumberland 23.4 60 90

145/150 Stockton-on-Tees 26.7 50 65

146/150 Warrington 24.7 50 94

147/150 South Gloucestershire 22.1 57 143

148/150 Bradford 26.7 38 18

149/150 Barnsley 19.6 50 32

150/150 Knowsley 20.0 25 2

 Average IMD rank of bottom 10 areas 69.9

Source: Ofsted Data View, overall school effectiveness, op. cit.; Department for Education, GCSE and Equivalent Attainment by 
Pupil Characteristics: 2014; Office for National Statistics, English Indices of Deprivation, 30 September 2015

Below these areas which are underperforming for their poorest children are a small, but 
notable, number of schools in terminal failure. That is, at secondary level those schools which 
have failed to get to floor standards (40 per cent of students achieving five A*-C grades) for 
five consecutive years. The Commission’s analysis suggests that between 2011 and 2015 
there have been 30 such secondary schools across England. None of these schools are to be 
found in London, there are two in Nottingham, but Yorkshire and the Humber is home to nine, 
including four in Leeds. These schools represent less than 1 per cent of all secondary schools 
in England. They are consistently and tragically failing their pupils. The systemic response to 
this failure must be both swifter and bolder.

Overall, the large variations in attainment and school quality highlighted in this section, 
particularly among areas and schools with similarly disadvantaged populations, provide great 
grounds for optimism. There are tried and tested ways of tackling these issues, and there 
are huge gains to be made where this is done successfully. Analysis for the Commission’s 
Cracking the Code report found that if schools closed half the gap in performance compared 




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


42

with the top 20 per cent of schools with similar concentrations of disadvantage, over 14,000 
more disadvantaged students would get five good GCSEs each year.27  

Problem 2: The incentives and structures that determine the recruitment, 
retention, development and deployment of teachers in England are 
failing to deliver enough high-quality teachers in the numbers required, 
especially in the most disadvantaged areas.

One of the key means at the Government’s disposal to improve the social mobility problem in 
England is to address the issue of teacher quality and ensure that the poorest children have 
greater access to highly effective teaching. But there is increasing evidence that the teacher 
labour market is misfiring badly, accentuated by wider economic, population and policy 
factors.

Teacher training
Efforts to increase the number and quality of trainee teachers have had mixed success at 
best and it is clear that teacher-training places for many subjects are not being filled. The 
problem is most marked at secondary level, where just 82 per cent of the target number 
of places were filled in 2015/16.28 We welcome the growth of school-based initial teacher 
training (ITT), which has the potential to improve the quality of training as well as the numbers 
recruited. However, the arrival of School Direct has only complicated the already highly 
fragmented offer for potential applicants. People interested in teaching as a career will find 
little information which compares the real costs, benefits and effectiveness of different teacher 
training routes or institutions, despite their wide variation.29   

This is further complicated by the complexity of the financial packages available to help 
teachers finance their training. Two in 10 teacher-training places from 2015/16 were salaried, 
either through School Direct or Teach First,30 and so required no upfront payments. The 
remaining eight in 10 (including seven in 10 of School Direct places) required applicants to 
pay tuition fees of up to around £9,000, just as for any undergraduate course in England. 
Students are entitled to full tuition-fee loans and other student finance, as well as various 
subsidies in the form of scholarships and bursaries, which vary according to subject 
specialism and degree classification. While financial assistance outside of the mainstream 
student finance system is extremely rare for primary school trainees (other than maths 
specialists), a secondary school physics trainee with a first-class degree or PhD might 
receive a bursary of £30,00031 in addition to their student finance (see Table 2.3). Bursaries 
are extremely expensive and the evidence on their effectiveness in attracting individuals to 
teaching (who would not previously have considered it) is not clear.32 Also, characteristics 
such as degree classification, which determine the amount of the bursary, have no bearing 
on the potential of the individual to be an effective teacher.33 In addition, a recent evaluation 
by the Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS) found that, under the new student finance system, the 
average teacher will never pay off the borrowing accrued for fees and living costs for their ITT 
year.34 The IFS found that the combination of unpaid loans and subsidies mean that the cost 

27 Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, Cracking the Code, September 2014
28  Department for Education, Initial Teacher Training: Trainee Number Census – 2015 to 2016, SFR 46, 19 November 2015
29  UCAS Teacher Training, Postgraduate Routes into Teaching, https://www.ucas.com/ucas/teacher-training/getting-started/

postgraduate-routes-teaching, accessed 18 November 2015
30 Ibid.
31 Get Into Teaching website, https://getintoteaching.education.gov.uk/bursaries-and-funding, accessed 18 November 2015
32  See, HB., Determinants of Teaching as a Career in the UK. Evaluation & Research in Education, 2004 and National 

Foundation of Educational Research, Who Would be a Teacher? A Review of Factors Motivating and Demotivating 
Prospective and Practising Teachers, 2000

33  Allen, R., and Burgess, S., Reforming Teacher Training to Find the Best Teachers, Centre for Market and Public Organisation, 
http://www.bristol.ac.uk/media-library/sites/cmpo/migrated/documents/reformingteachertraining.pdf

34  Institute for Fiscal Studies, The Costs and Benefits of Different Initial Teacher Training Routes, IFS report R100, November 


2014


https://www.ucas.com/ucas/teacher-training/getting-started/postgraduate-routes-teaching
https://getintoteaching.education.gov.uk/bursaries-and-funding
http://www.bristol.ac.uk/media-library/sites/cmpo/migrated/documents/reformingteachertraining.pdf




Chapter 2: Schools – the engine of social mobility


43

to the state of fee-paying teacher training options (for shortage subjects) was as much as 50 
per cent higher than for salaried ITT routes.35   

Table 2.3: Bursaries for fee-paying Initial Teacher Training routes, 2016/1736 

Specialism Scholarships
Bursaries

Trainee with 
1st/PhD

2:1/Master’s 2:2 Other

Physics £30,000 £30,000 £25,000 £25,000 £9,000

Maths £25,000 £25,000 £25,000 £25,000 £9,000

Languages N/A £25,000 £25,000 £20,000 £0

Chemistry, computing £25,000 £25,000 £20,000 £20,000 £0

Biology N/A £20,000 £15,000 £15,000 £0

Geography N/A £15,000 £15,000 £15,000 £0

Design and technology N/A £12,000 £9,000 £0 £0

English, history, music, 
religious education 

N/A £9,000 £4,000 £0 £0

Primary maths N/A £6,000 £6,000 £6,000 £3,000

Primary N/A £3,000 £3,000 £0 £0

Source: Get Into Teaching website, op. cit.

Teacher pay
Entry-level teacher pay is falling further and further behind other graduate jobs and teacher 
pay elsewhere in the OECD. Here we compare teacher salaries to the salaries offered by 
top graduate employers to understand the extent to which teaching presents an attractive 
financial package for top graduates. In 2015, the median salary for top graduate vacancies 
was £30,000, compared with a starting salary for teachers of £22,244 in most of the country 
and £27,819 in London.37 Starting salaries for qualified teachers outside of London have 
increased by 16 per cent (just over £3,000) in 10 years (2005/6 to 2015/16), held down by 
public sector pay constraint, compared with a 30 per cent increase (£6,900) in the median 
graduate starting salary which reflects recent improvements in the economy.38 While the 
majority of new teachers in England are young (55 per cent were under 25 in 2015/16), 
teachers’ starting salaries also need to attract career changers, with, for example, 57 per 
cent of the flagship School Direct cohort in 2015/16 being made up of over 24s.39 Starting 
salaries for teachers in England are also in effect deferred until after the initial teacher training 
year (which students may have to pay for), so do not become a reality as immediately as for 
other graduate jobs. A recent OECD report commented on the fact that while teacher pay 
in England is notably low compared to the OECD average at the start of teachers’ careers, 
when additional allowances (for leadership responsibilities, which can be acquired once 
teachers are more experienced) are included teachers in England become – overall – better 
remunerated than teachers elsewhere.40 While it does not make up for the low starting salary, 
this evidence from the OECD raises an important point. There is clearly an opportunity to do 
more to sell the potential for career progression and accompanying salary uplifts, as well as 
addressing the pay shortfall at the start.

35  Institute for Fiscal Studies, The Costs and Benefits of Different Initial Teacher Training Routes, IFS report R100, November 


2014


36 Get Into Teaching website, op. cit.
37  Association of Teaching Leaders; https://www.atl.org.uk/Images/School%20Teachers’%20Pay%202015-16%20Pay%20

Scale%20Points%20-%20National%20Joint%20Advice.pdf
38  Comparing median graduate salary from http://www.highfliers.co.uk/download/2015/graduate_market/GMReport15.pdf to 

teacher pay rates on M1 (the first point on the teacher pay scale) – outside of London – £19,161 in 2005 and £22,224 in 


2015


39  Department for Education, Initial Teacher Training: Trainee Number Census – 2015 to 2016, SFR 46, 19 November 2015
40 OECD, Education at a Glance: Country Notes – United Kingdom, November 2015

https://www.atl.org.uk/Images/School%20Teachers%E2%80%99%20Pay%202015-16%20Pay%20Scale%20Points%20-%20National%20Joint%20Advice.pdf
http://www.highfliers.co.uk/download/2015/graduate_market/GMReport15.pdf




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


44

Teacher numbers
There is a teacher numbers problem, which risks creating a quality problem. Put simply, if 
school leaders do not have sufficient high-quality candidates to choose from, they will be left 
with the option of appointing someone below par or with a vacancy that requires them to use 
temporary teachers and non-specialists. At the end of 2014, teacher numbers were 5,000 up 
on the previous year, bringing the total to 455,000 full-time equivalent teachers in England.41 
This increase not only responds to increases in pupil numbers, but it is also accounted for by 
6,000 new nursery and primary school teachers. Over the same period there were 800 fewer 
secondary school teachers. The result is that secondary schools in particular are finding it 
harder to fill posts. At the end of 2014, there were over 1,000 more vacancies and temporarily 
filled posts compared with the same point in 2013.42 Surveys of school leaders show this to 
be a significant problem, with eight in 10 saying that recruitment is a problem, with the most 
stark issues at secondary schools in English, maths and science.  Just over half attributed 
their recruitment struggles to overall shortages and just under half to the suitability of the 
candidates applying. Almost two-thirds of those in London said that the high housing and 
living costs were a specific barrier to recruitment in their area.43 This highly unsatisfactory 
situation is likely to get worse, not better, as we approach a period in which the pool of 
potential graduates is declining at the same time as the number of school-age children is 
increasing considerably. In 2012, there were 10 school-age children per 21-year-old, which 
will increase to 12 for each 21-year-old in 2020.44   

Teacher quality and incentives
What is perhaps most worrying about this numbers squeeze is the potential knock-on effect 
it has on teacher quality. In 2014, 20 per cent of maths lessons in secondary schools were 
being taught by teachers without a relevant qualification, an increase from 17 per cent in 
2013.45   

In addition, there are few incentives available to encourage teachers to work in the most 
challenging schools. A survey for the Commission in 2014 found that just 15 per cent of 
teachers would actively seek out a school that was more challenging than their current 
school and over half said that the pressure of working in a weaker school was a significant 
deterrent.46 There are marked contrasts between the lack of incentives to teach in challenging 
schools and areas, and the incentives to encourage subject specialists – even in subjects 
where there is not strong evidence of shortages. This is exacerbated by the fact that, below 
senior leadership level, teachers are not a mobile workforce, with most working in the region 
where they grew up. Travel-to-work time is of primary concern as they seek new roles.47 

Problem 3: Schools are not sufficiently focused on preparing the poorest 
children for life after school.

At the sharp end of schools’ success – or otherwise – in breaking the cycle of disadvantage 
lies the destinations of their pupils after school. The picture is not good, with big geographic 
variations in the extent to which young people from poor households access the best 
universities. At the worst end of the scale, in two local authorities, no pupils eligible for free 
school meals progressed to the top third of higher education institutions in 2013/14, the 
last year for which data is available. In 13 of the worst 20 performing local authorities, 2 per 
cent or less of the poorest children doing A levels progressed to the best universities. In the 
same local authorities, pupils not on free school meals who attained A level or equivalent 

41 Department for Education, Statistical First Release, School Workforce in England, November 2014, July 2015
42 Ibid
43  National Association of Headteachers, The NAHT School Recruitment Survey 2015, 9 December 2015
44  Office for National Statistics, Principal projection – England Population, Single Year of Age, 2012-based, Table A3–4, 2013
45 Department for Education, Statistical First Release, School Workforce in England, November 2014, July 2015
46 Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, Cracking the Code, September 2014
47 LKMCo, Why Teach?, October 2015




Chapter 2: Schools – the engine of social mobility


45

qualifications at schools and colleges within the area were five times more likely to progress to 
top universities.48  

Yet Figure 2.10 also highlights some authorities that buck the trend in the cluster to the top 
left. Examples include Bournemouth and Wigan. There is a further worrying trend at a local 
level. In the majority of places where overall progression to top universities is above average, 
the gap in progression between youngsters eligible for free school meals and others is 
wide. If opportunities were fairly shared, we might expect local authorities with high overall 
proportions of students progressing to top universities to do better for all. This is not the 
current position. As illustrated below, in too many places the balance goes against those from 
poor families (as indicated by free school meal eligibility).

Figure 2.10: Comparison of young people progressing to top third of higher education 
institutions by English local authority area 

Below average progression 

Above average progression 


Narrower than average free school meal gap Wider than average free school meal gap

Narrower than average 
free school meal gap, 
above average progression

Wider than average free 
school meal gap, above 
average progression 

Narrower than average 
free school meal gap, 
below average progression

Wider than average free 
school meal gap, below 
average progression


-20-15-10-505101520253035

-15 -10 -5 0 5 10 15 20

Source: Department for Education, Destinations of Key Stage 4 and Key Stage 5 Pupils 2013 to 2014, 23 October 2015

Note: Both axes are in percentage points from average. The X-axis represents the free school meal progression gap; the Y-axis 
the overall progression to top universities in that local authority

More areas serving large proportions of poor pupils clearly need to replicate the performance 
of the areas with high progression – and that needs to start at school. This means 
going above and beyond the traditional narrow focus on the academic curriculum. The 
Commission’s Cracking the Code report, published in 2014, highlighted many of the practices 
undertaken by some of the schools that do particularly well for poor children. We found that 
the best schools proactively set out to broaden the experiences of their poorest students 
to prepare them to compete in the world beyond school. Approaches taken included 
looking beyond academic results, social and cultural capital building, early engagement with 

48  Department for Education, Destinations of Key Stage 4 and Key Stage 5 pupils: 2013 to 2014, 23 October 2015. The data 
excludes local authorities where the number of free school meal-eligible pupils progressing to top HE is small (one or two 
pupils). These have been reconstructed in the data by assuming the maximum – two free school meal pupils progressing to 
top HE. The City of London, Isles of Scilly and Rutland are excluded entirely due to small numbers




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


46

universities, a knowledge-based curriculum tailored to individuals and early engagement with 
employers. One secondary school head teacher told the Commission:

  It’s just the right thing to do ... It’s us being socially responsible – if we do not do it, we’re 
setting them up to fail. We’re measured in the same way as other schools – mainly on 
attainment – but we have to make sure that kids who leave here are ready to walk into 
great careers ... and they absolutely won’t if we do not look at the wider set of things 
stopping our students from succeeding.49 

As this head teacher points out, schools’ direct incentives to look beyond exams are relatively 
weak. The accountability system remains strongly focused on academic performance, and 
the much-lauded destinations data relates only to institutions where students undertook 
their post-16 studies, not the ones where they spent their secondary school career (which is 
different for many students). It also does not tell us enough about the destinations of students 
who do not progress to higher education. 

49 Commission for Social Mobility and Child Poverty, Cracking the Code, September 2014




Chapter 2: Schools – the engine of social mobility


47

A levels: the stepping stone to university

A levels are and will remain the stepping stone to university, and are therefore the 
biggest rung on the social mobility ladder. So it is a major problem that poor, bright 
children are far less likely than their wealthier peers to gain good A levels. 

Only 2,000 (or 2.2 per cent) of the most deprived children gain the good grades in their 
A levels that top universities demand (3 grades A*-B). The figure is 10 times higher 
(20.6 per cent) for the least deprived children (see Figure 2.11). This yawning chasm 
represents a real risk to the Government’s ambitious widening university participation 
target, particularly if top universities are to participate fully. As one study shows, 
extremely high attaining poor children50 at 11 are four times less likely to go on to an 
elite university than their high-attaining, wealthier peers.  

 Figure 2.11: High attainment at A level 


Percentage01020304050607080

Most deprived Least deprived


1.3


2+ A-B in facilitating subjects at A level
3+ A-B in any subjects at A level
Percentage taking A levels


2.2




30.9




13.6




20.6




72.2


  Source: Crawford, C., Macmillan, L., and Vignoles, A., Progress made by High Attaining Children from Disadvantaged 
Backgrounds, Commission for Social Mobility and Child Poverty, June 2014 

Successive governments have sought to increase the proportion of students gaining  
A level equivalent qualifications, and have had considerable success in doing this. 
Ninety per cent more 19-year-olds from the most deprived areas hold Level 3 
qualifications than 10 years ago.51 However, this increase is driven, almost entirely, by 
students holding non-A level qualifications which often do not offer the same access to 
top universities.  

These figures are a wake-up call to both state schools and top universities. Both need 
to do more to ensure that the brightest but poorest children are able to access the top 
universities.  

50 Those who achieved Level 5
51 Department for Education, A Level and Other Level 3 Results: 2013 to 2014 (revised), 29 January 2015




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


48

In schools there needs to be a renewed focus on ensuring that those children who 
are identified as high attainers early in their academic career are aiming for A levels 
and university beyond. This means preparing the path from the start of secondary 
school, including access to the best teachers who can ensure they choose core 
GCSE subjects and do well in them. This is exacerbated by the fact that one-third 
of secondary schools have no responsibility for their pupils’ education after GCSE 
because they lack a sixth form. That is why we call in this report for a new destinations 
measure which links an individuals’ progress back to their secondary school, regardless 
of where they undertook further education. 

Universities have a stake in this too – they should be assessing how they can use 
widening participation funds in a much more focused manner to increase the likelihood 
that those children identified as capable of going to university at an early age, take and 
then excel in A levels. Universities – especially those elite institutions that are currently 
the most socially exclusive – also need to ensure their admissions processes are 
looking at potential by, for example, taking fuller account of the type of school and the 
family background from which applicants come.

2.3 How are these problems being addressed?
While there have been some new policy approaches for schools announced in this 
parliament, there are a number of significant changes that were developed during the last 
parliament that are still to come to fruition. All of this is happening in the context of schools 
with financial challenges on the horizon. Despite Government’s recent commitment to real 
terms protection for schools and the welcome commitment to protect the Pupil Premium 
on a per pupil (cash) basis, analysis from the IFS suggests that the figures imply a real terms 
cut of 7.5 per cent in spending per pupil in this parliament.52  Schools are facing a number of 
new pressures over the coming years as a result of the rise in pupil numbers, and the cost 
pressures of increases in pension contributions and National Insurance. The IFS suggest 
that the next five years will be considerably more challenging for schools than during the last 
parliament, and the first time schools have seen a real-terms cut in per pupil funding since 
the mid-1990s.53 In addition, there are wide-ranging implications of the announcement in 
the recent Autumn Statement of the introduction of the national funding formula for schools. 
Government has announced plans to consult in 2016 and commence roll out in 2017.54 This 
move to address the historical unfairness in school funding is welcome, but Government has 
some complex choices to make about how to implement the formula. There will be significant 
implications for some schools (particularly those considered to be overfunded); so it is 
important that Government gets the formula and the transition arrangements right. 

The Government’s reforms fall in two broad areas: improving standards across the system, 
which includes failure regimes for schools, and raising standards within schools and across 
the workforce.

Improving standards across the system

The Government has focused heavily on failure regimes in recent years, with the introduction 
of regional schools commissioners to identify struggling schools and promote academies 
and free schools, and proposals for a coasting schools accountability measure from 2016. 

52  Institute for Fiscal Studies, School Funding Reform, http://www.ifs.org.uk/uploads/publications/budgets/Budgets%202015/
Autumn/Sibieta_Schools.pdf, 2 December 2015

53  Institute for Fiscal Studies, Observations: English Schools Will Feel the Pinch Over the Next 5 Years, 21 October 2015  
http://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/8027, 18 November 2015

54 HM Treasury, Spending Review and Autumn Statement 2015, 25 November 2015

http://www.ifs.org.uk/uploads/publications/budgets/Budgets%202015/Autumn/Sibieta_Schools.pdf
http://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/8027




Chapter 2: Schools – the engine of social mobility


49

This new measure focuses on overall attainment as well as progress over a three year 
period – and will commence when 2016 test data has been analysed. Until 2018, when 
there will be three years of new data, plans are to use an interim measure for previous years 
in combination with the new data. For primary schools, the 2016 measure will be where 
fewer than 85 per cent of children achieve the new higher expected standard at the end of 
primary and pupils do not make good enough progress. In the interim for 2014 and 2015, the 
measure will be where fewer than 85 per cent of pupils achieved Level 4 in reading, writing 
and mathematics and below the median percentage of pupils made expected progress in 
reading, writing and maths. For secondary schools, the 2016 measure will be where schools 
are performing below a level set against the new progress 8 measure. The interim measure 
for 2014 and 2015 for secondary schools will be where fewer than 60 per cent of pupils 
achieved 5 A*-C grades including English and maths and the school has a below median 
percentage of pupils making expected progress in English and maths. 

The Government has also recently announced that five academy sponsors have been 
awarded grants of £5 million in total and tasked with driving up standards in particular 
areas of the north of England where performance has been low.55 Detailed plans for this 
arrangement have not yet been published.

In addition to these wider structural reforms, the accountability and exam reforms begun 
under the previous government have started to bed in. This includes the new Progress 8 
and Attainment 8 measures at GCSE. These measures aim to capture both attainment and 
progress in eight subjects (including a set of core subjects) through secondary school, and 
will compare the attainment of pupils that started school at the same level. In addition, levels 
have been scrapped at primary school, new progress-focused accountability for primary 
schools have been introduced, and the bar for tests at Key Stage 2 and GCSE have been 
raised. These measures will support the Government’s plans for coasting schools described 
above, which will increasingly reflect the new progress-based measures year-on-year as there 
is more data. 

Secondary schools in particular face a wide set of reforms affecting Key Stage 4. The new 
GCSE scoring system, replacing letters with numbers, commences for the cohort starting 
English and maths GCSEs this year and other subjects from next year. The raised bar means 
that the new threshold measure will be equivalent to the top third of a current C grade and 
adds more scope for differentiation between performance at the top of the ability range. 
Alongside this, wider exam reforms will make GCSEs more stretching. The Government also 
announced this year that from 2018, secondary schools will be required to ensure that 90 per 
cent of students study English, maths, science, either history or geography and a language 
at GCSE (the compulsory English Baccalaureate, or EBacc). Schools that do not conform will 
not be eligible for an outstanding Ofsted rating. 

There have also been important reforms at A level. The decoupling of A and AS levels has 
commenced and all students failing to achieve a C grade in GCSE English and maths must 
now continue their studies in these subjects into the sixth form or college. 

In primary schools, the Government has recently announced proposals for new Key Stage 
1 tests at age seven as well as plans for children who do not reach the required level in Key 
Stage 2 tests at the end of primary school to be retested at secondary school. In addition, 
primary schools are now required to undertake a baseline assessment for children in 
reception class.

As well as this, the Government has committed to 500 new free schools in this parliament, in 
addition to just over 400 already open or planned to open in 2016 and beyond.56 While these 
individual schools will of course affect the students that attend them, the numbers of schools 

55  Department for Education, press release for speech by the Secretary of State for Education, 3 November 2015,  
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/nicky-morgan-no-tolerance-of-areas-where-majority-of-pupils-fail

56  Department for Education, Free Schools: Open Schools and Successful Applications, last updated 2 September 2015

https://www.gov.uk/government/news/nicky-morgan-no-tolerance-of-areas-where-majority-of-pupils-fail




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


50

and attendees remain proportionately small, making up less than half a per cent of all schools 
in England.

There are encouraging signs of progress. Increasing numbers of schools are turning 
previously accepted wisdom about the inevitability of poor children’s outcomes on their 
head. The schools which perform best for their disadvantaged students are taking on 
board the Government’s school reform programme, using the Pupil Premium strategically, 
and maintaining a strong focus on standards. Government reforms have clearly led many 
schools in the right direction, but there are limits to its control. The best performers push their 
responsibility for their poorest children above and beyond the areas where Government has 
explicit levers, taking responsibility for the attainment and long-term outcomes of their poorest 
students, driven by the highest expectations of their students and their teachers.57 These 
schools have shown that ensuring that their poorest children fulfil their potential requires 
ambition and innovation, as well as an explicit commitment to ensuring that poor children 
have the chances and choices that reflect their potential, rather than their background.

Teacher numbers, deployment and quality

The Government has continued to back a more market-based approach to teacher 
training, with increasing numbers of places being offered by individual schools through 
School Direct, the school-based ITT programme, with the stated aim of improving quality. 
For the recruitment year 2015/16, there is also one significant reform to the teacher 
training landscape. The Government has in effect deregulated the teacher training market, 
maintaining an overall target figure, but removing the specific allocations that were previously 
in place for each training institution (which now includes individual schools). What this means 
for training providers is that they can recruit entirely freely until the Government’s national 
totals are reached for each subject, phase (primary or secondary), or route in (i.e. School 
Direct or Higher Education Institution). 

Bursaries and scholarships continue to be offered to trainee teachers on fee-paying (student 
rather than salaried) routes, with rates depending on subject specialism, school phase and 
degree classification. Table 2.3 sets out the bursaries recently announced for the 2016/17 
school year.

The Government has also set out to address the underperformance of schools in areas that 
struggle to recruit, through its new National Teaching Service programme. The intention is to 
deploy high potential teachers and leaders to some of England’s most challenging schools 
for up to three years, with plans for 1,500 participants by 2020 and a pilot in the North West 
starting in September 2016.58 

In addition, the Government has sought to recognise the large workloads of teachers in 
England, which include substantial amounts of activities that do not necessarily add value 
to students. It has undertaken a Workload Challenge review, which sets out a new protocol, 
including longer lead-in times to major reforms and a commitment that Ofsted will not make 
substantive changes to the assessment handbook mid-year. This has been accompanied by 
a myth-busting drive by Ofsted to clarify what activities are and are not expected. 

2.4 Assessment: what further action is needed?
The key priorities for schools introduced over the last parliament and into this one have in the 
main been the right ones. Under the Coalition, various actions were taken to address flaws 
that had proved to further the disadvantage of the poorest children. Notably, this includes the 
move away from the five A*-C threshold at GCSE, the recognition of the importance of the 

57 Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, Cracking the Code, September 2014
58 Department for Education, press release regarding speech by the Secretary of State for Education, op. cit.




Chapter 2: Schools – the engine of social mobility


51

study of core subjects for all students in preference to low- or no-value vocational courses, 
the drive to address failing schools and the championing of the Pupil Premium and the 
work of the Education Endowment Foundation. The Government elected in May 2015 has 
committed to support all of these policy strands and has continued to support Teach First, 
which places excellent teachers in some of the most disadvantaged areas of England. 

But it is the Commission’s judgement that without efforts to build capacity in schools and in 
the teaching workforce, and in the absence of careful monitoring, some of the Government’s 
policy approaches could further disadvantage some of the poorest children – those who have 
the most to gain from many of these new reforms. There are particular risks with regard to:

•	 Implementing the new national curriculum at primary schools; 

•	 Raising the bar for tests at Key Stage 2 and GCSE;

•	 Teaching the EBacc subjects to all secondary school pupils; 

•	 The requirement for retakes of GCSE maths and English during Key Stage 5 study.

For these policies to have the desired impact, they require schools to be firing on all cylinders. 
They need a highly effective teaching workforce; schools with the leadership and capacity 
to deliver to a (rightly) demanding set of new reforms; efficient and effective use of the pupil 
premium to channel money directly to the most disadvantaged children; and a well-designed 
accountability system to back it up. Below we look in more detail at the risks associated with 
these four elements of the system.

Improving standards across the system

The Government’s new accountability regime, combined with the introduction of the coasting 
schools measure, have the potential to classify many more schools as ineffective. This means 
that those schools that are not already academies are likely to become sponsored academies 
if they do not demonstrate their potential to improve, and quickly. The Commission supports 
this broad approach.

The implications for primary schools are particularly significant here. First because the new 
accountability demands on primary schools are so far above current standards, and second 
because the proportion of primary schools that have converted to become academies is still 
relatively low and the market is not well developed. The think-tank Policy Exchange estimates 
that the new accountability standards could mean that 20 per cent of primary schools – 
3,300 schools – could fall into the failing category.59   

But there does not seem to be a clear plan to address the gaps in capacity in the schools 
themselves which might lead to self-improvement. Neither does there appear to be a plan to 
ensure that where schools are required to convert to academy status under a sponsor, there 
are a sufficient number of well-equipped, high-quality sponsors available to take on the job, 
particularly outside of London and the South. 

The Government has broadly gone in the right direction on its accountability regime, which is 
an important piece in the jigsaw of any effective strategy to drive out underperformance and 
incentivise high expectations. The Commission has strongly welcomed the shift from the five 
A*-C measure at GCSE to the Progress and Attainment 8 approach. It is absolutely right that 
all children have access to an academic curriculum to age 16, and Progress and Attainment 8 
is a well-designed approach. The focus on progress across the eight subjects also addresses 
some of the problems of the previous threshold-based accountability regime – there is 
recognition of progress between any given grades, rather than focusing closely on the C/D 
borderline as at present. 

59  Policy Exchange, Primary Focus: The Next Stage of Improvement for Primary Schools in England, Policy Exchange, 2014




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


52

However, the recent addition of the compulsory EBacc to the core accountability measures 
seems out of sync with the intention behind Attainment and Progress 8. The policy objective 
behind the EBacc was addressed effectively and flexibly by Attainment and Progress 8. In 
addition to the capacity and availability of the teachers required to teach the EBacc, which is 
discussed above, there is a risk that an inflexible EBacc will disengage some children. There 
is some evidence from Germany that a more academic curriculum resulted in an increase 
in disengagement with school and an attendance drop-off.60 Avoiding this kind of outcome 
requires a careful balancing act and the Government should be aware of the implications of 
its recently announced requirement for 90 per cent of children in each school to undertake 
the EBacc from 2018. A move to determine a proportion of students in a school likely to be 
capable or not of achieving the EBacc seems inconsistent with a system of autonomy and, 
indeed, a system where we know that each school inherits students of widely differing ability 
and engagement. In one school, it may be that 100 per cent of students should be studying 
for a core set of subjects, whereas in others that figure may well be far lower. Attainment and 
Progress 8 offered schools the flexibility to determine this, which it seems was an approach 
more fitting with the autonomy granted to them.

The elements of government policy described in this chapter should certainly go some 
way towards driving up standards. However, it remains vital that specific additional focus 
remains on the troubling attainment gap. While the Commission welcomes the Government’s 
commitment to continue to fund the Pupil Premium, we are deeply concerned at suggestions 
of a move away from a focus on narrowing the attainment gap, replacing this with an 
objective of raising standards for all. We recognise that when applied to individual schools, an 
exclusive focus on narrowing the attainment gap could only be as stretching as the non-pupil 
premium students are wealthy. We understand the risk that this could lead to an unambitious 
lowest common denominator approach for individual schools.61 However, disregarding the 
objective at a national level would be a major mistake. Raising standards for everyone is a 
reasonable and ambitious aim, but the lesson has been learnt by previous governments that 
without specific focus on the poorest children within schools, progress across the board 
stalls. The evidence is absolutely clear that the particular disadvantages faced by the poorest 
children drag their actual attainment way below their potential, which is evident from the 
bottom to the top of the attainment distribution, not just in the proportion of children achieving 
the basics: 

•	 Poorer children start school almost a year behind their wealthier peers;62 

•	 Children in the poorest areas of England are less likely to attend the best schools and 
therefore have less access to the best teaching (see Figure 2.7);

•	 Once they are at school, poorer children make less progress than their wealthier peers, in 
effect widening the gap throughout school;63 

•	 Children from wealthy families tend to significantly exceed their potential based on ability, 
whereas children from poorer families too often fail to fulfil their potential, even where 
they demonstrate high ability at a young age. Research for the Commission showed that 
low-ability children from wealthy families are 35 per cent more likely to be high earners as 
adults than high-ability children from poorer families;64    

•	 Even where poorer children can compete on grades, their wealthier peers are likely 
to benefit from other factors that boost their attainment further and unlock wider 
opportunities, including private tutoring and access to extracurricular activities.65  

60  Gorlitz, K., and Gravert, C., The effects of Increasing the Standards of the High School Curriculum on School Dropout, IZA 
DP No 8766, January 2015

61  Speech by the Secretary of State for Education, 18 June 2015, https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/nicky-morgan-
discusses-the-future-of-education-in-england

62  Waldfogel, J., and Washbrook, E., Low Income and Early Cognitive Development in the UK, Sutton Trust, 1 February 2010
63 Department for Education, GCSE and Equivalent Attainment by Pupil Characteristics: 2014
64  Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, New research exposes the ‘glass floor’ in British society, op. cit.
65 Francis, B., Hutchings, M, Parent Power, Sutton Trust, 18 December 2013

https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/nicky-morgan-discusses-the-future-of-education-in-england




Chapter 2: Schools – the engine of social mobility


53

For these reasons, the Government’s attention must remain unwaveringly on both raising 
standards across the board, and on the gap between the richest and the poorest. A move 
away from this approach would adversely affect both practices and outcomes, and the 
system itself would fail to fulfil its potential.

Teacher numbers, deployment and quality

Wider reforms, including those set out above, will not have the desired impact if they are not 
accompanied by a major drive to increase the number of good teachers in the system. There 
are two broad issues that the Government must review and should address as a matter of 
urgency.

System management: While the Commission welcomes the contribution of School Direct, 
the move to more school-based ITT has led to a system of teacher supply that is not social-
mobility friendly. The laissez-faire system of teacher recruitment and retention undoubtedly 
favours the best performers in the most desirable areas, so accentuating the gap between 
the best and the weakest schools. Other than through Teach First, the system in effect 
encourages new and existing teachers seeking employment to go to better-performing 
institutions in better-off areas. This problem could be accentuated by the new deregulated 
approach to ITT, which would appear to incentivise providers to take the earliest rather than 
the best applicants – to avoid their allocations being closed down once the national quota is 
exceeded. While schools as recruiters (through School Direct) in theory have more at stake 
than universities if they select weaker applicants, in a market where there are shortages, they 
may feel that they have little choice – and prioritise quantity of early candidates over quality.66 
How far this plays out, only time will tell. In the Commission’s view, it would be perfectly 
reasonable to create a diverse market for teacher recruitment if the incentives in the system 
were well aligned to the problem. But they are not. 

Creating a 21st-century teaching profession: Teaching is struggling to keep up with 
other graduate career paths in terms of pay, training and career development, with profound 
implications for recruitment and retention. There is evidence that concerns about debt and 
increases in student fees, may shift career patterns away from lower-paid roles, including 
teaching.67 The IFS suggests that, at current ratios, population increases mean there will be 
a need for 480,000 teachers by 2020, 25,000 more than at present.68 Delivering this requires 
schools to keep their best teachers, recruit high-potential new ones and possibly attract 
former teachers back into the fold, while retaining the bandwidth to remove underperformers. 

In its teacher recruitment strategy, the Government needs to move away from its current use 
of large bursaries, which, as described earlier, are an unproven and expensive approach. 
A long-term strategy is required that should aim to remove the current barriers to entry to 
the profession, identify what is required to improve retention, and further identify and trial 
incentives to get the best teachers into challenging schools. Three key ingredients are:

•	 Pay reform: while public sector pay restraint has been an important part of the drive 
to balance the books it has had a significant impact at the bottom of the teacher career 
ladder, with a large and increasing gap between teacher starting salary and the median 
graduate salary offered by top recruiters. Government encouragement for schools to pay 
better teachers more is welcome but, in reality, schools have little flexibility to do anything 
meaningful in this regard. 

•	 Workload: the Government clearly recognises the fact that many teachers are being 
driven, for a variety of reasons, to undertake a wide range of administrative and 

66  Husbands, C., ‘Tragedy of the commons’: How the government abandoned the pursuit of teacher quality, blog post, Institute 
of Education, 16 November 2015, https://ioelondonblog.wordpress.com/2015/11/16/the-tragedy-of-the-commons-how-
the-government-abandoned-the-pursuit-of-teacher-quality/

67 Policy Exchange, Education Manifesto, 2014
68  Institute for Fiscal Studies, http://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/8027

https://ioelondonblog.wordpress.com/2015/11/16/the-tragedy-of-the-commons-how-the-government-abandoned-the-pursuit-of-teacher-quality/
http://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/8027




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


54

preparatory tasks outside of the classroom which may not be adding value to their 
teaching. It clearly does not make for a desirable career if only half of a teacher’s 
working week of 46 hours is spent in the classroom.69 Neither is this good for students. 
Government and Ofsted must continue to clarify what practices are and are not required 
so that the Workload Challenge is not a tokenistic gesture but instead genuinely drives 
teachers and leaders to focus on what is important.

•	 Training and development: Teachers’ probation periods are relatively short – in effect 
just made up of the one newly qualified teacher year which follows the initial teacher 
training year. And evidence suggests that after the first three years, teachers develop very 
little.70 Both of these are perhaps a symptom of systematic under-investment by schools 
in their workforce. Schools are spending just £15 per pupil on the continuing professional 
development of their workforce, over half of which goes on costs to cover teachers while 
they are training. Fewer than one in 10 schools evaluate the impact of their training spend 
on student attainment.71 The Teacher Development Trust reports that most schools use 
training and development to react to changes in government policy and to understand 
how to deal with Ofsted, rather than to develop their workforce.72 

The Government’s recent proposal for a National Teaching Service (NTS) is welcome, and in 
line with proposals made earlier this year by the Commission for a fast stream for teaching. 
There is significant potential for the NTS to help to shape teaching into a more desirable 
career – able to compete with other graduate careers on factors other than pay – and to 
carve out a clearer career structure for ambitious potential recruits and current teachers. 
However, in the context of the entire system, the scale of the NTS is relatively small, with 
proposals for a cumulative total of 1,500 participants by 2020, and it is likely that this kind of 
route will be suitable only for a relatively small proportion of teachers. The problems set out 
earlier in this chapter – of teacher shortages, concerns about quality and the necessity for 
high-quality teachers to deliver on Government’s reforms demand much greater breadth and 
more scale in the Government’s response.

2.5 Conclusion and Recommendations
If the Government is to realise its One Nation ambition, it must raise its sights. A step change 
in ambition is required. Its education objective should be to reduce the attainment gap 
between the most disadvantaged children and everyone else by two-thirds by 2030. This 
would involve poor children elsewhere doing as well as they currently do in Inner London.
Achieving that challenging objective requires significant further reforms.

Recommendation 1: Government should adopt a new zero tolerance 
approach to schools in terminal failure, which fail their pupils and their 
communities for more than five years in a row. 

There are too many schools which have consistently failed their communities, churning out 
some of the poorest results in England year after year – even after various efforts to turn 
things around. These schools are failing all their pupils, but it is the poorest who suffer  
the most.  

69 OECD, New Insights from TALIS 2013: Teaching and Learning in Primary and Upper Secondary Education, 2014
70  Written evidence to the Education Select Committee from Rebecca Allen (Institute of Education) and Simon Burgess (CMPO, 

Bristol University), http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201012/cmselect/cmeduc/1515/1515vw40.htm
71  Teacher Development Trust, CPD in England: The Good, the Bad and the Ugly, https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1

wUrIfDFaTGGUdFe8rCGmo6ZRGgTUMGbxs1EJEhXiw7A/edit?pli=1#slide=id.g24793c2e_0_51, accessed 18 November 


2015


72 Teacher Development Trust, CPD in England: The Good, the Bad and the Ugly, op. cit.

http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201012/cmselect/cmeduc/1515/1515vw40.htm
https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1wUrIfDFaTGGUdFe8rCGmo6ZRGgTUMGbxs1EJEhXiw7A/edit?pli=1#slide=id.g24793c2e_0_51




Chapter 2: Schools – the engine of social mobility


55

The failure framework for schools is complex, inconsistent, drawn out and treats academies 
and maintained schools differently. Understanding it is a test in itself. It serves no-one well. It 
should be replaced as a matter of urgency. The Commission recommends:

•	 A new national framework for terminal failure should apply to all schools equally. Terminal 
failure should be classified as falling below the floor standard for five years in a row, and 
where there have not been substantial changes in a school’s leadership and governance in 
that period.

•	 The leadership and governance of a terminally failed school should be replaced – with an 
expectation that a (new) multi-academy sponsor will be sought.

•	 Given the intensified problems associated with primary school failure, an early warning 
point should be established for primaries, which will encourage schools to voluntarily 
combine with a successful academy group prior to the point of final sanction.   

•	 In addition a prestigious new cadre of Change Leaders – head teachers with previous 
experience of successfully turning around schools – should be created to channel and 
support the best leaders into schools with the greatest turnaround challenges. This 
programme should be modelled on the current Talented Leaders Programme, and include 
a centrally administered salary boost to reflect the challenge of the role, as well as a 
relocation budget and a leadership fund, to be used to bring talented senior leaders into 
the support team and for wider staff development.   

Recommendation 2: The Government should make clear its absolute 
commitment to narrowing the educational attainment gap at a national 
level and confirm it by launching a new set of social mobility measures at 
a national, local authority and school level.

The Commission is extremely concerned by suggestions that the Government might reduce 
its focus on narrowing the attainment gap. Raising standards for everyone is a reasonable 
and ambitious objective but the lesson has been learnt by previous governments that without 
specific focus on the poorest children within schools progress across the board stalls. As 
long as poorer children make far less progress, are less likely to attend good schools, and are 
overtaken academically by wealthier children of lesser ability, the attainment and the progress 
gap remain important indicators of our nation’s success.

The Commission recommends that alongside a relaunch of the pupil premium, a new set of 
One Nation social mobility measures should be introduced to take a more nuanced look at 
attainment in schools and the extent to which poorer children are falling behind. The new data 
should include:

•	 Performance at primary school, secondary school and A level and equivalent study to  
age 19;

•	 A specific focus on the socio-economic gap at the top and the bottom of the attainment 
distribution as well as on achievement at a standard performance threshold and on gaps 
in progress;

•	 Rankings of schools based on similar-schools analysis according to the performance of 
the most disadvantaged students;

•	 A new destinations measure, which relates all students’ outcomes post-18 to their 
secondary school, regardless of whether or not they conducted their post-16 study at the 
same institution. Government should seek to use new data-linking models to build in data 
on the destinations of students who are not in higher education post-19.




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


56

The Government should then enshrine a new objective for all schools to narrow the gap with 
the best similar schools, supplemented by the Education Endowment Foundation’s Families 
of Schools database. This data should be published annually by the Secretary of State for 
Education in the form of a schools social mobility index.

Recommendation 3: Pay and reward for new teachers should be 
overhauled.

There are gaps emerging between teacher pay and that of other top graduate professions 
which have grown significantly over the past decade and which are exacerbating problems 
with recruitment. The majority of recruits commence their teaching career with a year as a 
student (with the additional debt that this entails), rather than with a salary, which doesn’t 
commence until after their teacher training year. In response, the Government is pursuing 
an expensive bursaries policy based on subject specialism and degree grade. There is very 
limited evidence that such a system will work. Despite the bursaries policy, the fee-paying (so 
bursary-eligible) School Direct training route filled only six in 10 of its target places in 2014/15. 
If the Government is to attract the additional 25,000 teachers that the system requires by 
2020 (as well as replacing those that leave the profession each year), it needs to take more 
drastic action. It should do this by: 

First, getting more new teachers into the system. Government should do this by taking 
seriously the gaps emerging between teacher pay and that of other professions, particularly 
at the bottom of the pay scale. While pay restraint has played an important role in the 
Government’s fiscal plans, this risks creating a long-term problem for the profession if the 
gap between teacher pay and other top graduate professions continues to increase. An 
important gesture that could be made here would be to scrap fees for Initial Teacher Training, 
paid in 2014/15 by almost 30,000 trainees. The Institute for Fiscal Studies has highlighted 
that these fees will never be paid off by the average teacher, so the costs of our proposal 
would be minimal. Beyond this, the Government should review entry- level pay to ensure that 
the teaching profession competes with its competitors, including top graduate employers. 
There is also more that could and should be done to clarify and explain the potential career 
paths of teachers, including the many opportunities to take on additional responsibilities and 
leadership positions that can come relatively early in a teachers’ career.

Second, the quid pro quo for increased entry-level wages should be an increase in the 
probation period for teachers from the current one year to three. This should be joined by 
a raising of the bar on the criteria required to be certified as a fully-fledged teacher – an 
approach first proposed by experts in 2012.73 This approach should be developed in line 
with recent proposals for a curriculum for the teacher training period – and would lead to the 
development of a higher-quality training offer with a clear end point at which those who fail 
their training period would not be eligible for continued employment. In addition, the door to 
teaching should be opened to high potential people from a wider range of backgrounds, by 
stopping the current approach which places such heavy emphasis upon degree classification.

Third, to help finance changes in pay, the Government should change track on the large 
bursaries it offers to enter the profession. The evidence for such large financial incentives is 
weak and there is no evidence that candidates with better degrees make better teachers. 
In fact, it is very hard to determine who will be a good teacher before they are practised in 
teaching. 

73  Allen, R., Burgess, S., Reforming Teacher Training to Find the Best Teachers, CMPO, http://www.bristol.ac.uk/media-library/
sites/cmpo/migrated/documents/reformingteachertraining.pdf, 2012

http://www.bristol.ac.uk/media-library/sites/cmpo/migrated/documents/reformingteachertraining.pdf




Chapter 2: Schools – the engine of social mobility


57

Recommendation 4: New incentives should be introduced to get more 
good teachers into the most challenging schools. 

Until the senior leadership grades are reached, teaching is not a mobile profession, with 
many teachers working in the area in which they trained. There are few incentives for new 
and current teachers to move to schools that are weaker or in less desirable areas. The 
Government’s National Teaching Service is very welcome, but does not go far enough in 
addressing the wider lack of incentives in the system to get teachers to the places where 
they are most needed. The move towards more school-led teacher training with no central 
management exacerbates this problem from the start of teachers’ careers. More needs to be 
done to get promising teachers who have proven themselves to the schools and areas that 
most need them. 

The Commission recommends that there should be area-based trials of a number of different 
approaches designed to incentivise teachers to move to schools that are more challenging, 
including:

•	 Committing to write off a proportion of teachers’ student loans for each year that they 
teach at a particularly challenging school. This would form part of a robust performance 
management system, so weaker performers would not get the benefit. For example, a 
teacher has £45,000 of outstanding student loans, accrued over their three-year degree 
and one year of teacher training. If they move to a qualifying school (from a non-qualifying 
school), they could have 10 per cent of their student loan paid off each year (£4,500 in 
year one), subject to meeting agreed performance management standards. The real cost 
of this policy would be low over the long term, particularly since the teacher will also be 
repaying their loan. The real cost would be further reduced because of the likelihood 
that a proportion of the average teachers’ student debt will never be paid off in any case 
(according to the IFS). 

•	 Committing to implement a new help-to-buy scheme exclusively for teachers, targeted at 
first-time buyers moving to eligible areas (where they must also teach) from a non-eligible 
one. Rather than the current general Help to Buy scheme, where recipients can purchase 
new or old properties with a 5% deposit and a government-backed loan, this scheme 
would be more generous – and require the Government to match the teacher’s 5% deposit 
for properties worth up to £250,000. This would be on the condition of a commitment 
to the area of at least five years. The cost to the Government would be relatively low 
compared to incentives such as bursaries. Even at full property value (which few would be 
eligible to borrow against), the Government’s contribution would be £12,500, or £2,500 
per year for each of the five years. This compares with, for example, a bursary of £30,000 
for someone with a first-class degree training to be a physics teacher, who can teach in 
any school with no long-term commitment. 

•	 Taking on board a suggestion made by Policy Exchange, the Government should work 
with areas with new devolved powers, such as Manchester, to support the creation of 
area-wide relocation packages, which might include incentives on housing, training, 
childcare and transport.74 In practice, this could promote collaboration between academy 
chains, individual schools and local government. This approach would also provide an 
excellent opportunity to test and thoroughly evaluate a range of different incentives and 
promote the ownership of teacher recruitment among the areas involved. 

74 Simons, J., Porter, N., and Briggs, A., Education Manifesto, Policy Exchange, 2014




Chapter 3: Improving life chances for non-graduates


59

Chapter 3: Improving life chances for  
non-graduates

•	 There is a ‘16+’ divide between youngsters who go on to university 
and those who do not with non-graduates, who tend to come from low 
income backgrounds, ending up in low-pay, low-progression careers. 

•	 Youth unemployment is falling, but there remains no solution to the 
phenomenon of young people not in education, employment or training 
(NEET).

•	 There is a welcome government focus on improving the life chances of 
non-graduates, with major commitments to expand apprenticeships, 
design new routes to technical jobs and establish a retake system for 
those who did not achieve good English and maths GCSEs.

•	 But more than two in five apprenticeships go to adults over 25 and the 
non-graduate route into employment is complex and fractured. 

•	 The Government should make the non-graduate track into employment 
a priority for reform. 

•	 New apprenticeships should be targeted at higher-level courses 
and there should be at least 30,000 young people starting a higher 
apprenticeship a year by 2020.

•	 A new UCAS-style website should be created for vocational education 
within two years so that young people can see what progression, 
employment and earnings opportunities they are likely to achieve.

•	 Failing further education (FE) colleges should become FE academies 
along the lines of the initial city academies, with an external business 
sponsor.

•	 By 2020, the Government should reduce the NEET rates of 16–18-year-
olds to 3 per cent or less (or around 55,000),1 in line with the best 
performing Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD) countries.

1  This is 3 per cent of the projected 16–18 population in 2020. Office for National Statistics, Young Age Structure Variant – 
England Population Single Year of Age, 2012-based, 2013




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


60

3.1 Introduction
The old 11-plus created a social divide at the end of primary school. It was rightly criticised 
for the advantages it conferred on some children over others.2 Although the old exam is 
mostly gone, its spirit remains. The divide between grammar and secondary modern has 
been replaced by the split between sixth form and further education (FE). The 11-plus has 
become a 16-plus. Young people who end up on the wrong side of the educational divide at 
this point in their lives find it much harder to get on track to good careers.

The public’s views on 16-plus choices tell their own story. Nearly three-quarters of parents 
think vocational education is not worthwhile.3 Of mothers of children born at the turn of the 
century, 96 per cent aspired to university for their children, regardless of their own education.4  
In part, this reflects real difficulties in the FE sector. Despite improvements in many areas, 
last year nearly 390,000 young people were in provision rated inadequate or requires 
improvement by Ofsted, and 16 colleges were unable to improve from the lowest Ofsted 
ratings.5 6 Overall, the non-graduate track continues to be seen, in the words of Baroness 
Wolf, as a “great idea for other people’s children” 7 – yet it remains the mainstream option for 
young adults: the last Census showed that two-thirds of young people in their early 20s did 
not have a degree.8  

For too many, non-graduate routes lead to outcomes that are simply not good enough.  
At the top, non-graduate routes that deliver high-level technical skills and professional jobs 
are very much an exception. In the middle, for the majority on vocational courses, the 
system is complex and confusing, and progression to a good career is far from guaranteed. 
At the bottom of the ladder, hundreds of thousands of young people are neither learning nor 
earning, with no clear policy for re-engaging them. By the age of 19, few that leave school 
with low attainment have secured the basic qualifications employers seek. The contract 
between government and those on the non-graduate route is stretched to breaking point. 
There is no guarantee that if you carry on in vocational study you will have decent outcomes.

There are strong economic reasons for tackling this situation. Persistent levels of job 
vacancies and growing requirements in high-skill industries show that the current skills 
system is not delivering.9 UKCES report that around 22 per cent of all vacancies are due to 
skills shortages.10 At current levels of job vacancies the skill gap might be the cause of over 
150,000 unfilled roles. Year-on-year vacancies are up 5 per cent in construction and scientific 
work to almost 90,000. The demand for more proficient workers cannot be delivered by the 
university sector alone.

There are social justice arguments too. Those from working class backgrounds (NS-SEC 
5-7) are much more likely to go to FE colleges and vocational education. So it is vital that the 
mainstream non-graduate route offers real chances to do well.11 A One Nation society would 
be one where non-graduates had much better opportunities to progress up the social ladder.

2  Hart, A. Moro, M. and Roberts, E.J., Date of Birth, Family Background, and the 11 Plus Exam: Short- and Long-term 
Consequences of the 1944 Secondary Education Reforms in England and Wales, 2012

3 Edge Foundation, Children Labelled ‘Too Clever’ for Vocational Education, 2014
4 Centre for Longitudinal Studies, Millennium Cohort Study Fourth Survey: A User’s Guide to Initial Findings, 2010
5 Ofsted, View Data View, 2015, http://dataview.ofsted.gov.uk/
6 Ofsted, Education and Skills, 2015
7 Wolf, A., Does Education Matter?, 2002
8 Office for National Statistics, Qualifications and Labour Market Participation in England and Wales, 2014
9 Office for National Statistics, Labour Market Statistics, 2015
10 UKCES, UK Commission’s Employer Skills Survey 2013: UK Results, 2014
11 Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, Downward Mobility, Opportunity Hoarding and the ‘Glass Floor’, 2015

http://dataview.ofsted.gov.uk/




Chapter 3: Improving life chances for non-graduates


61

3.2 Does today’s reality meet the One Nation vision?
Of those enrolled in full-time education at age 17, youngsters whose parents were in routine 
occupations are two-and-a-half times as likely to be in an FE college as those whose parents 
were in higher managerial and professional roles.12 Half of young people eligible for free 
school meals who stay in education post-16 progress to FE colleges compared to just over 
one-third (36 per cent) of their peers.13 

However, it would be wrong to assume that the non-graduate route is only for the less able. 
Of those in the top one-fifth of GCSE scores in education at 17, more than 10 per cent go to 
FE colleges.14 In the early 2000s, just over one-quarter of those taking vocational A levels at 
Level 3 had more than 10 GCSE passes.15 

Depending on the route of study, graduate or non-graduate, there is a divide in whether 
young people continue or complete their courses. Those taking courses at FE colleges, 
excluding A levels and A/S levels in 2013 were twice as likely to withdraw as those on A level 
courses (a 10.8 per cent drop out versus 4.8 per cent). Furthermore, those on FE courses 
were 12 times more likely to finish without a qualification than those studying A levels (15.7 
per cent failure rate versus 1.3 per cent A levels without a grade). Although there has been 
improvement in retention over recent years, the cost of this is still substantial: £814 million.16 
Young people and the taxpayer are being let down.

Those who study towards A level or equivalent qualifications at FE colleges are around one-
third less likely to progress to higher education (HE) than those studying in state schools (39 
per cent versus 58 per cent) and less than half as likely to attend one of the most selective 
third of universities (10 per cent versus 26 per cent).17 This reflects both the courses followed 
and type of qualifications achieved.

In general, those that leave FE colleges with A level or equivalent qualifications have positive 
outcomes. In 2013/14, nearly seven in 10 of those leaving FE sector institutions continued 
into further study, training or work.18 However, as currently constituted, FE all too often leads 
to a lower occupational status and lower-paying jobs. Those who follow a non-graduate route 
are more likely to end up in lower socio-economic groupings. They are more likely to work 
in lower-paying industries, with fewer opportunities for progression. Fewer than one in 10 
adults (6.7 per cent) aged 25–49 whose highest qualification is Level 3 (A level equivalent) find 
themselves in higher managerial and professional roles. This compares to three in 10 (28.1 
per cent) of those qualified to Level 4 (the lowest level of HE) and above.19 Non-graduates are 
twice as likely as graduates to work in distribution or hotels: jobs associated with lower pay 
and fewer opportunities to increase salaries.20 Conversely, non-graduates are one-quarter 
less likely to work in banking and finance, and half as likely to work in public administration or 
education – jobs which traditionally have strong chances for progression and high pay.21 

Finally, social background and choices at 16-plus have an impact on whether people are in 
work at all. In 2014, those qualified above degree level were 18.2 per cent – nearly one-fifth – 
more likely to be in work than those without (85 versus 72 per cent). Looking across the UK, 
the biggest gap in the employment rate between those with degrees and those without is in 

12 Meschi, E., Crawford, C. and Vignoles, A., Post-16 Educational Choices and Institutional Value Added at Key Stage 5, 2010
13 Department for Education, Destinations of KS4 and KS5 pupils, 2013 to 2014, 2015
14  Meschi, E., Crawford, C. and Vignoles, A., Post-16 Educational Choices and Institutional Value Added at Key Stage 5, 2010. 

Attending an FE college is not itself proof that an individual will follow a non-graduate route, but they are more likely to
15 Vickers, P. and Bekhradnia, B., Vocational A Levels and University Entry: Is There Parity of Esteem?, 2007
16 Centre for Economic and Social Inclusion, Achievement and Retention in Post-16 Education, 2015
17 Department for Education, Statistics: Destinations of Key Stage 4 and Key Stage 5 Pupils, 2015
18 Department for Education, Statistics: Destinations of Key Stage 4 and Key Stage 5 Pupils, 2015
19 Office for National Statistics, Census 2011 Tables: NS-SEC by Highest Level of Qualification, by Age, 2011
20  Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, Escape Plan: Understanding Who Progresses from Low Pay and Who Gets 

Stuck, 2014
21 Office for National Statistics, Graduates in the Labour Market, 2013




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


62

inner London at 39 per cent – the lowest is in the East Midlands, but it is still more than 10 
per cent (see Figure 3.1).22 

Figure 3.1: Percentage difference in employment rates between non-graduates and 
graduates in Britain in 2014


Percentage points Inner London Outer London North East Scotland West Midlands North West Yorkshire And The Humber Wales East Of England South East South West East Midlands0510152025303540

Source: Data provided by Office for National Statistics, Commission analysis

The effect of the 16-plus reverberates across lives. These sharply different outcomes pose 
fundamental questions about the state of Britain’s vocational education system. Currently, for 
youngsters with options to take either an HE or FE route, the non-graduate track is generally 
less attractive than a university degree.23 For those currently on the vocational track, there 
is a need to improve the quality of vocational education. In the following sections, the three 
challenges to One Nation laid out at the start of this chapter are examined in detail. 

First, we assess the lack of non-graduate options with the greatest potential for social 
mobility: apprenticeships. Second, we examine the extent to which the majority of ‘quality’ 
non-graduate routes offer chances for progression to decent jobs and pay. Third, we consider 
the absence of a national solution to youth disengagement and low attainment. If we are to 
achieve a high-functioning, British non-graduate system, these are the barriers that must be 
overcome.

22 Commission analysis of Labour Force Survey data, provided by the Office for National Statistics
23 Sutton Trust, Levels of Success: The Potential of UK Apprenticeships, 2015




Chapter 3: Improving life chances for non-graduates


63

Problem 1: Too few non-graduate routes deliver good life chances.

The One Nation challenge of expanding high-quality, non-graduate routes is not new. It 
has been recognised for half a century that those who fall between the disengaged not in 
education, employment or training (NEET), and the university track elite categories, are losing 
out. A 1959 government report on the education of 15–18-year-olds concluded:

In the middle… the deficiencies [of the educational offer], relatively to the need, are 
greatest of all, for it is in this “second quartile” that the richest vein of untapped human 
resources lies, which will have to be exploited if this country is to keep a place among 
the nations that are in the van of spiritual and material progress.24 

The conclusion is as valid in this century as it was in the last. The majority of those on the 
non-graduate track are neither disengaged nor in remedial study, but neither are they offered 
vocational options that provide a path to top employment opportunities. There is huge 
potential for the sector to do more. Consider two simple facts. Demand from youngsters 
for apprenticeships far outstrips supply. In 2014/15, just over 190,000 apprenticeship 
vacancies were posted, compared to well over 1.5 million applications: a ratio of more than 
8:1.25 Businesses also report major skill gaps: around three in 10 vacancies are reported 
to be hard to fill because of skill gaps, most likely in skilled trades – the area where many 
apprenticeships focus.26 

Unlike in HE, where government took the bold step to remove any cap on university places, 
currently the best vocational options are limited. In 2014 only 6.5 per cent of 16–18-year-
olds were on an apprenticeship.27 For Higher Apprenticeships, which at Level 5 offer better 
lifetime earnings than undergraduate degrees from all universities (bar the most selective), the 
opportunities are similarly limited.28 In 2013/14, only 2,900 people aged 19–24 started Higher 
Apprenticeships, compared to nearly 170,000 first-year undergraduate degree starts in the 
same age range. This is a ratio of nearly 60:1.29 30 There is no way that the non-graduate 
route can become attractive for young people when it offers so few top opportunities.

Of course, it is welcome that apprenticeship numbers are set to rise, but the apprenticeships 
that young people take are mostly below the skill level that one would expect or want. If 
16–19-year-olds progress in line with the English curriculum, they should have achieved 
Level 2 (five GCSEs at A*–C) by 16, and ideally be studying at Level 3 (A level equivalent) 
aged 16–18. Students aged 19–24 should be aiming for Level 4 or above. However, in 2014, 
seven out of 10 under-19s (the age definition used in apprenticeship statistics) who started 
apprenticeships were working towards a GCSE equivalent (Level 2) qualification, which offer 
only slightly better earnings than secondary school qualifications alone.31 Nearly all 19–24 
apprenticeship starts were at Level 3 or below (97 per cent). In comparison, 19–24-year-
olds who start an honours degree are progressing towards Level 6. Apprenticeships ask less 
of young people than those on the academic track. This reinforces the attitude that if you 
can, you do A levels and if you can’t, you take the other route. The 16-plus has driven down 
ambitions and opportunity for the majority of young people.

Widespread concerns about the quality of apprenticeships compound the general lack of 
stretch that apprenticeships provide. Recent inspections by Ofsted paint a worrying picture. It 
finds apprentices completing their course by making coffee, serving sandwiches or cleaning 
floors, adding little value and underlining the disconnect between the current national skill 

24 Ministry of Education, 15 to 18, 1959
25 Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, FE Data Library: Apprenticeship Vacancies, 2015
26 UK Commission for Employment and Skills, UK Commission’s Employer Skills Survey 2013: UK Results, 2014
27 Department for Education, Participation in Education, Training and Employment: Age 16 to 18, 2015
28 Sutton Trust, Levels of Success: The Potential of UK Apprenticeships, 2015
29  Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Further Education and Skills: Statistical First Release – Learner Participation, 

Outcomes and Level of Highest Qualification Held, 2015
30 UCAS, End of Cycle Report 2014, 2015
31 Sutton Trust, Levels of Success: The Potential of UK Apprenticeships, 2015




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


64

gaps and training provided. Even worse, Ofsted found that some learners were not even 
aware that they were on an apprenticeship. Successful apprenticeships were identified in 
sectors more traditionally associated with the model: engineering and construction. It is 
beyond bizarre when people who, as far as they are concerned are doing their day job, are 
counted as apprenticeship successes.32 The challenges identified need urgent remedy, or a 
headline policy risks becoming tainted by its failing parts.

What is more, too few young people start apprenticeships, and the number has declined over 
recent years. The total number of apprenticeship starts by people under 19 in 2015 is up on 
the previous year – but over 5,000 fewer than in 2010/11 or 2011/12. For the 19–24 group, 
total starts are less than any year since 2011. Much of the growth in apprenticeships over 
the last Parliament was due to apprenticeship starts by over-25s. These increased by one-
quarter (or almost 50,000) between 2011 and 2012, when previous adult training schemes 
were reclassified as apprenticeships. After a dip in 2014, apprenticeships for over-25s are on 
the rise again, making up more than two in five of all starts in 2015.33 There is a social mobility 
problem when fewer young people are on the best non-graduate routes. There is also a 
problem with the brand ‘apprenticeship’ when so many of those on it are adults over the age 
of 25 already in work rather than young people being introduced to a trade.

Apprenticeships: fewer opportunities for the young?

Since 2010 the age profile of people starting apprenticeships has altered dramatically. 
In 2010 the majority of starts were young people, with fewer than one in five over-25s 
starting an apprenticeship. Since then, the age profile has been turned on its head. The 
proportion of apprenticeship starts by over-25s has more than doubled, and under-19s 
are now the fewest (Figure 3.2).

 Figure 3.2: Apprenticeship starts by age, 2009/10 to 2014/15


0

50,000

100,000

150,000

200,000

250,000

2009/10 2010/11 2011/12 2012/13 2013/14 2014/15

Under 19 19–24 25+



2010

<19: 42% of starts
19–24: 41% of starts
25+: 17% of starts



2015

25+: 43% of starts

19–24: 32% of starts
<19: 25% of starts

 Source: Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Further Education and Skills: Statistical First Release, 2015

32  Ofsted, Apprenticeships: Developing Skills for Future Prosperity: How Well Do Apprenticeships Meet the Needs of Young 
People, Their Employers and the Economy?, 2015

33  The dip in 25+ apprenticeship starts was possibly due to a requirement for adults to take out loans for some 24+ 
apprenticeships, a policy later reversed




Chapter 3: Improving life chances for non-graduates


65

Despite the high return to apprenticeships on average, there are big differences depending on 
gender and the sector in which an apprenticeship is taken. The earnings premium for a Level 
3 apprenticeship compared to those who remain at Level 2 is more than 50 per cent greater 
for men than women.34 This is likely driven by the sector in which people choose to take 
apprenticeships. Apprenticeships at Level 2 and 3 lead to the greatest increase in earnings 
in construction and planning, and the lowest increase in health, public services and care.35 
The former are more likely to be chosen by men and the latter by women. Of engineering 
apprenticeships, 96 per cent are male.36 Young people are not making the best choices, 
which suggests the advice being given to them is poor.

As access to better apprenticeships is imbalanced by gender, neither is access to the best 
apprenticeship frameworks balanced across the country. Last year there were twice the 
number of Higher Apprenticeship starts in the North West, compared to the East Midlands 
or the North East.37 More generally, there is a national skew away from apprenticeships in 
science, technology, engineering and maths (STEM), which can carry higher rewards, to 
other subject areas.38 In London there are more than five non-STEM starts for every STEM 
apprenticeship. In the South East, South West and West Midlands the ratio is 3:1 – better, but 
still poor.39 

In short, there are too few top apprenticeship opportunities, and they are not shared fairly. 
The lack of top-end, non-graduate options reduces the attractiveness of the route, despite 
some leading to better earnings than university degrees. So most of the brightest young 
people simply opt out of this route altogether. Young people who do well in exams at the 
point of the 16-plus choose the A level option because they believe it is better. This is 
reinforced by teachers, parents and careers advisers. It has led to the current situation where 
the non-graduate track is perceived as a route for those who are less capable.

Similarly, the lack of top non-graduate options leads employers, especially in many 
professional occupations, to prefer graduates. In most circumstances, non-graduate 
certificates are not competitive with degrees. Many professional occupations have extremely 
limited or no non-graduate entry routes. It is hardly surprising that parents with higher levels 
of qualification take a dimmer view of vocational education than higher education, and advise 
their children accordingly.40 The consequence is to reinforce the class divide in post-16 
education where children from better-off backgrounds tend to go to HE, while those from 
poorer backgrounds tend to be in vocational education.

Problem 2: The mainstream non-graduate track lacks coherence and 
does not prioritise career progression.

The characteristics of the graduate route which make it easy to understand and navigate are 
lacking in the non-graduate track.

First, university has a national admissions process. The UCAS system provides a 
straightforward gateway by which a young person can apply to a number of institutions 
for their subject of choice. The non-graduate route has no single admissions process, 
and certainly no national arrangements. Young people not heading to university will not be 

34  Department for Education and Skills, Research Report 834: A Cost–Benefit Analysis of Apprenticeships and Other Vocational 
Qualifications, 2007

35  Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Research Paper 105: Review of the Economic Benefits of Training and 
Qualifications, as Shown by Research Based on Cross-Sectional and Administrative Data, 2013

36 Sutton Trust, Levels of Success: The Potential of UK Apprenticeships, 2015
37 Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Apprenticeships by Geography, Age and Level 2005/6 to 2014/15, 2015
38 STEM apprenticeship sectors are science and mathematics, ICT, engineering and construction and planning 
39  Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Apprenticeships by Geography and Sector Subject Area: Starts 2005/6 to 

2014/15, 2015
40  City and Guilds Centre for Skills Development, New Directions: Young Peoples’ and Parents’ Views of Vocational Education 

and Careers Guidance, 2011




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


66

automatically able to access the best options nationally, and will end up constrained by what 
local providers offer and what the local labour market needs.

Second, universities have a place in the public consciousness. Providers of non-graduate 
options do not. There are numerous kinds of FE college, 14–18 institution, schools and 
private providers where non-graduate training can take place. Some areas have a range of 
choices, and others few. It is not straightforward for a young person to understand which 
institution is good and which should be avoided. Defaulting to the nearest option may not be 
the best, but it may not be at all easy to work out where a better option lies. The university 
degree is an unambiguous qualification. If a student achieves a degree such as law, it signals 
certain skills and is common currency in the jobs market. However, there is no equivalent 
for the non-graduate route. There are four documents totalling 75 pages that list all of the 
current technical and vocational qualifications for young people at Levels 2 and 3, and these 
documents only relate to courses recognised in performance tables: there are still nearly 
16,000 qualifications available for 16–19-year-olds.41 The performance table simplification 
is significant but still a maze, especially in relation to courses outside the science and 
technology subjects which may have multiple and similar options.42 

Third, the vocational courses that young people (16–18) take offer less attractive routes 
into the world of work or chances to transfer from the non-graduate to the university track. 
Of most popular vocational Level 3 courses taken up in 2014, sports studies and business 
studies made up more than one-fifth of the total.43 These qualifications provide ways into 
work and HE, but will be less likely to unlock places at top universities or in top professional 
firms. A student gaining CDD at A level is still more likely to go to university than a student 
gaining three distinctions in Level 3 BTEC courses.44 The best results in vocational courses, 
especially if outside areas where skills are in demand such as engineering and construction, 
do not match up in terms of progression.

For those over 19, health and social care is the largest category of courses taken – one-third 
of the total.45 Around half of the top category is in social care: a sector which has been in 
focus for poor pay and limited progression opportunities, driven by expanding demand and 
tight local government finances.46 Sectors with greater earning potential, engineering and 
construction, make up less than 5 per cent of the top 100 Level 3 vocational qualifications by 
certificates awarded (see Figure 3.3).47 48 Yet presently there are around 25,000 vacancies in 
construction.49 

41  Department for Education, Section 96 – Qualifications lists just short of 16,000 qualifications: http://www.education.gov.uk/
section96/download.shtml

42  Department for Education, Technical and Vocational Qualifications for 14- to 19-year-olds, 2015. For example, in the 
performance tables there are two Level 3 qualifications for mechanical engineering, one for medical services and three for 
heavy vehicle repair. On the other hand, there are eight for horse management, 13 for hairdressing and 16 for beauty

43 Department for Education, A level and Other Level 3 Results: 2013 to 2014 (Revised), 2015
44  Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE), Young Participation in Higher Education: A Levels and Similar 

Qualifications, 2015
45  First Aid qualifications make up around half of the total. If these are discounted, on the basis of often being a mandatory part 

of a job, the category would be roughly joint first
46 Resolution Foundation, As If We Cared: The Costs and Benefits of a Living Wage for Social Care Workers, 2015
47 Ofqual, Vocational Qualifications Dataset: Dataset 2009 to Present – England, Wales and Northern Ireland, 2015
48 National Foundation for Educational Research, A Literature Review of the Value of Vocational Qualifications, 2015
49 Office for National Statistics, Labour Market Statistics, Table VACS02 – Vacancies by Industry, 2015

http://www.education.gov.uk/section96/download.shtml




Chapter 3: Improving life chances for non-graduates


67

Figure 3.3: Top 100 Level 3 vocational courses (by certificates awarded in 2014–15) by 
subject area


Percentage by certificates Health, public service, care Arts, media Preparation for life and work Business Leisure and travel Scien

ce IC


TEngineering Retail, commercial Construction Education Language, literature, culture05101520253035

Source: Deparment for Business Innovation and Skills, Adult Further Education Learners: Destina-tion Rates for National 
Qualifications – Experimental Data, 2014. 
Source: Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Adult Further Education Learners: Destination Rates for National 
Qualifications – Experimental Data, 2014

The future of young people who do not go to university is as important as those who do. 
However, vocational education is not currently structured in a way that maximises its social 
mobility potential. Compared to the relatively coherent university system, the FE system offers 
a fragmented application process, a proliferation of institutions with no clear signal of quality, 
and a range of qualifications with different value to different employers. This leads to some 
areas where young people are much less likely to attain benchmark Level 3 qualifications 
by 19 (see Figure 3.4).This poses a fundamental challenge to closing the opportunity gap 
between the university and the non-graduate track.




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


68

Figure 3.4: Social mobility cold spots: English local authority districts with the fewest 
poor (free school meal-eligible) 19-year-olds qualified to Level 3

Source: Department for Education, Level 2 and 3 Attainment by young people aged 19 in 2014, 2015

Devon

Cumbria



Kent


Norfolk

Essex

Suffolk

North Yorkshire

Lincolnshire

Cornwall

Dorset

Wiltshire

Somerset
Hampshire

Northumberland

Shropshire

Durham

Lancashire

Surrey

Derbyshire


O

xfordshire



Glou

ceste

rshire

West Sussex

Herefordshire

East Sussex

Leeds

Staffordshire

Cambridgeshire

Leice
sters



hire Warwickshire Northamptonshire Nottinghamshire Hertfordshire

Worcestershire

East Riding
of Yorkshire

Buckingham
shire


Cheshire East


Bedford



York Doncaster

Rutland


Kirklees West

Berkshire


North Lincolns




hire


Bradford

Sheffield

Barnsley

Cheshire
West &
Chester

Wakefield


Central Bedfordshire

Calderdale

Isle of
Wight

Swindon

Rotherham

Peterborough

Medway


North Somerset

South
Gloucs

Milton
Keynes

Thurrock

Telford &
Wrekin

Derby

Poole

Bath & NE
Somerset

Torbay
Plymouth

North East
Lincolnshire

Leicester

Luton

Nottingham

Stoke-


on-

Trent

Brighton & Hove
Southampton

Kingston
upon Hull

Portsmouth

Blackpool

Southend on SeaBristol

Bournemouth



Kent

Surrey

Essex

Bromley

Hertfordshire

Havering

Barnet

Enfield


Bexley

Ealing

Brent

Harrow

Sutton

Merton


Hillingdon Croydon Hounslow

Thurrock


Redbridge

Greenw


ich

Newham


Lew

isham

Harin


gey Lambeth

Wandsworth S


outhwark

Camden


Waltham Forest Richmondupon Thames

Hackney

Westminster

Islington


Kingstonupon Thames Barking &Dagenham

Tower
Hamlets


Hamm &


 Fulham

Kens & Chelsea



City


Surrey

Wokingham

Oxfordshire

Hampshire

Buckinghamshire

Windsor & Maidenhead


Bracknell Forest

Reading

Slough

Warwickshire

Solihull

Birmingham

Staffordshire

Walsall

Dudley

Worcestershire

Coventry


Sandwell

Leicestershire

Wolver-
hampton

Lancashire

Wigan

Wirral

Calderdale

Bolton

Cheshire East

Oldham


Rochdale

Sefton



Bury Derb

yshire


Warrington


St Helens

Salford


Trafford

Stockp


ort

Halton

Liverpool

Tameside


Manchester Knowsley


Blackburn


with


Darwen

Cheshire West & Chester

Durham

North Yorkshire

Darlington

Gateshead


Sunderland Stockton-on-Tees


Hartlepool

NorthTyneside
South

Tyneside

Middles-
brough

Redcar &
Cleveland

Newcastle
upon Tyne

Isles of
Scilly

Proportion qualified
to Level 3 

Best 20%

Worst 20%

Data not available

Proportion qualified 
to Level 3




Chapter 3: Improving life chances for non-graduates


69

Problem 3: There is no solution to chronic levels of youth unemployment 
and the NEET phenomenon.

In 2014 around 10,000 school-leavers achieved no GCSEs at all: more than double the figure 
in 2012/13 and the highest number since 2008.50 51 The size of the group with no GCSEs is 
the equivalent of more than 60 schools’ year 11 cohort.52 In the 10 lowest performing local 
authorities, on average more than 3 per cent of their pupils achieve no passes at GCSE (see 
Table 3.1). Part of the reason for the increase in those with no passes has been the removal 
of qualifications perceived as lower value from the GCSE league tables. This reform, while 
understandable, has not been accompanied by the right support to give all young people the 
chance to succeed.

Table 3.1: Local authorities with the highest proportion of pupils achieving no passes  
at GCSE

Local authority % of pupils achieving no GCSE passes

Knowsley 6.7

Leicester 3.9

Wandsworth 3.8

Wolverhampton 3.7

Middlesbrough 3.5

Manchester 3.2

Stoke-on-Trent 3.1

Haringey 3.0

Newcastle upon Tyne 2.9

Redcar and Cleveland 2.9

Source: Department for Education, GCSE and Equivalent Results in England 2013/14: Subject and Local Authority Tables, 2015.
Data relates to state-funded schools only

Being qualified to less than Level 2 (achieving less than five GCSEs at grade A*–C) has a 
damaging effect on employment. On average, only half of 21–24-year-olds with one to four 
GCSEs or no qualifications were employed at the time of the last census, compared to an 
employment rate of more than 70 per cent for those with Level 2.53 Yet those who did not 
get good GCSEs at 16 and try for their Level 2 qualifications in their later teens tend not to 
make good progress. Of those who have not achieved Level 2 qualifications including English 
and maths by 16, only 20 per cent achieve this by 19. In other words, around eight out of 
10 young people who did not get a C in GCSE English and maths by 16 still had not got 
this mark of employability by the end of their time in compulsory education.54 Increasing the 
proportion of young people that reach this level will increase their employability, boost their 
potential to progress to higher levels of study and fill skill gaps in the economy.

The outlook for those who become unemployed or NEET after leaving school remains poor. 
Despite the proportion of 16–24 NEETs with no qualifications almost halving since 2005 (28 
versus 16 per cent), the overall number of 16–24 NEETs is only 10,000 less (780,000 versus 
770,000), suggesting a major structural challenge.55 Although young NEET numbers are the 

50 Department for Education, GCSE and Equivalent Results in England 2013/14, 2015. Data for all state-funded schools
51  Department for Education, Review of Vocational Education: The Wolf Report, 2011.The number of pupils obtaining no 

GCSEs has been driven up by changes to GCSE rules which removed courses deemed to be of lower quality from the 
statistics. This change is referred to as the ‘Wolf Rules’, as it arises from the 2011 Wolf Report of Vocational Education

52  Department for Education, Schools, Pupils and Their Characteristics, 2015. In 2015 there were 3,381 state-funded 
secondary schools, 543,526 pupils in year 11. An average year 11 had 161 pupils

53 Office for National Statistics, Qualifications and Labour Market Participation in England and Wales, 2014
54  Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Level 2 and 3 Attainment by Young People Aged 19 in 2014, Table 14b, 



2015

55  Office for National Statistics, Highest Attained Qualification for Those Who are NEET (Not in Employment, Education or 

Training) in England as a Percentage of all NEETs, 2015




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


70

lowest ever recorded, 140,000 16–18-year-olds are still currently disengaged from learning 
or earning.56 This is progress from a high of more than 200,000 in 2008, but a long way from 
success. In fact, when compared to other countries the UK comes close to the bottom of 
the table. The five OECD members with lowest levels of 15–19-year-old NEETs have rates 
around 3 per cent – the UK had a rate of 8.4 per cent at the point of comparison. Only seven 
countries do worse, including Greece, Spain and Turkey, which have faced far longer and 
deeper youth employment crises than Britain.57 On one estimate, the lifetime costs of a young 
person being NEET is around £56,00058 – around £7.8 billion for the total group. Successful 
schemes to tackle the NEET problem are needed, and they pay for themselves. 

For the young adult group, around 430,000 18–24-year-olds who are not in full-time 
education are unemployed, above the pre-recession levels of early 2008 (see Figure 3.5).59 
The progress in reducing youth unemployment from the highs of more than 1 million during 
the recession has been substantial. Yet for a large number of young people, the economic 
recovery has still not produced a social recovery.

Figure 3.5: Employment rates of 18–24-year-olds and 16–17-year-olds not in full-time 
education and in full-time education (FTE)


1020304050607080199219931994199519961997199819992000200120022003200420052006200720082009201020112012201320142015

18–24 in FTE 18–24 not in FTE 16–17 in FTE 16–17 not in FTE


Percentage


Source: Office for National Statistics, Labour Market Statistics, 2015 

Note: 18–24-year-olds not in study are in employment at pre-recession rates. The 16–17-year-old group is still more likely to be 
out of work than in 2008

The unemployment challenge applies to older non-graduates as well as those under the 
age of 25. Non-graduates aged 21–30 felt the sharpest rise in unemployment following the 
recession. In 2012 the unemployment rate of young non-graduates was 80 per cent higher 
than that of recent graduates (15 per cent versus 8 per cent).60 The wages of people born 
in 1983 are now the same as the wages that those born 15 years earlier experienced at the 
same age, despite significant economic growth (see Figure 3.6). The growth in earnings of 
the 1983 cohort came to a halt as GDP shrunk in 2008/09.61 The recession had a profound 
impact on young people’s life chances – and more so for those without a degree.

56 Department for Education, Participation in Education, Training and Employment: Age 16 to 18, 2015
57  OECD, Education at a Glance: Percentage of 15–29-year-olds in Education/Not in Education, by Work Status, Age Group 

and Gender, 2015
58 University of York, Estimating the Lifetime Cost of NEET: 16–18 Year Olds Not in Education, Employment or Training, 2010
59 Office for National Statistics, Unemployment by Age and Duration (Seasonally Adjusted), 2015
60 Office for National Statistics, Graduates in the Labour Market, 2013
61 Gregg, P., Making Steady Progress: Policies to Help Long-term Earnings Growth, 2015




Chapter 3: Improving life chances for non-graduates


71

Figure 3.6: Comparison of the weekly earnings of cohorts of young people born 
between the 1960s and 1980s


250300350400450500550


22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40


Real weekly earnings (CPI)Age

1964 Cohort 1968 Cohort 1973 Cohort 1978 Cohort 1983 Cohort

Source: Gregg, P. Making steady progress: policies to help long-term earnings growth, 2015.Source: P. Gregg, Making Steady Progress: Policies to Help Long-term Earnings Growth, 2015

The introduction of the National Living Wage may also have unforeseen consequences for 
young people. With the higher National Living Wage rate starting for those aged 25 and over, 
there will be an incentive for employers to create roles for young people, but not necessarily 
with skill and progression opportunities: once a person reaches the age of 25 some may seek 
to replace these workers with younger, cheaper, staff. As the policy is phased in there will be 
a need for government to monitor the jobs market effect, to ensure that a drive to increase 
opportunity for some does not increase disadvantage for others.

Although youth unemployment continues to decline in the UK as a whole, in some areas it 
remains high and is rising. In the North East and Wales more than two in 10 16–24-year-
olds are unemployed. Over the last year (comparing May–July 2014 with May–July 2015), 
the proportion of unemployed young people has increased in three regions: by 14 per cent 
in Wales, 9 per cent in the West Midlands and 8 per cent in London (see Figure 3.7).62 The 
regional NEET challenge mirrors the unemployment problem. In the North East, where youth 
unemployment is worst, on average 7 per cent of 16–18-year-olds are NEET. In Stockton-on-
Tees almost one in 10 (9 per cent) young people are NEET: the highest level in the country.63 
This continuing level of disengagement is unacceptable.

62  Office for National Statistics, Regional Labour Market Statistics: Regional Unemployment by Age (Experimental Statistics), 


2015


63 Department for Education, 2014 Local Authority NEET Figures, 2015




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


72

Figure 3.7: Change in rate of 16-24 unemployment by region: May–July 2014 versus  
May–July 2015


16–24 percentage-20-15-10-5051015North East Scotland West Midlands North West Yorkshire and The Humber East of England Wales London South East South West East Midlands 

Source: Office for National Statistics, Regional Labour Market Statistics: Regional Unemployment by Age (Experimental 
Statistics), 2015

3.3 How are these problems being addressed?
In relation to apprenticeships, the target for 3 million starts by 2020 is core to the 
Government’s agenda. Apprenticeship growth is welcome: the contribution of vocational skills 
to productivity is greater where it is embedded in an apprenticeship system – as in Denmark, 
Germany and the Netherlands, for example.64 Of all vocational routes, apprenticeships 
consistently bring higher returns for individuals and the wider economy than other 
qualifications.65 Nonetheless, as assessed below, growth in apprenticeship numbers does 
not automatically translate into more social opportunity. In addition, by 2017 the Government 
plans for all new apprenticeships to be on revised frameworks that have been designed by 
the employers that will use them. In theory, this employer buy-in should put the scheme on 
a more sustainable and long-term footing, and is based on trailblazer schemes that have 
been rolled out over the past five years. On top of the plans to grow numbers, Degree 
Apprenticeships were introduced in September 2015, many in ICT subjects, as part of a drive 
to expand higher-skill routes.66 To fund this expansion the Government has announced a levy 
of 0.5 per cent of firms’ paybill if it is greater than £3 million, which will raise £3 billion a year 
by 2020.67 Finally, legislation is being developed to restrict use of the term ‘apprenticeship’ in 
law to government-approved schemes.

64  European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training, Macroeconomic Benefits of Vocational Education and Training, 


2014


65 Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Measuring the Net Present Value of Further Education in England, 2015
66  The Tech Partnership, Degree Apprenticeships, https://www.thetechpartnership.com/recruit-and-train/degree-apprenticeships/
67  Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Apprenticeships Levy: Employer Owned Apprenticeship Training – 

Government Response, 2015

https://www.thetechpartnership.com/recruit-and-train/degree-apprenticeships/




Chapter 3: Improving life chances for non-graduates


73

In relation to vocational education and training in general, there is substantial policy activity. 
For 16–19-year-olds in FE, per-pupil funding has been protected in cash terms to 2020 which 
equates to a real terms cut, depending on inflation. Sixth-form colleges have been given the 
green light to become academies, thereby allowing them to avoid VAT charges they currently 
face.68 Responding to the need to improve training in higher technical skills (at Levels 4 
and 5), the Government has put in place plans for a new generation of national colleges – 
such as the College for High Speed 2, which will operate from Birmingham and Doncaster. 
Other new institutions are focused on technical training, such as university technical 
colleges; while others provide 14–18 routes that span academic and vocational courses 
such as careers colleges; and yet others provide a mix of work experience and classroom 
study, such as studio schools. Further, reforms to technical and professional education 
have been announced to create around 20 new routes to employment through study and 
apprenticeship, designed by employers and overseen by an expert panel.69 To fund some of 
these courses, 19–23-year-olds will be able to take out loans to fund study at Level 3 or 4, 
and anyone over 19 can take out loans for FE study at Level 5 or 6.70 

In relation to reducing NEET numbers, the Government has a package of measures planned 
to ensure that young people are in work. Jobcentre Plus is working with schools to provide 
advice to 16- and 17-year-olds. Plans are in development to add conditions to youth 
benefits, referred to by some as ‘earn or learn’, making participation in an apprenticeship or 
community activity mandatory. Traineeships have been introduced as programmes to prepare 
for work or an apprenticeship. In 2014/15 only 58 per cent of traineeships were completed – 
but of those that were finished, on average just over half progressed to a job, apprenticeship 
or other training.71 These decent early results suggest that the model has potential, but needs 
further refinement to reach more young people and ensure good outcomes. There are also 
broad commitments for a new social impact bond (a payment-by-results scheme) to target 
youth unemployment.

Spanning the challenges of youth unemployment and the vocational route is the fledgling 
policy to drive up retakes of GCSEs. The Government has identified the premium that 
employers put on these qualifications, especially in English and maths, and requires those 
who fail to secure a C in these subjects by 16 to work towards achieving these qualifications 
as part of their study programme. Institutions that do not put such students on approved 
English and maths courses will have their funding reduced.72 Recent data suggests some 
impact of the 2014 requirements. The most significant increases are in English retakes and 
successes, up by half and three-quarters respectively, although this may have been partly 
caused by a rise in those with grade D English entering for these exams. Despite this initial 
sign of progress, there remains a way to go. Three out of four of those who did not get a 
GCSE C in English, and four out of five of those without GCSE maths, were not retaking in 
2014. Building a proper retake system is necessary, but it appears some way off.73 

68 HM Treasury, Spending Review and Autumn Statement 2015, 2015
69 Department for Education, Technical and Professional Education Revolution Continues, 2015
70 HM Treasury, Spending Review and Autumn Statement 2015, 2015
71 Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Further Education and Skills Statistical First Release, 2015
72 Education Funding Agency, 16 to 19 funding: Maths and English Condition of Funding, 2015
73  Department for Education, Level 1 and 2 Attainment in English and Maths by Students Aged 16–18: Academic Year 

2013/14, 2015




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


74

3.4 How can more progress be made?
On the trajectory of current policy and wider trends there are a number of areas of continued 
concern.

First, the Government’s main target for vocational education – the creation of 3 million 
apprenticeships by 2020 – could be met without substantially increasing opportunities 
for young people. Increasing the number of over-25 apprenticeships would be the easy 
option. They already make up a large proportion of apprenticeship starts – as much as 45 
per cent in recent years – and are a low-risk choice for firms, as often the candidates have 
been in their current role for many months. One government report suggests that seven 
out of 10 adult apprenticeships have already been working with a company for at least a 
year before they start their apprentice programme.74 It would be the path of least resistance 
for firms if they want to reinvest their apprenticeship levy contribution on training existing 
staff. If apprenticeships are to become a byword for opportunity and social mobility, the real 
challenge is to make sure that the target and the incentives presented by the levy are used to 
increase the number of young people on high-quality apprenticeships at Level 3 and above.

There is a further risk that the 3 million target puts too much focus on the creation of 
apprenticeships, and not enough on their completion. The target is based on apprenticeship 
starts, yet between 2011/12 and 2013/14 apprenticeship success dropped by nearly 7 per 
cent in just two years (from 74 per cent to 69 per cent).75 On a broad calculation, should 
successes continue to fall, 3 million apprenticeship starts would amount to just fewer than 
2 million apprenticeship successes. The risk is that a sensible objective – more opportunity 
through the vocational route – loses out to a numerical target. More clarity is needed on how 
the Government will work with firms and training providers to ensure that more of those that 
start apprenticeships actually finish them.

Working futures? Scenarios for apprenticeship growth

The Government faces a range of challenges in relation to growing apprenticeship 
numbers:

•	 Meeting its target of 3 million apprenticeship starts by 2020;

•	 Tackling the decline in youth apprenticeship starts;

•	 Reversing the decline in the apprenticeship success rate.

The Government’s 3 million apprenticeship starts target appears to be stretching. 
Figure 3.8 shows three scenarios of growth for apprenticeship starts based on recent 
trends. A 3 per cent growth rate (the average between 2011/12 and 2014/15) misses 
the target by 300,000. An ambitious 6 per cent growth scenario still undershoots by 
around 50,000. A lower rate of 1.5 per cent misses the target by 400,000.

74 Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Prior Qualifications of Adult Apprentices 2012/13, 2014
75  Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Further Education and Skills Statistical First Release, 2015.




Chapter 3: Improving life chances for non-graduates


75

 Figure 3.8: Three scenarios of apprenticeship growth 2015–20

250,000

300,000

350,000

400,000

450,000

500,000

550,000

600,000

650,000

700,000

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Starts to date 3% growth (current trend) 6% growth 1.5% growth


6% grow


th: 2
.95 m

illion
 star

ts 20


15–20

3% gro
wth: 2.7

 million
 starts 2

015–20

1.5% growth 2.6
 million starts 201



5–20Starts per year


   Source: Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Further Education and Skills: Statistical First Release, 2015 
(Commission projections)

Yet even if the target is met, urgent action is required to prevent young people missing 
out (see Figure 3.9). Since 2011/12 the growth in numbers of apprenticeship starts 
has differed significantly between age groups. Starts by the 25+ group have grown on 
average by 7 per cent a year, the 19–24 group by 3 per cent and the under-19s by  
-1 per cent. Taking these trends and projecting them forwards implies the gap in starts 
between age groups may widen.

  Figure 3.9: Trends of apprenticeship starts per year by age group


0

50,000

100,000

150,000

200,000

250,000

300,000

350,000

Over 25 19–24 Under 19


Over 25


s: Av


erag


e inc


reas


e of 


7% a year

19–24s: Averag
e increase of 3%

 a year

Under 19s: Average decrease of -1% a year

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019


Starts per year




2020


  Source: Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Further Education and Skills: Statistical First Release, 2015 
(Commission projections)




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


76

Perhaps as few as three in five of all apprenticeships started between 2015 and 2020 
will result in successful completion (see Figure 3.10). Today, fewer than seven in 10 of 
starters have completed their apprenticeships by the target date. This rate declined by 
3.4 per cent a year between 2011/12 and 2013/14. Should this trend continue, even if 
numbers of starts increase by 3 per cent a year (the current trend), growth will be offset 
by higher proportions of people starting but not finishing their apprenticeship.

 Figure 3.10: Trends in apprenticeship success rates, 2015–20

250,000

300,000

350,000

400,000

450,000

500,000

550,000

600,000

All starts (on 3% growth) Success rate

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020


01020304050607080

90Starts:


 

3% gro
wth = n

early 3
 million

 2015–


20

Success rate (right axis): -3.4% a year (2012–14 trend)


Percentage Starts per year


  Source: Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Further Education and Skills: Statistical First Release, 2015 
(Commission projections)

An additional challenge to ensuring apprenticeship growth and opportunity is bringing firms 
on board. The burden of responsibility and funding for training will be further shifted to firms 
through the new levy and longer-term declines in funding for classroom vocational education. 
How this will change firms’ approach and attitude is unclear. Early responses to the levy 
suggest that there is a distance to go before employers are bought in.76 Also, over recent 
years, while the number of firms offering apprenticeships has increased, this rate of expansion 
is slowing. Between 2010/11 and 2012/13 the number of workplaces employing apprentices 
increased by 13 per cent a year on average. However, for the last two years the number of 
employers with apprenticeships has increased by less than 5 per cent a year.77 Current firms 
cannot offer unlimited additional apprenticeships; new firms must buy in. This urgently needs 
to be escalated to the top of the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills’ ‘worry list’. 
If business does not embrace the opportunity to take the lead, there is a risk of a void left 
where chances for progression once were.

Second, skill gaps at a higher technical level may persist if the right structures do not exist 
to deliver them.78 State-driven solutions to the FE system – such as colleges for High Speed 
2 – are not an adequate response to the current employer demand for skills at Levels 4 and 
5. There is no reason why, in 2015, an FE system should look so much like a flashback to the 
1970s. The implication of the current situation continuing is twofold: potential productivity will 
be lost to the economy, and individuals will miss out on opportunities that provide chances for 
social mobility. Getting the higher vocational solution right will unlock opportunity for those not 

76  Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development (CIPD), Employers Split over Plans to Introduce Apprenticeships Levy 
According to CIPD Survey, 2015

77  Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Workplaces Employing Apprentices by Region (2009/10 to 2014/15 In-year 
Estimates), 2015

78  Higher Education Policy Institute, Raising Productivity by Improving Higher Technical Education: Tackling the Level 4 and 
Level 5 Conundrum, 2015




Chapter 3: Improving life chances for non-graduates


77

following traditional graduate routes. The greatest productivity returns to a well-functioning 
higher vocational system are in the production sector. Of all the parts of the economy that 
employ non-graduates, manufacturing has the most potential for pay and skill progression.79 
There is a potential virtuous circle if more young people enter higher vocational training in the 
right areas – but at present it is unclear whether FE reforms are underpinned by a strategy to 
deliver this.

More broadly in relation to classroom-based vocational training, it is unclear whether 
innovations will fill the gaps that exist. Creating a range of different institutions does not 
respond to the fundamental problems, not least a system that is difficult for young people 
to navigate. The fact that some university technical colleges have had to close due to low 
demand, with public sunk costs in excess of £15 million, suggests that the Government 
should exercise caution in expanding untested models.80 The implication of longer-term 
funding arrangements for the sector is potentially severe. More than one-third of sixth-form 
colleges believe that, under current 16–19 funding arrangements, it is likely that they will 
cease to be a going concern by 2020.81 Planned funding reductions are made even more 
challenging by additional costs imposed by the expansion of apprenticeships. Even with the 
proposed levy on firms, the cost to the Government may need to be met from elsewhere.

Third, at present, evidence suggests that the vocational route only partly delivers for those 
who move across to the university track. The positive story is that former apprentices do well 
when they progress to HE. One in five of a cohort of apprentices progressed to HE in the 
seven years since 2006/07. Nearly seven in 10 former advanced apprentices (Level 3) who 
went on to study a first degree achieved a 2:1 or first – a rate above the UK average. Further, 
annual salary for former apprentices with degrees was higher than HE leavers in general.82 

However, for young people on general vocational tracks, despite the increasing popularity 
of BTEC, this route to university does not match up to A levels in its outcomes. Those with 
BTEC qualifications at Level 3 are found to be less than half as likely to progress to HE 
compared to those with A levels (29 versus 64 per cent). Those who do progress to HE with 
BTEC qualifications are nearly seven times less likely to enter highly selective Russell Group 
institutions (17.9 versus 2.6 per cent). Further, those who do progress are likely to be less 
successful. BTEC students taking first degrees are one-fifth (19 per cent) less likely to achieve 
a degree, and nearly 30 per cent less likely to achieve a first or 2:1 than those who studied 
A levels.83 Young people progressing to HE who started on the vocational track are seeking 
opportunity, but not all are finding it. To provide genuine choice, more high-quality, non-
academic routes are needed.

Fourth, the changing shape of the jobs market means that in some areas the vocational track, 
especially in relation to qualifications that carry less purchase with employers, will be more 
likely to lead to low-paying work. The trend of growth in both high-paying and low-paying 
jobs at the expense of certain intermediate roles is exaggerated in some cities. Between 2001 
and 2011 the share of employment in low-paid jobs increased by 5 percentage points in 
Coventry, Luton and Stoke – more than double the average increase.84 If young people are to 
make the most out of vocational options, there needs to be more clarity than at present about 
the job and progression opportunities to which courses or apprenticeships might lead. The 
local option may be far from the best, but the evidence to help young people decide is absent 
from the debate.

79 New Economics Foundation, Good Jobs for Non-graduates, 2012
80 Times Educational Supplement, Government Spent £15m on UTCs that Closed or Did Not Open, 2015
81 Sixth Form Colleges Association, SFCA Funding Impact Survey Report 2015, 2015
82 Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Progression of Apprentices to Higher Education: Second Cohort, 2015
83 Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Progression of Further Education Students to Higher Education, 2015
84 Centre for Cities, Unequal Opportunity: How Jobs are Changing in Cities, 2014




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


78

Fifth, current low rates of success in English and maths retakes for those who have not 
achieved Level 2 by 16 suggest a deep problem. These young people are more likely to be 
unemployed, and without core qualifications will be unable to access training. Requirements 
for apprenticeships vary, but many employers ask for five GCSEs at grades A*–C, including 
English and maths.85 Moreover, ensuring educational re-engagement is not just important 
for progression; it is the crucial link to prevent low attainment at school converting into 
unemployment and NEET status. With large numbers of young people unaccounted for in 
local authority data, there have been suggestions that there could be as many as 50,000 
16–18 NEETs missing from official statistics.86 This situation is difficult in the best of economic 
times; in the event of another downturn, this group risks falling even further behind. There is 
an urgent need for a local solution to this ongoing issue.

3.5 Conclusion and Recommendations
Over recent years, proposed solutions to the faultlines in the post-16 education landscape 
have fallen broadly into two categories. One approach suggests that the system as 
represented by the current institutions does not need changing. Instead, the options within 
the system, courses, qualifications and routes through the system need to be improved.87 
The other approaches favour a reformed system, perhaps localised and with new institutions, 
that brings those on the graduate and non-graduate route closer together.88 If the objective is 
to increase social mobility, elements of both approaches are required.

Improving vocational education requires overturning decades of inaction and contradictory 
policies. Recently there has been a welcome push from the Government to improve 
vocational options, expand apprenticeships and bring employers into the fold. However, this 
alone will not fix the damaging effect of the 16-plus; neither will it overcome the entrenched 
negative attitudes held by many parents and students. To deliver a One Nation society a new 
contract is required between government, young people on the non-graduate track and their 
parents. 

This new contract needs to focus on outcomes, not numbers. It should have four parts: 

1. A commitment to rapidly increase participation of youngsters on high-quality courses;

2. Far better information on the employment prospects of vocational choices;

3. A new focus on improving the quality of failing colleges;

4.  A commitment to reduce the dropout rate of 16–18-year-olds in line with the best 
international comparisons. 

A non-graduate track that is firing on all cylinders can create both a virtuous supply of high-
skilled workers and engaged firms who will employ them. Opportunity and social mobility will 
be enabled. If it is not, a sizeable proportion of the population will continue to fall behind, to 
the loss of us all.

85 UCAS Progress, Apprenticeships, https://www.ucas.com/ucas/16-18-choices/search-and-apply/apprenticeships
86 Fabian Society, Out of Sight, 2014
87  Examples being: HM Government, Dearing Review of Qualifications for 16–19-year-olds, 1996 and Department for 

Education, Review of Vocational Education: The Wolf Report, 2011
88  Examples being: Department for Education and Skills, 14–19 Curriculum and Qualifications Reform Final Report of the 

Working Group on 14–19 Reform, 2004 (the Tomlinson Review); Nuffield Foundation, Education for All: The Future of 
Education and Training for 14–19-year-olds, 2009; Kenneth Baker, 14–18: A New Vision for Secondary Education, 2013 

https://www.ucas.com/ucas/16-18-choices/search-and-apply/apprenticeships




Chapter 3: Improving life chances for non-graduates


79

Recommendation 1: New apprenticeships should be targeted at  
higher-level courses and young people: there should be 30,000 young 
people starting a higher-level apprenticeship a year by 2020.

If the Government and firms are serious about securing talent from all walks of life, 
expanding top non-graduate routes is essential. This means that the current dominance of 
apprenticeships by older people must come to an end. The Commission recommends the 
following:

•	 By 2020, increase by tenfold the number of 19–24-year-olds starting Higher 
Apprenticeships. This would change the ratio of degree starts to Higher Apprenticeship 
starts from 60:1 to around 6:1 on current levels. It would mean around 30,000 starts a 
year by this age group. There are more than 19,000 Higher Apprenticeship starts a year at 
the moment, although around three-quarters of these go to over-25s;

•	 Apprenticeship starts by older people who have been employed for over a year should be 
reclassified as in-work training. This could result in as much as a 70 per cent drop in the 
number of adult apprenticeship starts.89 The effect, at current levels, would be a reduction 
of the proportion of adult apprenticeships to 20 per cent of the total, rather than 45 per 
cent as at present. This is vital to restore credibility to the apprenticeship brand.

Recommendation 2: A new UCAS-style website should be created for 
vocational education within two years so that young people can see  
what progression, employment and earnings opportunities they are likely 
to achieve.

To ensure that young people can make the most of changes to vocational study, there needs 
to be clear routes through – as there are clear routes through A levels to higher academic 
study. Clarity is all the more important since the announcement at the 2015 Spending Review 
that FE students (over 19) will be able to take out loans to fund their courses. To achieve 
this, better outcomes data is required at the point when young people apply to courses at 
colleges or for apprenticeships. The purpose is to ensure that young people know what a 
choice at 14 or 16 will lead to at 18 or 19 – or later – regardless of whether someone wants 
to enter employment, continue to higher levels of study or attend university. To achieve this, 
the Commission recommends:

•	  The Department for Business, Innovation and Skills accelerates the process of publishing 
outcome data for vocational courses, and expands this in collaboration with the 
Department for Education to cover those under 19. In specific terms, it is important to 
capture whether a qualification or apprenticeship will enable progression to the next level 
of study;

•	  Outcomes data to be published regularly that link FE and tax data, to show the earnings 
progression for those who follow vocational courses. This should be further broken down, 
where possible, to level and type of qualification, region and background of the individual, 
both social and ethnic;

•	  This data should be brought together in a UCAS-style website that allows pupils to apply 
for courses at 14 or 16, as appropriate. Further, it should have national coverage, so that 
young people at 18 or 19 can apply for courses in different parts of the country, if relevant.

89 Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Prior Qualifications of Adult Apprentices 2012/13, 2014




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


80

Recommendation 3: Failing FE colleges should become FE academies 
along the lines of the initial city academies, with an external business 
sponsor.

The Government is taking action in relation to schools perceived as coasting. The same 
enthusiasm for high-quality provision should be applied to FE colleges. The purpose is to 
improve attainment, build links with the local jobs market and ensure that young people are 
equipped with the skills for work or progression to higher levels of study. 

The Commission recommends that:

•	 Where colleges are failing – in terms of quality or finances – the Skills Funding Agency, 
Further Education Commissioner’s Office and Department for Business, Innovation and 
Skills put in place a process by which they can become an academy; 

•	 Any college that is rated requires improvement or inadequate one year and does not 
move out of this category the next should be urgently converted to an academy to protect 
pupils. The 16 colleges that Ofsted identified as failing to improve should be the primary 
targets of this academy programme;

•	 Where area reviews take place and mergers or closures are proposed, the academy model 
should be preferred to reinvigorate skills provision and progression on the vocational track 
in an area.

Recommendation 4: By 2020 the Government should reduce the NEET 
rates of 16–18-year-olds to 3 per cent or less (or around 55,000),90 in line 
with the best performing OECD countries.91 This should be underpinned 
by a new social investment fund worth around £50 million to pay for the 
successful outcomes of NEET prevention schemes.

There is an urgent need to establish a solution to prevent those at risk of dropping out 
from becoming NEET. The lesson from recent programmes is that that nationally imposed 
schemes can meet resistance, but a lack of central direction will result in local schemes of 
varying quality.92 The key challenge to end the NEET phenomenon for the 16–18 group is to 
prevent young people from dropping out in the first place, then ensure they remain engaged. 
The Commission recommends:

•	 The Government expand existing commitments to social impact bonds for reducing 
unemployment, and establish a social impact bond with the core objectives of identifying 
those at risk of NEET when they are at school, preventing dropout and ensuring continued 
engagement in earning or learning. A social impact bond works by investors providing 
funding for an intervention, and the Government making success payments to investors 
when an intervention achieves specific outcomes. The payments are on the basis of 
current and future savings to government and the taxpayer: for example, from reduced 
benefits, prison places and remedial education costs. The Government’s three-year, £30 
million innovation fund has recently finished, leaving the future of this approach uncertain. 
A new extended fund would ensure a continued focus on delivering vital outcomes, scope 
to further build the market and establish this model;

90  This is 3 per cent of the projected 16–18 population in 2020. Office for National Statistics, Young Age Structure Variant: 
England Population Single Year of Age, 2012-based, 2013

91  In 2014, the youth (15–19) NEET rate in Britain was 8.4 per cent. The rate was 2.4 per cent in Luxembourg, 2.9 per cent in 
Germany, 3.2 per cent in the Czech Republic, and 3.5 per cent in Norway. OECD, Education at a Glance 2015, 2015

92  Department for Education, The Youth Contract for 16–17 Year Olds Not in Education, Employment or Training Evaluation, 


2014

Chapter 3: Improving life chances for non-graduates


81

•	 An initial scheme should be targeted at the North East. Of the top five local authorities with 
the highest proportion of 16–18 NEETs and the greatest increase in proportion of NEETs 
between age 16 and 18, three are in this region (Gateshead, Redcar and Middlesbrough). 
A recent scheme to reduce NEETs in the North East as part of the Coalition Government’s 
Youth Contract showed significant re-engagement and attainment of qualifications. 
Schemes under the Department for Work and Pensions Innovation fund have shown 
promising results; 

•	 The Government should identify investors and run a competition in collaboration with local 
authorities in the area to select service providers. As the benefits of NEET reduction span 
a number of departments’ outcome, payments should be managed centrally from the 
Cabinet Office or Treasury.93 On the basis of initial evaluation, this scheme should be rolled 
out rapidly to other parts of the country, starting with the areas with the greatest problems.

93  The Department for Education will save through reduced requirement for Pupil Referral Units; the Department for Work and 
Pensions through reduced benefit payment; and the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills through a reduced 
remedial adult education bill. The Ministry of Justice and its agencies will benefit from reduced requirement for court time and 
prison places. Local government will save funds otherwise spent on NEET reduction




Chapter 4: Fair access to university and the professions 


83

Chapter 4: Fair access to university and 
the professions

•	 Substantial effort has been made by some universities and firms to 
increase the socio-economic diversity of their intakes, but young people 
from poor families are still far less likely to go to university, attend a top 
institution or access certain elite professions.

•	 Law and professional service firms are doing most to improve social 
mobility; engineering and construction firms least.

•	 Privileged youngsters are disproportionately likely to attend selective 
universities with independently schooled pupils making up nearly 40 per 
cent of the intake of the five most selective Russell Group universities. 

•	 The Government has set a welcome target to double the proportion 
of students from low participation areas, but achieving it will be 
challenging. 

•	 If the Government’s target is to be met, by 2020 universities might 
need to increase by 12,000 per year the number of students from low 
participation areas. There is little chance of success unless universities 
work together to focus more outreach activity on the schools and the 
places where HE access lags behind. A £40 million fund taken from 
universities’ widening participation budgets should underpin this  
vital effort. 

•	 The Government should make public sector internships transparent 
with a new interns.gov.uk website.

•	 Top professional firms must follow the lead of those making the greatest 
progress in opening opportunities by changing recruitment processes. 

4.1 Introduction
For society to be socially mobile, access to higher education and to jobs that bring the 
greatest reward must be open to all with the ability to benefit from them. The members’ 
club mindset that once dominated admission to university and the professions is no longer 
acceptable. Real equality, as the Prime Minister put it, is now the shared goal.1 Over recent 
years good progress has been made. There has been a dawning realisation in both higher 

1 David Cameron MP, The Prime Minister’s Party Conference Speech, 2015




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


84

education and among our country’s top professional employers that they have been missing 
out on talent by recruiting from too narrow a social stratum. Bigger efforts have been made 
to diversify their intakes. Yet the long shadow of the members’ club remains. It can be seen 
in university interview questions that some are coached to answer but are a mystery to the 
rest. It is present in job assessments that rely on notions of talent or polish rather than purely 
on potential. And it hangs over internships reserved for those in the know rather than all who 
seek to establish their career. It leads to a situation where the holders of top jobs today too 
often represent a small selection of backgrounds and experience.2  When aspiration and 
potential are held back – whether by lack of careers guidance, connections or finances – 
individuals and society lose out. It is vital that our universities and professions redouble their 
efforts to turn growing calls for equality of opportunity into meaningful, lasting change.

The benefits of universities to the economy and to individuals are significant. As a country, 
the skills that university education can provide are vital to our future economic growth. With 
the expansion of university provision over the final quarter of the last century, participation in 
higher education (HE) increased from around 15 per cent in 1988 to 47 per cent by  
2013/14.3 4 This has led to substantial gains in productivity and output in the economy. 
Graduate skill accumulation accounted for a fifth of UK Gross Domestic Product (GDP) 
growth between 1982 and 2005; productivity is estimated to rise between 0.2 and 0.5 per 
cent for each 1 per cent increase in the share of the workforce with a degree.5 In 2011/12 
universities contributed £40 billion to GDP or around 2.8 per cent of UK national income.6 7 
And for individuals today, the average premium for a degree across a lifetime is more than 
£200,000 and is higher for women (£277,000) than for men (£199,000).8 Since the late 1990s 
further progress has been made, especially in recognising and responding to the challenge 
of widening participation and opening access to the most selective institutions. More people 
than ever from a greater diversity of social backgrounds are seeing the benefits of higher 
education. But there is still a long way to go.

A good degree unlocks the door to the professions and to positions in elite organisations. 
Firms are beginning to recognise the value of a diverse workforce and their own role 
in broadening the range of backgrounds of their employees. Initiatives in accountancy, 
professional services and other sectors are a good start but they remain the exception and 
need to become the norm across the economy. 

A prosperous One Nation Britain is one that recognises and incubates talent from all walks 
of life. Clear pathways must be provided to jobs that the best and brightest can flourish in 
to drive growth and international competitiveness. We face not only a social crisis when 
access to some prestigious universities and jobs is limited to those from privileged families. 
As a nation we also face a crisis of growth and productivity. Over the current parliament, it 
is predicted that increases in jobs will be in higher skilled, white-collar services. The number 
of jobs in managerial, professional and assistant professional occupations is expected 
to increase by 2.3 million –17 per cent – over the next decade.9 This growth provides an 
opportunity to open up the professions to a wider range of talent. Failing to do so would 
widen divisions that already exist and limit the productivity boost that the economic recovery 
is yet to deliver. It is time to turbo-charge efforts to make Britain a country that is more equal 
and less elitist.

2  Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, Elitist Britain?, 2014; Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, Elitist 
Scotland?, 2015

3  Participation of 17- to 30-year-old English domiciled first-time entrants to HE. Institute for Fiscal Studies, Widening 
Participation in Higher Education: Analysis Using Linked Administrative Data, 2010

4 House of Commons Library, Participation in Higher Education: Social Indicators Page, 2015
5  Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, The Relationship Between Graduates and Economic Growth Across 

Countries, 2013
6 Universities UK, The Economic Role of UK Universities, 2014
7 David Willetts MP, Contribution of UK Universities to National and Local Economic Growth (speech), 2014
8  Walker, I., and Zhu, Y., The Impact of University Degrees on the Lifecycle of Earnings, BIS research paper 112, 2013. The 

figures presented here are for the net present value of obtaining a degree
9 UK Commission for Employment and Skills, Working Futures 2012-2022, 2014




Chapter 4: Fair access to university and the professions 


85

4.2 To what extent does today’s reality match up to the One 
Nation vision?
The gap in university access between those from poor households and others is wide, but 
narrowing. In this context the Government has committed by 2020 to double the proportion 
of young people entering higher education who live in areas with the lowest HE participation, 
compared with 2009 levels.10 This is a hugely welcome commitment. It is also a daunting 
one. Currently, on average, young people from the areas with the lowest higher education 
participation are over two and half times less likely to attend HE compared with those from 
the areas with the highest higher education participation (18 versus 46 per cent).11 The 
participation rate of young people from low participation areas in 2009 was 14 per cent, and 
has been rising by around a percentage point a year. At this rate the commitment will not be 
met until the mid-2020s. But even with this progress, the gap between poorer young people 
and others will remain. If recent trends continue, the gap in access will not close until the 
2060s.12

Figure 4.1: Government commitment to increase HE participation by young people 
from low participation areas


010203040506070Percentage2006201120162021202620312036204120462051205620662016

2009: 14% from 
lowest participation 
areas continue to HE

2020: 23% from lowest 
participation areas 
continue to HE (projection)

2025: Government commitment met. 
28% from lowest participation areas 
continue to HE (projection)

2067: Gap closed 
between highest and 

lowest participation areas

Highest participation areas Lowest participation areas

Source: UCAS, End of Cycle Report, 2014Source: UCAS, End of Cycle Report 2014, 2015 (Commission projections)

Just as the mix of students in universities fails to reflect wider society, so too does the social 
make-up of top firms. Research for the Commission shows that those who went to private or 
grammar schools make up 40 per cent of trainees in law firms and as many as 70 per cent in 
some elite accountancy firms.13 Furthermore, young people from disadvantaged backgrounds 
who make it to top jobs are likely to be paid less than their counterparts who grew up in 
professional families. Those who are long-range socially mobile (who started off in families 
working routine or manual jobs and ended up in professional jobs themselves) earn on 
average £150 a week less than those whose parents worked in professional and managerial 
roles.14 

10  Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Fulfilling our Potential: Teaching Excellence, Social Mobility and Student 
Choice, 2015

11 UCAS, End of Cycle Report 2014
12 Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Widening Participation in Higher Education 2015, 2015
13  Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, A Qualitative Evaluation of Non-educational Barriers to the Elite Professions, 



2015

14  In this instance, an individual is considered long-distance socially mobile if, broadly, they grew up in families where the main 

occupation was routine or manual and gained a professional job as an adult. London School of Economics, Introducing the 
Class Ceiling: Social Mobility and Britain’s Elite Occupations, 2015




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


86

The low proportions of less advantaged young people in top firms can partly be accounted 
for by the fact that few go to the most selective universities. This is because elite firms often 
recruit candidates from a narrow selection of HE institutions. But this only partly explains the 
dominance of privileged social backgrounds in some firms. In fact, in many cases, firms’ own 
behaviour exaggerates the trend. Research for the Commission suggests that employers’ 
preconceived ideas of talent cause them to headhunt new recruits in their own image, to the 
exclusion of others.15 16 While background still plays a central role in access to universities 
and the professions, even when attainment is accounted for, there will remain a distinct social 
mobility problem at the top of society.

In the remainder of this section, closely connected challenges to fair access to higher 
education and the professions are examined in detail. First, we assess the wide gap in HE 
participation between those from disadvantaged backgrounds and others. Second, we 
explore the acute problem of the gap in access to the most selective universities. Third, 
we examine the enduring effect of background in access to professional jobs, even after 
graduation.

Problem 1: The university participation gap is too wide.

Over the past decade there have been positive and welcome trends in university participation: 
from 2003/04 to 2013/14 the proportion of working-class students at all universities 
increased by almost a fifth (from 20.9 to 24.7 per cent).17 Since last year alone there has 
been an increase of over 9 per cent in young people from areas with the lowest rates of 
participation accessing HE (from 27,500 to 30,000).18 These achievements are driven 
by several factors: improved school results, increased efforts by universities to widen 
participation (including by those who have studied vocational BTECs rather than academic  
A levels), and individuals responding to the rising importance of university degrees in the  
jobs market.

But the participation gap remains wide. Young people eligible for free school meals are a little 
over half as likely to enter HE by the age of 19 than those not eligible. Because of the gap 
between the most and least advantaged, the university population fails to reflect the make-
up of wider society. In the UK, 41.6 per cent of adults work in professional jobs, but 54.9 per 
cent of those at university have parents in professional jobs. At the other end of the scale, 
30.4 per cent of adults work in routine and manual jobs yet only 24.4 per cent of those in 
universities have parents in routine and manual jobs.19 Much of this gap can be explained by 
differing levels of attainment by social background. But, while universities continue to serve 
certain groups in society over others, social mobility will suffer.

15 Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, op. cit
16 CIPD, A Head for Hiring: The Behavioural Science of Recruitment and Selection, 2015
17  Higher Education Statistics Agency (HESA), SMCPC analysis. Working class is here defined as students who reported their 

parents working in lower supervisory and technical, routine and manual occupations, National Statistics Socio-economic 
Classification (NS-SEC) 5-7. This differs from the definition used in HESA analysis, which also includes young people whose 
parents worked in NS-SEC 4 occupations (small employers and the self-employed) 

18  UCAS, End of Cycle Report 2014, 2014. This has been driven by steep rises in acceptances on the basis of BTEC rather 
than A level qualifications. As set out in Chapter 3, those accessing HE via this specific vocational route are less likely to 
access the most selective universities and less likely to achieve top degree results compared with the A level cohort

19  Commission analysis of data provided by HESA. Professional relates to NS-SEC groups 1 and 2; routine relates to NS-SEC 
5–7; Office for National Statistics, Table EMP11: Employment by Socio-Economic Classification, 2015




Chapter 4: Fair access to university and the professions 


87

Figure 4.2: People from professional backgrounds are far more likely to be in HE


Percentage Higher managerial and professional occupations Intermediate Routine0102030405060

Source: Higher Education Statistics Agency, Students in Higher Education Providers 2003/4, 2009/10 & 2013/14, 2015 
(provided for SMCP commission).

32% more 
from 

managerial 


and 


professional 
backgrounds 

in HE than 
people in 

managerial


and 


professional 
jobs 

24% of 
population 


in 

intermediate 



jobs


20% fewer 
from 

intermediate 
backgrounds 

in HE than 
people in 

intermediate 
jobs 

30% of 
population 
in routine 

and manual 


jobs


20% fewer 
from routine 
backgrounds 

in HE than 
people in 

routine and 
manual jobs 

Proportion in occupation Proportion in HE

42% of 
population 


in 

managerial 



and 

professional 



jobs


Source: Data supplied by Higher Education Statistics Agency (Commission analysis)

Universities have put their shoulder to the wheel in recent years to widen participation and 
ensure fairer access. But they are not helping their own efforts by focusing their activity 
in the wrong place. Despite substantial and rising expenditure on widening participation, 
the Commission is concerned that the balance is still tilted too far away from universities 
doing outreach activity in schools – especially those in less-advantaged areas – and too 
much towards financial support for individual students. The evidence for bursaries as tools 
to increase numbers of less advantaged pupils in HE is insufficient to justify their being the 
largest part of participation expenditure.20 21 22 Last year the Commission called for 25 per cent 
of widening participation funding to be used to support strategic engagement with schools 
by 2020. In 2013/14 (the latest year for which there is data), £803 million was spent in total 
on widening participation driven by access agreements between universities and the Office 
for Fair Access (OFFA) and additional funding from the Higher Education Funding Council for 
England (HEFCE).23 Of this, £122 million was used towards outreach work with schools and 
young people – around 15 per cent.24 This is the same proportion as in the previous year.25 
Universities are a vital player in enabling social mobility. But to demonstrate their credentials 
as real agents of opportunity, more institutions will need to prioritise active outreach with 
schools, since the evidence suggests it is this activity that returns the greatest social  
mobility dividend.

20 OFFA, What do we Know About the Impact of Financial Support on Access and Student Success?, 2015
21 OFFA, Do bursaries have an effect on retention rates?, 2014
22 Widening Participation and Lifelong Learning, Special Issue on Student Financial Support, vol. 17, number 3, 2015
23 OFFA, Outcomes of Access Agreement Monitoring for 2013-14, 2015
24 Ibid.
25  OFFA, Outcomes of Access Agreement, Widening Participation Strategic Statement and National Scholarship Programme 

Monitoring 2012-13, 2014




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


88

There are big gaps between the English regions in the proportion of university widening 
participation spend that is dedicated to improving access. Universities in Greater London 
spend on average a quarter of their access agreement expenditure (25 per cent) on access 
activity (i.e. outreach), more than double the proportion universities spend in the East 
Midlands (11 per cent).26 London is fortunate in having a large number of universities and a 
school system that outperforms many other places. It is therefore disappointing that areas 
outside of the capital where there is a clear case for more outreach to raise attainment, 
aspirations and admission continue to lag behind.

Figure 4.3: Average proportion of access agreement expenditure spent on access 
activity, 2013/14


Percentage0510152025

Source: Office for Fair Access, Outcomes of access agreement monitoring for 2013-14, 2015.


North East West Midlands North West Yorkshire and the Humber East of England Greater London South East South West East Midlands


Source: OFFA, Outcomes of Access Agreement Monitoring for 2013-14, 2015

Greater focus is needed too to address worrying trends concerning mature and part-time 
HE students. The decline in numbers reported last year has continued: comparing 2012/13 
with 2013/14, first-year undergraduate part-time students are down by around 12 per 
cent and first-year undergraduate mature students studying for their first degree or other 
undergraduate degrees are down by over 5 per cent year on year.27 Overall, part-time student 
numbers dropped by nearly 50 per cent from 2010/11 to 2013/14.28 This is an astonishing 
and deeply worrying trend. The Independent Commission on Fees concluded that there is 
a strong suggestion that the introduction of higher fees has had an impact on the numbers 
of part-time and mature students.29 Despite student loans being made available for part-
time students, a range of exemptions means that only one-third of this group were eligible 

26  OFFA, Outcomes of Access Agreement Monitoring for 2013-14, 2015. The remainder goes towards schemes to improve 
student success, student progression and institutional financial support. London access spend is boosted by a number of 
arts and music institutions that allocate large proportions of access agreement expenditure to access activity

27  Numbers calculated from: HESA, Table 2 – First year HE student enrolments by mode of study, sex, level of study and 
domicile 2009/10 to 2013/14, 2015, and HESA, Table H – Percentage of first year UK domiciled undergraduate students by 
age, level of study and mode of study, 2015

28 Universities UK, Trends in Undergraduate Recruitment, 2014
29 Independent Commission on Fees, Independent Commission on Fees 2015 Final Report, 2015




Chapter 4: Fair access to university and the professions 


89

for loans, and a smaller proportion took them out.30 Higher education should provide routes 
to social mobility for people of all ages – not just the youngest. It must be a priority for 
universities and government to better understand, check and then reverse these trends.

Mature and part-time students are hit by the combined effect of lower participation and 
persistently high drop-out rates. In 2012/13 more than one in 10 full-time mature students 
(11.9 per cent) and over one in three part-time students (34.1 per cent) were not in HE a year 
after entry (two years after entry for part-time students). In comparison, around one in 20 
young full-time entrants drop out of HE (5.7 per cent). There has been some improvement for 
mature students, the non-continuation rate falling by around a fifth from 2002/03 to 2012/13 
(15.4 per cent to 11.9 per cent). However, the improvement for part-time students is much 
less marked. In the five years between 2006/07 and 2011/12 (the biggest gap for which data 
is available), the drop-out rate fell by only 3.4 per cent (1.2 percentage points).31 Given that 
part-time and mature routes have been vehicles for social mobility and second chances in the 
past, this also merits further government attention.

Finally, the high university drop-out rates for young people from low-participation areas 
remains of concern. There has been some improvement over the longer term, the overall 
drop-out rate falling from 10 per cent in 2005/06 to 8 per cent in 2012/13. But in some 
institutions there is a wide gap between the rate for those from areas with the lowest 
participation and other areas. Of the 10 institutions with the highest ratio of low participation 
to high participation area drop-out rates, seven are selective Russell Group institutions.32 
It remains the case that even when the participation gap is closed, the retention gap is 
damaging the prospects of disadvantaged young people.

Table 4.1: The 10 universities with the greatest ratio of drop-outs among young 
people from low-participation neighbourhoods compared with those from other 
neighbourhoods

Institution Drop-out rate: 
young entrants from 
low-participation 
neighbourhoods (%)

Drop-out rate: young 
entrants from other 
neighbourhoods (%)

Ratio of drop-outs: 
low participation vs 
others

Durham University 5.4 1.4 3.9

University of Sussex 8.2 2.8 2.9

University of 
Southampton

6.2 2.2 2.8

University of Oxford 3.6 1.3 2.8

University of Bristol 4.4 1.7 2.6

University of Cambridge 3.3 1.3 2.5

University of Exeter 4.3 1.7 2.5

Leeds College of Art 11.6 4.9 2.4

Newcastle University 4.8 2.2 2.2

Keele University 5.0 2.4 2.1

Source: HESA, Non-continuation rates, 2015

30  Higher Education Policy Institute, It’s the Finance, Stupid! The Decline of Part-time Higher Education and What to do About it, 


2015


31 HESA, Non-continuation Rates, 2015
32 Ibid.




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


90

Problem 2: There is a yawning gap in access to selective universities.

Attending a top university leads on average to better jobs and higher pay. Within four years of 
graduation, those who attend the most selective institutions earn over £4,300 per year more 
than those who attend universities created after 1992.33 Comparing this to vocational options, 
only higher apprenticeships can compete with degrees in terms of lifetime earnings, but even 
they cannot match the earnings premium of the most prestigious UK universities.34  

It is therefore welcome that there has been slight progress since our 2014 annual report in 
participation gaps at the 24 highly selective Russell Group universities. Over the past year the 
proportion of state school pupils increased by 1.7 per cent (75.9 to 77.2 per cent) and pupils 
from less advantaged social groups (NS-SEC 4-7) by 1 per cent (20.4 to 20.6 per cent).35 
These are small but welcome steps forward, but the job is far from complete. 

These general improvements do not fix the fundamental issue: access to selective universities 
remains more likely for those from privileged backgrounds, even taking account of differences 
in A level grades.36 In 2013/14 half of the Russell Group universities admitted significantly 
less state school pupils than their HESA benchmark figure (see Figure 4.4).37 The HESA 
benchmarks are estimates of what the social mix of entrants to each university would be if the 
university’s intake was representative of the general intake of those with the required grades 
entering a UK higher education institution in that year. In relation to access by students from 
NS-SEC classes 4 to 7,38 over half of the Russell Group universities fall significantly short of 
their benchmark. There are an estimated 2,800 missing students at Russell Group universities 
from state schools and 1,900 missing students from class 4 to 7 backgrounds if the social 
mix of entrants is compared with the social mix of those with the right grades to enter.39

The scale of the fair access challenge becomes clear when individual selective universities are 
compared to one another (Figure 4.4). At one end of the scale, the five universities furthest 
from the benchmark set by HESA for admitting pupils from state schools would need to 
increase their state intake by a fifth or more on average – 28 per cent in the case of Bristol 
– if they were to achieve ‘fair access’ on this measure. At the other end, almost all of the 
students at Queen’s Belfast come from the state sector – well above its benchmark of around 
85 per cent. There are challenges to overcome, but high performance is certainly possible.

A similar trend (Figure 4.5) is seen in relation to access to the Russell Group by students 
from less advantaged social backgrounds (NS-SEC 4-7). Disappointingly, but perhaps 
unsurprisingly, many of the universities that are a way from meeting their HESA state school 
benchmark are also some distance from achieving the HESA measure of fair access for less 
advantaged students. Indeed, the bottom seven performers in both Figures 4.4 and 4.5 are 
the same institutions. However, Queen’s Belfast, Queen Mary London and the London School 
of Economics all perform well against both the social class benchmark and the state school 
benchmark described above. These three examples confirm once and for all that world class 
reputation and a student population reflective of wider society are entirely compatible. 

33  Sutton Trust, Earning by Degrees, 2014. The figures account for student characteristics, A levels attained, degree class and 
subject. The most universities referred to in the text are the 13 most selective as defined by the Sutton Trust

34 Sutton Trust, Levels of Success, 2015
35 HESA, Widening Participation of Under-represented Groups, multiple years’ data
36 Boliver, V., ‘How fair is access to more prestigious UK universities?’, British Journal of Sociology, vol. 64, issue 2, 2013
37  Data supplied by the Higher Education Statistics Agency. This uses the working-class definition used by HESA social groups 

4–7 as described in footnote 17 above
38 This is broader than ‘working class’ as NS-SEC class 4 includes small employers and the self employed
39 SMCP Commission, Higher Education: the Fair Access Challenge, 2013




Chapter 4: Fair access to university and the professions 


91

Figure 4.4: Proportion of entrants from state schools and HESA benchmark by Russell 
Group institution, 2013–14

Source: Association of Graduate Recruiters, data supplied to the SMCP commission.


50556065707580859095100Percentage Queen’s Belfast Liverpool Queen Mary London Glasgow Southampton Sheffield Cardiff Manchester Birmingham York Leeds Nottingham TOTAL RUSSELL GROUPWarwick Newcastle King’s LSEUCLEdinburgh Exeter Imperial Durham Cambridge Bristol Oxford

Source: Higher Education Statistics Agency, Widening participation of under-represented groups, 2015 

Note: In this chart the diamond shows current proportion of state school entrants, the tail is the distance from the HESA 
benchmark. A diamond with a line beneath it is a university doing better than its benchmark; a diamond with a line above it is a 
university not meeting its benchmark.




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


92

Figure 4.5: Proportion of entrants from less advantaged social backgrounds (NS-SEC 
4-7) and HESA benchmark by Russell Group institution, 2013–14


0510152025303540

Source: Association of Graduate Recruiters, data supplied to the SMCP commission.


Percentage Queen Mary London Queen's Belfast King's Liverpool Manchester Birmingham Southampton Newcastle Leeds Glasgow Sheffield TOTAL RUSSELL GROUPCardiff York Nottingh

am UC


LWarw

ick LS


EEdinburgh Exeter Imperial Durham Bristol Cambridge Oxford

Source: Higher Education Statistics Agency, Widening participation of under-represented groups, 2015 

Note: In this chart the diamond shows current proportion of pupils from less advantaged social backgrounds, the tail is the 
distance from the HESA benchmark. A diamond with a line beneath it is a university doing better than its benchmark; a diamond 
with a line above it is a university not meeting its benchmark.

The gap that remains between admissions and fair access in many universities should not 
overshadow examples of significant progress (Figure 4.6). Nottingham, University College 
London (UCL) and Kings’ are notable for improving significantly over the last decade, in terms 
of admitting both state school students and students from less advantaged backgrounds. 
On the other hand, some universities which currently are behind their benchmarks have 
gone backwards, notably Bristol and Exeter in terms of admitting state school pupils. Some 
universities that are shown to have made little or negative progress are actually above their 
benchmarks (such as Queen Mary or Queen’s Belfast) and their apparent lack of progress 
should be seen in this context. The takeaway message is that some universities have made 
improvements from a low base. There is no reason why others should not follow suit. 




Chapter 4: Fair access to university and the professions 


93

Figure 4.6: Russell Group universities ranked by combined progress in admitting state 
school pupils and pupils from NS-SEC 4-7 backgrounds, 2003/4 to 2013/14


Percentage-10-50510152025303540

Source: Higher Education Statistics Agency, multiple years' data

Change in proportion of state school entrants


Nottingh

am UC


LKing's Southampton Edinburgh York Newcastle Manchester Leeds Sheff

ield LS


EImperial Birmingham Queen Mary Cambridge Cardiff Liverpool Oxford Warwick Exeter Queen's Belfast Bristol Glasgow Durham

Change in proportion of NS-SEC 4-7 entrants

Source: Higher Education Statistics Agency, Widening Participation of Under-represented Groups, multiple years’ data

Widening participation for ethnic minority students

There has been some, but not enough, progress in widening participation of young 
people from ethnic minority backgrounds. Over the decade from 2003/04 to 2013/14, 
the proportion of ethnic minority first-year students rose from 17.1 to 22.5 per cent, 
an increase of nearly one-third (32 per cent). The greatest proportion of ethnic minority 
students is found on courses in law, medicine and dentistry, and business studies.40 

Recent research on ethnic inequalities in accessing selective universities has highlighted 
that ethnic minority students are less likely to receive offers from Russell Group 
universities than white applicants with comparable qualifications. This is the case even 
after the numerical competitiveness of a course is taken into account.41 

Subsequent UCAS analysis has suggested that most of these inequalities can be 
explained by the fact that universities make entrance decisions based on predicted 
rather than actual grades. A limitation of the UCAS analysis is that it excludes the 
36,000 students who either apply to Oxford and Cambridge, apply to Medicine or 
Veterinary sciences or are predicted to get three A*s at A level – a sizeable proportion of 
those who apply to the Russell Group universities.

40 HESA, Students by Ethnicity, 2015
41 Boliver, V., Exploring Ethnic Inequalities in Admission to Russell Group Universities, 2015




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


94

However, even if the UCAS analysis is right and the differential application success 
rates can be explained by predicted grades, it would still be extremely worrying – grade 
prediction is less accurate for disadvantaged young people and the end of modular  
A levels will increase this uncertainty.

These findings highlight a problem but further research is required to explain what is 
driving these outcomes. It is not yet clear whether the cause is intentional behaviour 
of universities, the application process or a combination of the two. To resolve this, 
UCAS should make the necessary fine-grained data available to researchers, ensuring 
individual information is anonymised to usual academic standards.

The most selective universities, Oxford and Cambridge, still recruit a disproportionate number 
of students from private schools. Despite an increase in the proportion of state-educated 
pupils of 6 per cent between 2003/04 and 2013/14, independently schooled pupils still make 
up around two-fifths of the intake at both Oxford and Cambridge. To meet their benchmarks, 
Oxford would need to increase the percentage of state school pupils by a quarter (24 per 
cent) and Cambridge by a fifth (18 per cent). Only Bristol, where the proportion of the intake 
from state schools is declining, fares worse on this measure. Part of the reason why the 
most selective universities admit such a large percentage of privately educated students 
is that top A level grades flow disproportionately from this group. In 2010 one-third of all 
pupils in England who achieved A*AA at A level, Cambridge’s standard offer at the time, 
were educated independently.42 As described in Chapter 2, there is much more work to do 
to raise the attainment of all pupils, especially those from disadvantaged backgrounds. And 
our analysis shows that even after taking into account differences in A level performance, 
unexplained gaps in access between advantaged and disadvantaged groups remain. The 
challenge faced by young people from poorer households or low-performing schools in 
achieving good grades, and the quality of advice and guidance from parents, teachers and 
universities all play a part in this continuing unwelcome trend.

The difficulties encountered by less advantaged young people in accessing Oxbridge is 
amplified when considered in terms of the colleges that make up the universities.43 There are 
large discrepancies between colleges in the number of offers made to applicants from the 
state sector. Some make less than half of their offers to state-educated pupils, and even the 
highest performers in this regard still give a quarter or more of their places to the privately 
educated. Yet even given Cambridge’s own estimate of a reasonable target for admissions 
from state schools on the basis of the social backgrounds of those achieving very high A level 
grades – somewhere between 60 and 63 per cent – it is clear that some parts of Oxbridge 
are falling far behind.

42 University of Cambridge, UK State-Sector Undergraduate Admissions to Cambridge: What is an Achievable Target?, 2011
43  The universities of Oxford and Cambridge are made up of a number of colleges. There are 38 at Oxford and 31 at 

Cambridge




Chapter 4: Fair access to university and the professions 


95

Table 4.2: Colleges from Oxford (2013) and Cambridge (2014) with the highest and 
lowest percentage of offers made to applicants from the state sector 44 45

College Proportion of acceptances by state sector 
applicants (%)

Colleges with greatest proportion of acceptances by state sector

Churchill (Cambridge) 73.7

Mansfield (Oxford) 72.7

Girton (Cambridge) 70.2

Wadham (Oxford) 69.4

Homerton (Cambridge) 69.2

Colleges with lowest proportion of acceptances by state sector

Christ Church (Oxford) 42.2

Trinity (Oxford) 44.3

St Peter’s (Oxford) 47.1

Robinson (Cambridge) 47.4

University College (Oxford) 48.3

Source: University of Oxford, Undergraduate Admissions Statistics: 2013 entry, 2014; University of Cambridge, Undergraduate 
Admissions Statistics: 2014 cycle, 2015

Nonetheless, it is welcome that contextual measures are increasingly being used by elite 
universities, including Oxbridge, as a means of addressing the under-representation of lower-
income and state-educated students.46 47 Too often in the past, university applicants have 
missed out because of a lack of opportunity to demonstrate their potential. So it is right that 
where a young person has attended a poor-performing secondary school, is a care leaver or 
comes from an area with stubbornly low HE participation, their predicted and actual grades 
should be considered in that light. This practice should be encouraged and continued.

Problem 3: Social background continues to drive graduate outcomes and 
access to the top professional jobs.

The sea of gowns at graduation ceremonies creates the false impression of a uniform 
student body headed for equally grand destinations. But differences become clear soon 
after graduation. Accessing top jobs is tightly connected to the university and the course a 
young person takes. But even accounting for institution and subject choice, there remains 
a gap. Young people from the most disadvantaged areas are almost a tenth less likely to be 
in professional employment three and a half years after graduation. Black African qualifiers 
are around 14 per cent less likely to be in professional jobs six months after qualification 
compared with white graduates, a problem that gets worse 40 months after graduation. 
Three and a half years after leaving university, black African pupils are 16 per cent less likely 
than white graduates to be in professional roles.48 Hurdles to social mobility remain for those 
who have succeeded, perhaps against the odds, in getting into university once they leave. 

44 University of Oxford, Undergraduate Admissions Statistics: 2013 entry, 2014
45 University of Cambridge, Undergraduate Admissions Statistics: 2014 cycle, 2015
46 University of Oxford, Contextual data (web page)
47 University of Cambridge, Contextual data (web page)
48  Higher Education Funding Council for England, Differences in Employment Outcomes: Equality and Diversity Characteristics, 



2015

State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


96

Non-educational barriers to the elite professions 

The Commission carried out research into law and accountancy firms in England 
(primarily London) and financial services firms in Scotland. We found:

•	  Firms look for ‘talent’ in a small number of highly selective universities, which have 
very high proportions of middle-class and privately educated students. They then 
coach potential applicants through their recruitment processes. As a result, in 
some law firms around 40 per cent of staff were educated at fee-paying schools – 
compared with just 7 per cent in the wider population.

•	 Notions of talent can often be skewed towards middle-class characteristics. One 
recruiter interviewed for the research commented, “I’m very interested in people 
who’ve gone travelling”; another talked of the importance of “holidays that you’ve 
been on, places you’ve visited”; another revealed that “accents make a difference, 
[the] things people talk about”.

•	 Disadvantaged graduates are less likely to be promoted, even if recruited. The 
report finds that “…while these patterns [of low social mobility] may be the result 
of conscious discrimination, they can also result from the tendency of more senior 
professionals to promote in their own image and thus ‘misrecognise’ merit”.

The challenge for graduates from less advantaged backgrounds in accessing elite professions 
starts before they finish their course. One important factor in an individual gaining a position 
in a top firm is whether the university they attend is targeted by firms’ outreach activity. Elite 
employers are more likely to focus their attention on a narrow group of universities, which less 
privileged young people are least likely to attend. On average, only one in 10 of the students 
in the universities most targeted by graduate employers are from working class backgrounds 
(NS-SEC 5-7). There is a self-fulfilling prophecy when firms seeking a certain kind of polish in 
their young recruits go only to a narrow selection of universities. Firms are missing real talent, 
and young people are missing out on the opportunities that they have been led to believe 
university will open.

Table 4.3: Proportion of students from working class backgrounds (NS-SEC 5-7) 
in universities most targeted by graduate employers.49 50 Thirty per cent of those 
in employment are in NS-SEC 5–7, a far greater level than in the universities listed 
above.51 

University % students NS-SEC 5-7 in 2013/14

University of Oxford 7.2

University of Cambridge 7.2

University of Bristol 8.9

Durham University 9.5 

Imperial College London 11.6 

University of Warwick 13.1 

University College London 13.6 

University of Nottingham 14.1 

University of Leeds 14.9

University of Manchester 17.0 

Source: Office for National Statistics, All in Employment by Socio-economic Classification, 2015

49 Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, op. cit.
50 NS-SEC data supplied by Higher Education Statistics Agency
51 Office for National Statistics, All in Employment by Socio-economic Classification, 2015




Chapter 4: Fair access to university and the professions 


97

In addition to the activity of graduate recruiters, young people’s ability to access unpaid 
internships or other forms of work experience depends on background. In 2014 one-
third of graduates working as interns were found to be doing so unpaid – and the Sutton 
Trust estimates that the cost of an unpaid internship is over £900 a month in London and 
nearly £800 a month in Manchester.52 The implication is that young people from better-off 
backgrounds are far better placed to exploit these opportunities. On average, around one-
third of placements are converted into graduate positions, which for some will make the 
expense more than worthwhile.53 The Commission and others have previously called for this 
practice to be ended – and at the least for work to recognised as such and paid for. Until 
these changes take place, some routes into top jobs will be reserved for children who are 
fortunate enough to be able to draw funds from the bank of Mum and Dad.

Parental education and the school a young person attended also continue to have an effect 
on graduates’ pay. There is some good news: students whose parents did not have degrees 
appear to earn more as new graduates if they graduate from the most selective universities. 
This amounts to just under £1,000 per year for Oxbridge graduates. On the other hand, a 
private school education also has a positive effect on earnings – even when university, subject 
and degree classification are accounted for – with starting salaries £1,350 higher than for 
state-school counterparts.54 Three and a half years after graduation, privately schooled young 
people earn £4,500 more than their state-school educated peers. Half of this difference 
cannot be explained by the type of higher education institution attended or prior attainment 
– suggesting this gap could be driven by soft skills including character and a network of 
contacts.55 Gaps that have opened early in life are once more seen to have enduring effects.

As well as the effects of individual and family education on adult income, there is a social 
mobility penalty imposed on graduates who make it to professional jobs from working-
class backgrounds. The London School of Economics has identified a ‘class ceiling’ where 
two people in similar jobs are likely to earn very different salaries depending on whether 
their parents worked in the same area or whether they themselves achieved long-distance 
social mobility. The long-range socially mobile – those who work in top professional socio-
economic groupings as adults but grew up in families where the main work was routine or 
manual – earn on average £7,700 less than those who grew up in families with jobs in the 
highest socio-economic bracket. This effect will in part be due to the kinds of schools and 
universities young people from different backgrounds attend. An additional explanatory factor 
is that different firms within ‘top job’ categories will have different pay and may seek to recruit, 
intentionally or otherwise, from a more or less privileged pool of candidates. But the fact 
remains that even when a child from a poor family accesses top jobs, it is probable their pay 
will be less than their privileged peers.56 This is not a level playing field: those who grow up in 
disadvantaged families are playing uphill and towards narrow goals. 

4.3 How are these problems being addressed?

Access to higher education

The November 2015 Green Paper Fulfilling our Potential lays out the Government’s plans 
for higher education.57 It makes a number of welcome commitments with the aim of driving 
improvements in social mobility. Primarily these are:

52 Sutton Trust, Internship or Indenture?, 2014
53 Association of Graduate Recruiters, Summer Survey, 2013
54 Sutton Trust, Earning by Degrees, 2014
55 Sutton Trust, Private Pay Progression, 2015
56 London School of Economics, Introducing the Class Ceiling: Social Mobility and Britain’s Elite Occupations, 2015
57  Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Fulfilling our Potential: Teaching Excellence, Social Mobility and Student 

Choice, 2015




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


98

•	 A commitment to improve access to HE by pupils from areas where participation is low;

•	 Streamlining of existing widening participation arrangements under a new umbrella body, 
the Office for Students. This will incorporate the role of OFFA – the fair access regulator – 
and the main functions of HEFCE, which also undertakes research and provides funding to 
open access to university; 

•	 Use of linked data to hold universities to account for the employment outcomes of their 
students as part of a new Teaching Excellence Framework;

•	 New powers for the Office for Students to require data to be made available to tackle 
access issues.

The Green Paper confirms the Government’s commitment to double the proportion of young 
people from low participation areas accessing HE by 2020, compared with 2009 levels. This 
is a substantial ambition. HEFCE finds the rate of increase in HE participation for the target 
group might need to as much as triple to achieve this.58 Achieving the same target in relation 
to children on free school meals would require a doubling in the current rate of increase. It 
is important that a focus on low participation areas is not at the expense of disadvantaged 
youngsters, but however the target is measured, the objective provides welcome 
encouragement to focus more on increasing participation for all. Plans to reduce the £380m 
Student Opportunity Fund by up to half have also been announced.59 This fund is focused on 
retention and progression of disadvantaged students. While cutting this fund may not have 
a direct impact on entry from disadvantaged areas there needs to be more clarity over how 
current levels of drop-out will be addressed. A comprehensive plan is needed that sets out 
how the Government’s objectives in this area will be met while funding is being reduced.

Thankfully the Government has restated its commitment to an independent fair access 
regulator. OFFA, which will in due course become part of the new Office for Students, plans 
to target participation work further on retention and progression of disadvantaged groups. 
The Commission believes these are necessary areas for focus, not least because of the 
spending reductions above. The Commission looks forward to seeing how the new Office 
for Students takes this mission to heart – for mature and part-time students as well as young 
entrants – and how universities respond in their access agreements to this continued push for 
action.60 Further, in the Spending Review the Government set out an intention to work with 
the Director of Fair Access to ensure universities take more responsibility for widening access, 
including collaborating on outreach to reduce inequality in admissions. This seems a sensible 
approach, but it will be important to target this at the right areas and ensure all universities – 
whether more or less selective – are involved.

Beyond the recent Green Paper, the Government has announced that from 2016-17 
living-cost grants for less well-off students will become loans. For a three-year course, 
this means average debt will rise from £40,500 to around £53,000 for the poorest 40 per 
cent of students.61 For those who go on to successful professional careers this will not be 
problematic. High earnings will more than make up for additional debt. But for those who do 
not convert their degree into a top job it will increase their debt burden and ultimately lead to 
a cost the Government will pick up if the debt goes unpaid. 

The implications of this policy for widening participation are not clear. It is good news that 
previous increases in fees did not by and large reduce HE participation for young full-time 
students. But it also was the case that when higher fees were introduced in 2012, grants for 

58  HEFCE, Delivering Opportunities for Students and Maximising their Success: Evidence for Policy and Practice 2015-2020, 


2015


59  Department for Business Innovation and Skills and HM Treasury, Department for Business, Innovation and Skills’ Settlement 
at the Spending Review 2015, 2015

60 Office for Fair Access, Strategic Plan 2015-2020, 2015
61 Institute for Fiscal Studies, Analysis of the Higher Education Funding Reforms Announced in Summer Budget 2015, 2015




Chapter 4: Fair access to university and the professions 


99

the poorest students increased by 10 per cent.62 Students are currently willing to shoulder 
substantial debts but it is less clear whether a point will be reached where the quantity of 
debt will seem too big and deter young people from applying to university. Trust in the student 
finance system may be further weakened following the decision to retrospectively change 
repayment conditions, freezing repayment thresholds in cash terms rather than increasing 
them in line with earnings. There is a need to proceed with greater caution, given the direct 
impact of the switch from grants to loans on the group whose participation in HE the 
Government seeks to increase. The confirmed freeze of the threshold at which student loans 
are repaid may also be significant, as students leaving university on lower incomes will see a 
proportional increase in repayments. Given that disadvantaged students are less likely to get 
into professional jobs, this could also have a deterrent effect.63 Should early evidence come to 
light that this policy will reduce participation by disadvantaged students, the Government will 
need to intervene or risk missing its public commitment.

Conversely, the welcome uncapping of student numbers could have a broadly beneficial 
effect on increased participation. More students attending university will lead to a growth in 
opportunities. The Government estimates 60,000 additional students a year will be starting 
HE from 2016.64 The immediate impact is clear: acceptances in 2015 are up by more than 
12,000 (3 per cent) on the previous year.65 Further, a commitment to allow part-time students 
to take maintenance loans and an extension of loans to postgraduates up to the age of 60 
may help reverse recent declines. Should these trends in participation continue, the longer-
term effect will be significant. Specifically it will present more chances for young people 
from less privileged backgrounds to access HE. This is positive news but it also comes with 
challenges, not least in ensuring that the rapid increase in numbers is met by support so that 
all entrants can succeed and that provision can expand in quantity without dilution in quality. 
For £9,000 a year, or more in the future, students and their families expect no less.

Access to the professions

The Social Mobility Business Compact, which began during the last parliament, continues 
under this Government. The compact is a voluntary commitment employers make to improve 
social mobility. In addition there is a ‘champion tier’ of firms that have agreed to stretching 
targets in relation to collection and publication of data about their own workforces and to 
examine how they can increase the number of people they recruit from less advantaged or 
minority backgrounds. The Department for Business provides a forum for the Champions’ 
Tier of firms to discuss and share best practice and has done a good job in holding firms to 
account for the criteria they have committed to. A report will be published in 2016 detailing 
the progress the champion firms have made. This is clear evidence of how government 
can provide real leadership in an important area. Over the next five years there is a need 
to continue working with those already signed up but also to expand the number of firms 
working towards becoming national – and global – leaders in opportunity.

The past year has seen continued activity by professional employers to improve access and 
make the case for social mobility. A number of firms have taken action to build the evidence 
base for reform. This includes publishing diversity statistics, and demonstrating commitment 
to transparency in relation to the socio-economic background of those they employ.66 The 
Civil Service has commissioned research into why those from lower socio-economic groups 
are less likely to apply to its Fast Stream graduate programme, and less likely to succeed if 
they do apply. Alongside an improved understanding of the barriers disadvantaged young 
people face in their careers, the Commission hopes the final report will provide the evidence 
and impetus to adjust the recruitment process itself. In financial services, J.P. Morgan has 

62 Ibid.
63 Sutton Trust, Unfair Deal, 2015
64 HM Treasury, Autumn Statement, 2013
65 UCAS, Interim Assessment of UCAS Acceptances by Intended Entry Year, Country of Provider and Qualifications Held, 2015
66 For example, see Ernst & Young, UK and Ireland Diversity and Inclusiveness Statistics, 2015




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


100


started a residential scheme in partnership with the Social Mobility Foundation; early evidence 
suggests good outcomes for the young people who have taken part.67 While it is critical that 
employers do not delay improving access, the specific barriers within the recruitment process 
– and what works in overcoming them – must be understood if real change is to take place.

Professional firms are also actively changing their hiring process. And firms have responded 
to the challenge of under-representation among new employees – either graduates or school 
leavers – of less advantaged socio-economic groups. Since our last annual report, firms in 
accountancy, law and professional services have ended A level and other academic criteria 
for graduate jobs, which disadvantage those who attended poorer schools,68 69 70 and 
created new apprenticeship routes to top professional occupations.71 A number of firms now 
subscribe to services that put young people’s grades in the context of their social background 
when making hiring decisions.72 73 These are most welcome changes and a necessary first 
step in making professional jobs accessible to a greater proportion of the population.

Finally there has been a range of actions taken to advocate for social mobility, provide 
guidance and raise the profile of these issues. In the legal and accountancy professions, 
the Prime74 and Access Accountancy75 schemes have similar objectives to the Business 
Compact. As with the compact, good progress was made initially, with many firms signing up. 
There is a need to ensure that the profile of these schemes remains high – the recent best-
practice event led by Access Accountancy is the kind of activity required. Other sectors have 
produced guidance to drive change. In medicine, Health Education England has published 
a widening participation strategy, aiming to tackle lack of social diversity in the profession,76 
including actions around widening access to medicine courses at university and reviewing 
admissions procedures at medical schools through the Medical Schools Council Selecting 
for Excellence review.77 In engineering, the Institution of Mechanical Engineers has set out 
proposals for government and the industry to improve participation.78 

All of this shows that an increasing number of sectors and employers have recognised the 
scale of the task and are beginning the tough process of working out how change can be 
achieved. There is no doubt the issue of fair access to professional employment is now on 
the agenda. The question is how to convert the welcome recognition of the need for change 
into real action to ensure it takes place.

67  Institute for Fiscal Studies, An Evaluation of the impact of the Social Mobility Foundation Programmes on Education 
Outcomes, 2015

68 PWC, UCAS Tariff Changes, 2015 (www.pwc.com)
69 Ernst & Young, Joining EY, 2015 (www.ey.com)
70 Grant Thornton, Applications and Minimum Requirements, 2015 (www.grantthornton.co.uk)
71 KPMG, KPMG Announces Plans for a New Apprenticeship Programme, 2015 (www.kpmg.com)
72 Deloitte, Social mobility: it’s Not Where You’re From, it’s Where You’re Going, 2015 (www.deloitte.com)
73 Linklaters, We’ll Look at Substance Rather Than Polish, 2015 (www.linklaters.com)
74 www.primecommitment.org
75 www.accessaccountancy.org
76 NHS Health Education England, Widening Participation: it Matters! Our Strategy and Initial Action Plan, 2014
77 Medical Schools Council, Selecting for Excellence Final Report, 2014
78 Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Social Mobility and the Engineering Profession, 2015

http://www.pwc.com
http://www.ey.com
http://www.grantthornton.co.uk
http://www.kpmg.com
http://www.deloitte.com
http://www.linklaters.com
http://www.primecommitment.org
http://www.accessaccountancy.org




Chapter 4: Fair access to university and the professions 


101


4.4 How can we go further?

Higher education participation

The Government’s commitments in the Green Paper to widening participation are the right 
starting point. Now there is a need to ensure that the opportunity presented by the creation 
of the Office for Students – not least putting all access activity under one roof – pays off. 
The most pressing challenge is the new commitment to double the proportion of young 
people from low participation areas entering HE. It is likely to be missed if recent trends 
continue. And even if the target is met, though more disadvantaged young people will be 
entering universities, the gap between poor students and others will barely have narrowed. 
Further, if widening participation activity over coming years serves the target exclusively there 
is a risk that disadvantaged pupils in high-participation areas (for example, many London 
boroughs) will lose out. By the end of the decade the Commission projects that those from 
low participation areas will still be less than half as likely to go to HE compared with those 
from areas with the highest participation. And youngsters eligible for free school meals will 
still be one-third less likely to go to HE by age 19 when compared with others.79 Of course, a 
substantial responsibility falls on parents, schools and communities to ensure young people 
are able to succeed at school. But universities and experts in this area, namely OFFA and 
HEFCE, retain a vital role in directing access funding to ensure this continued progress.

The current access agreement system has put widening participation front and centre 
in universities’ thinking but it does not yet present a solution to the problem of raising 
participation across the country. In response to this challenge, HEFCE has established 38 
National Networks for Collaborative Outreach – schemes to bring institutions together to 
improve HE participation in their areas. These schemes are time limited, with funding available 
only until the end of the 2015/16 financial year. An evaluation is planned by HEFCE but will 
not be available until the end of 2016.80 This gap in information is a challenge, especially as 
networks will need to become financially self-sustaining after current funding ends. But it 
would make it harder to widen participation – and for the Government to meet its target of 
doubling the proportion of young people from low participation areas entering HE – if the 
collaborative response to the participation problem was lost. It is right that the Spending 
Review has underlined the importance of collaborative action and that the government and 
OFFA will look into this. The university sector as a whole must spearhead the solution and the 
structures need to be in place to enable this.

The Government’s endorsement of the role of OFFA provides welcome support for widening 
participation activity in England. But whether the model of individual access agreements 
can deliver the shift in pace needed to achieve the Government’s ambitions is less certain. 
While on average progress is being made, some areas lag substantially behind. In the five 
local authorities with the lowest progression rates to HE for pupils from poor families, fewer 
than one in 10 disadvantaged young people are likely to progress to university. In the five 
authorities with the highest progression rates, nearly half of all young people eligible for free 
school meals progress to HE.81 Unless the lowest-achieving areas make more progress in the 
next few years, the Government will most likely miss its target of doubling the proportion of 
young people from areas with low participation in HE by 2020. Even if it is hit, unless those 
poorly performing areas see focused action, some parts of the country might barely reach 
2009 levels of progression by the end of the decade.

79 Projected from Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Widening Participation in Higher Education, 2015
80 London Metropolitan University, Evaluation of the National Networks for Collaborative Outreach (NNCOs), 2015
81 Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Widening Participation in Higher Education 2015, 2015




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


102


Figure 4.7: English local authority districts with the highest and lowest progression of 
young people eligible for free school meals to selective universities

Devon

Cumbria



Kent


Norfolk

Essex

Suffolk

North Yorkshire

Lincolnshire

Cornwall

Dorset

Wiltshire

Somerset
Hampshire

Northumberland

Shropshire

Durham

Lancashire

Surrey

Derbyshire


O

xfordshire



Glou

ceste

rshire

West Sussex

Herefordshire

East Sussex

Leeds

Staffordshire

Cambridgeshire

Leice
sters



hire Warwickshire Northamptonshire Nottinghamshire Hertfordshire

Worcestershire

East Riding
of Yorkshire

Buckingham
shire


Cheshire East


Bedford



York Doncaster

Rutland


Kirklees West

Berkshire


North Lincolns




hire


Bradford

Sheffield

Barnsley

Cheshire
West &
Chester

Wakefield


Central Bedfordshire

Calderdale

Isle of
Wight

Swindon

Rotherham

Peterborough

Medway


North Somerset

South
Gloucs

Milton
Keynes

Thurrock

Telford &
Wrekin

Derby

Poole

Bath & NE
Somerset

Torbay
Plymouth

North East
Lincolnshire

Leicester

Luton

Nottingham
Stoke-


on-

Trent

Brighton & Hove
Southampton

Kingston
upon Hull

Portsmouth

Blackpool

Southend on SeaBristol

Bournemouth



Kent

Surrey

Essex

Bromley

Hertfordshire

Havering

Barnet

Enfield


Bexley

Ealing

Brent

Harrow

Sutton

Merton


Hillingdon Croydon Hounslow

Thurrock


Redbridge

Greenw


ich

Newham


Lew

isham

Harin


gey Lambeth

Wandsworth S


outhwark

Camden


Waltham Forest Richmondupon Thames

Hackney

Westminster

Islington


Kingstonupon Thames Barking &Dagenham

Tower
Hamlets


Hamm &


 Fulham

Kens & Chelsea



City


Surrey

Wokingham

Oxfordshire

Hampshire

Buckinghamshire

Windsor & Maidenhead


Bracknell Forest

Reading

Slough

Warwickshire

Solihull

Birmingham

Staffordshire

Walsall

Dudley

Worcestershire

Coventry


Sandwell

Leicestershire

Wolver-
hampton

Lancashire

Wigan

Wirral

Calderdale

Bolton

Cheshire East

Oldham


Rochdale

Sefton



Bury D

erbyshire


Warrington


St Helens

Salford


Trafford

Stockp


ort

Halton

Liverpool

Tameside


Manchester Knowsley


Blackburn


with


Darwen

Cheshire West & Chester

Durham

North Yorkshire

Darlington

Gateshead


Sunderland Stockton-on-Tees


Hartlepool

NorthTyneside
South

Tyneside

Middles-
brough

Redcar &
Cleveland

Newcastle
upon Tyne

Isles of
Scilly

Proportion
progressing to
selective HE

Best 20%

Worst 20%

Data not available

Source: Department for Business, Innovation and Skills. Reproduced by permission of Ordnance Survey on behalf of HMSO, 


2015

Chapter 4: Fair access to university and the professions 


103


The risk of current policy for widening access is that many universities, especially more 
selective institutions, will continue to focus narrowly on target groups of students, for 
instance exceptional candidates from under-represented backgrounds, and dismiss general 
activity to drive up participation among disadvantaged students as too difficult or not their 
responsibility.82 On the other hand, universities that already attract large proportions of less 
advantaged pupils will spend their access funding, logically, on retention and success. 
These possible trends, combined with the preference for spending widening participation 
funds on bursaries and grants, seem likely to further squeeze out broad-based and shared 
programmes to increase participation of less advantaged young people. It is not acceptable 
for universities individually or collectively to in effect write off schools that send few or no 
pupils to good universities. Teachers and families alone cannot shift attitudes and ambitions 
to the extent required if lasting change is to be achieved.83 Universities need to find new ways 
of collaborating so that they can use their collective muscle to crack the hardest nuts – those 
schools in those parts of the country that currently send the fewest disadvantaged children to 
HE. The opportunity to use the HE reforms in the pipeline to solve this problem should not be 
allowed to pass by. 

Action is also needed to improve access to data on widening participation, as the HE Green 
Paper rightly acknowledges. The lack of availability of detailed UCAS data to identify specific 
outcomes and trends has been noted previously by the Commission as a block to progress.84  
UCAS is rightly concerned about broad access to information that may be used to identify 
individuals. But the Commission believes there are ways that data can be securely shared to 
allow vital questions to be answered, for instance via secure academic data portals. Without 
this, some issues in relation to participation will remain hidden, specifically the detailed 
selection decisions of universities, and trends in participation by background and location of 
residence. We hope that the Office for Students will work with UCAS to ensure future and 
historical data is made accessible, with stringent safeguards. 

Uncapping of student numbers will lead to more HE entrants who have not followed the 
traditional academic A level route. There was an 8 per cent increase in HE applicants with 
BTECs between 2014 and 2015, while over the same period the proportion with A levels 
remained steady.85 Lessons from Australia, which has a similar HE system and removed the 
numbers cap in 2012, suggest that universities will need to provide support for those who 
have gained entry via non-traditional qualifications or those less familiar with independent 
study.86 Failure to do so risks lower degree outcomes and a greater chance of disadvantaged 
students dropping out.87 There will need to be real clarity over how this will be pursued since 
the HEFCE budget used to support retention and progression of students, the Student 
Opportunity Fund, is being reduced. An increase in the stock of university places needs to be 
met by clear policy to ensure drop-out rates – particularly among disadvantaged students – 
come down. 

Planned changes to A levels present further challenges to widening participation, to which 
the HE sector will need to respond. As detailed in Chapter 2, A levels are becoming two-year 
courses with exams at the end. A/S levels can still be taken but will no longer count towards 
final A level grades. Some schools, perhaps those with funding to spare, are likely to continue 
to enter students for A/S levels. Even though this will not count towards final A levels it will 
provide an invigilated grade that can be used on UCAS forms. Pupils in schools who choose 
not to or cannot afford to prepare pupils for A/S levels as well as A levels will lose out as they 
will lack objective scores to present to universities. 

82 University of the West of England, AIMS Project: Towards a New Understanding of Widening Participation, 2015
83  Department for Business Innovation and Skills, Understanding Progression into Higher Education for Disadvantaged and 

Under-represented Groups, 2015
84 Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, Data and Public Policy: Trying to Make Social Progress Blindfolded, 2015
85 UCAS, Interim Assessment of UCAS Acceptances by Intended Entry Year, Country of Provider and Qualifications Held, 2015
86 Higher Education Policy Institute, A Guide to the Removal of Student Number Controls, 2014
87 Times Higher Education, Clearing the Way to Higher Dropout Rates? Lessons from Uncapped Australia, 2015




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


104


This fundamental change to the HE application process reopens the debate about whether 
to move the timing of the university application process so that students know their A level 
grades, rather than universities having to rely on predicted grades. There is a strong case 
to consider a shift to a post-qualification university admission process, despite the logistical 
challenges involved. First, with A/S levels being phased out, universities will be decreasingly 
able to predict reliably what applicants will actually get. And non-academic aspects of 
application may begin to take on a greater role, benefiting those from privileged backgrounds. 
Second, predictions based on GCSE scores will be more inaccurate than predications 
made on a track record of A/S level modules, and will be most inaccurate for the least 
advantaged.88 Third, the reputation of a school may become disproportionately important in 
university selection decisions: admission tutors may use historical success of a school as a 
proxy for accuracy of grade predictions. This would assist those who can access the best 
schools. Taken together these risks pose substantial challenges to the achievement of the 
Prime Minister’s widening participation objective. The Commission believes that the new 
Office for Students should take responsibility for reviewing the evidence and proposing a 
solution before the admissions process becomes a block to opportunity.

Student outcomes and access to top jobs

The Teaching Excellence Framework announced in the Higher Education Green Paper will 
create new and necessary accountability to ensure that universities are delivering value 
to their pupils. Quality of teaching is important to social mobility, and the framework may 
help some less advantaged pupils make informed choices about study. As the Green 
Paper acknowledges, the ultimate metric for social mobility is outcomes data. For young 
people, a clear picture of the kinds of employment and income a given course or institution 
provides is increasingly vital. Tuition fees make that data important for parents and families 
too. It is good news that the Government has put the legislation in place to enable data 
from different sources to be linked, and plans to act on this. The early studies using these 
approaches show their value and potential.89 As part of its commitment to data transparency 
and widening participation, the Government should accelerate this process of linking and 
publishing data over this parliament so that students can make decisions informed by the 
outcomes that matter.

The growth in new schemes and strategies that professional employers have announced 
to broaden their intakes is welcome. But there remains a patchwork quilt of action. Some 
firms and professions have risen to the challenge and begun the painful process of change. 
Others are barely acknowledging the problem. If access to the top jobs in the economy 
is to be genuinely open and fair, the changes that some are making need to become the 
preserve of all. The fair access agenda needs to move from the margins to the mainstream of 
employment practice across the professions. The key recommendations of the Commission’s 
research in this space,90 and the champion tier of the Government’s Social Mobility Business 
Compact (which the Commission helped design), are a good starting point and should be 
taken to heart by many more employers.91  

Real change also requires collection and analysis of data to assess the scale of the problem. 
This means better understanding the social make-up of current staff as well as new recruits. 
The Civil Service’s approach to this is an example of a thorough and serious attempt to start 
a programme of work.92 The ideal would be for all major professional employers to routinely 
collect background data from their new recruits and current employees so they can track 
progress and act on problems. 

88  Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Investigating the Accuracy of Predicted A level Grades as Part of the UCAS 
Admissions Process, 2011

89  Institute for Fiscal Studies, Comparing Sample Survey Measures of English Earnings of Graduates with Administrative Data 
During the Great Recession, 2015

90  Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, A Qualitative Evaluation of Non-educational Barriers to the Elite Professions, 


2015


91 Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Social Mobility Business Champion Criteria, 2014
92 Civil Service, forthcoming




Chapter 4: Fair access to university and the professions 


105


The public sector has made some progress in ensuring internships are available to those from 
disadvantaged backgrounds. The Whitehall Internship Scheme and the Summer Diversity 
Internship Programme currently provide around 400 places, around a quarter of the total 
paid work-experience places on offer in the state sector. In total, the public sector now 
offers the second-highest number of paid work-experience places, behind only investment 
banking.93 Other organisations will need to follow suit to show that their intent translates into 
opportunities on the ground. We are a long way from access to internships being based on 
what, not who, you now. Many more professions and employers need to take action to set 
that right.

93 High Fliers, The Graduate Market in 2015, 2015 (www.highfliers.co.uk)

http://www.highfliers.co.uk




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


106


The distance to go in increasing access to the professions

Accountancy and law are farthest ahead in their efforts to improve social mobility for 
their graduate intake. In accountancy, nearly nine out of 10 recruiters report targeted 
strategies to address socio-economic differences; in law, the proportion is seven in 10. 
Fewer than half of all other sectors have similarly targeted approaches.

Monitoring the background of staff is an essential tool to understand the social mobility 
challenge faced by employers. Accountancy, law and the public sector all perform 
well in this regard, with over half of all recruiters reporting monitoring activity. In most 
other sectors, monitoring is a minority activity: on average only just over one in 10 firms 
monitors the social background of recruits or employees (12 per cent). 

   Figure 4.8: Proportion of graduate recruiters with target strategies or data 
monitoring programmes to address socio-economic diversity 


Percentage020406080100

Source: Association of Graduate Recruiters, data supplied to the SMCP commission.

Monitoring Targeted strategy to address


FMCGIT/telecoms Public Law Energy, water or uti

litie


s firm Banking or financial services Retail Construction company or consultancy Accounting or professional services Engineering or industrial company Overall

 Source: Data supplied by the Association of Graduate Recruiters

Those sectors where progress lags need to look to those that have implemented their 
own schemes. Specifically, firms that are doing little need to consider what more they 
can do beyond targeting race and gender as priorities for action on inequality. 




Chapter 4: Fair access to university and the professions 


107


4.5 Conclusion and Recommendations 
Despite much focus and more action over the past few years, the gaps in access to leading 
universities and to top jobs are a high-profile reminder of where our nation fails the fairness 
test. Schools, as described in Chapter 2, need to improve young people’s outcomes but 
universities must match this by ensuring outreach activity gets where it is needed. The 
Government’s target to increase the number of students from low participation areas in HE 
sharpens this challenge. Universities need to take greater ownership for the outcomes of 
their students, and professional firms must do more to ensure their approach to finding and 
choosing new staff members is genuinely open and fair. There is no lever in Whitehall that can 
be pulled to solve this, but the Government can provide leadership. As a nation we are rightly 
proud of our world-class universities and professional companies. At this point, those with 
responsibility must pull together to make sure opportunities for access are fairly shared and 
talent is not missed.

Recommendation 1: The Government’s widening participation 
commitment requires around 12,000 more students from low 
participation areas to enter HE in 2020 compared to today. To ensure 
outreach activity accelerates to meet this vision, 5 per cent of universities’ 
widening participation funding – around £40 million – should be ring-
fenced for collaborative action and coordinated by OFFA and the new 
Office for Students.94

The current system of access agreements creates accountability for widening participation 
at the level of an individual university and ensures genuine consideration is given to this 
important issue. But universities as a body of organisations have no shared responsibility 
to increase participation in general and in all parts of the country. What this means is there 
can remain a large number of local authorities and schools that have significant problems 
in progressing disadvantaged students to higher education, yet participation activity is not 
targeted at these areas.

The Government has set its ambitions for widening participation. The university sector needs 
to rally around this, but a collaborative effort is required. Universities will need to significantly 
outdo recent progress. On a basic estimate this will require 12,000 more students from low 
participation areas entering HE by 2020 compared to 2014.

For these reasons we recommend that a portion of widening participation funding should be 
set aside to embed collaborative outreach at the heart of widening participation, to target 
areas where participation is low and to close the substantial gaps between poor students 
and others. This should be coordinated by OFFA and the new Office for Students to ensure 
collective effort across the HE sector in driving improvements. This will entail universities 
pooling their resources and skills to focus outreach activity on those schools and areas 
identified as the worst performers.

Recommendation 2: The Government should create a single online portal 
for young people to access public sector internships by 2017.

Despite increasing recognition that internships should be advertised openly and fairly paid, many 
are still secured through informal connections and remain unpaid. The public sector performs 
better than the private sector but the sheer range of internships it makes available – from defence 

94  At current rates (18.2 per cent in 2014), based on HEFCE’s POLAR measure, around 25,000 young people from low 
participation areas enter HE; at target rates (28.2 per cent in 2020) around 37,000 young people from low participation areas 
would enter HE via a UCAS application. HEFCE, Polar – Participation of Local Areas, 2015; UCAS, End of Cycle Report, 


2015

State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


108


to health, local to national government – makes access complex. Different organisations tend 
to have their own website or no website at all. There is a need to create a simple front-end so 
that students and young people can see what is available and then apply. The UK Government 
should make it a priority to bring order out of this chaos by creating a single interns.gov.uk 
website. In so doing, the public sector has the opportunity to blaze a trail for others to follow. 

Recommendation 3: Professional employers should follow the lead of 
those making the most progress in opening up more opportunities to 
people from disadvantaged backgrounds.

The Commission recommends professional firms, especially major recruiters of graduates and 
school leavers, hold themselves to account on the basis of the following measures. These 
are based on the Commission’s Business and Social Mobility manifesto,95 the criteria for the 
Social Mobility Business Champions96 and recent activity by firms:97 

Table 4.4: Opening up opportunities to people from disadvantaged backgrounds

Objective Why is it important?

Understand challenges. Collect data to 
understand the social background of applicants, 
recruits and current staff at different levels in the 
organisation. 

Review recruitment and selection procedures 
to identify where barriers exist and what can be 
done to overcome them – for both entry- and 
graduate-level positions.

In order to make progress, firms need to 
understand the social make-up of their 
organisations. 

Depending on the process a firm uses, 
disadvantaged candidates may fall behind at 
different stages in recruitment. Identifying where 
this happens is vital.

Remove roadblocks. Ensure initial thresholds 
for application are not exclusionary. Broaden the 
range of universities from which a firm recruits, 
reduce minimum academic/UCAS requirements 
and incorporate contextual admissions tools into 
the selection process.

Targeting only top universities and setting 
high UCAS-point thresholds will mean that 
some young people will not be able to apply 
at all. Changing such policies is important. 
Consideration of context is essential to 
understand the differences in opportunity 
candidates face.

Expand entry routes. Open up non-graduate 
entry routes with good progression prospects. 
Ensure entry requirements do not exclude 
disadvantaged young people.

The majority of young people do not follow the 
university route. Building work-based routes that 
recognise real-life experience is vital to social 
mobility.

Engage strategically. Forge connections with 
schools and young people. Encourage staff to 
become school governors.

Enduring relationships with schools will lead 
to changes in young people’s attitudes and 
prospects. Businesses can help explain and 
support paths to professions for those lacking 
experience in the family.

Open opportunities. Pay and advertise for 
internships, targeting at least 25 per cent at 
disadvantaged groups.

Many internships convert into permanent jobs. 
Ensuring these are accessible to people from 
different backgrounds is an important part of 
opening up the professions.

Embed leadership. Appoint a board-level 
business leader to champion this agenda.

To achieve real change, social mobility needs to 
be a ‘business as usual’ aim – akin to tackling 
inequality based on gender, race and disability – 
not a separate corporate social responsibility.

95 Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, Business and Social Mobility: A Manifesto for Change, 2013
96 Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, The Champion Criteria and 12 Month Timeline, 2014
97 For example, the civil service research cited above




Chapter 4: Fair access to university and the professions 


109


Changing employer practices to overcome the barriers young people from disadvantaged 
families face in accessing the best jobs must become a top objective for professional firms. 
As the arguments for reducing gender and ethnic inequalities were won in the 20th century, 
the arguments for reducing those that stem from family origins are gaining ground in the 21st. 
Firms that have committed to improving social mobility are making major changes to reduce 
the disadvantages some young people face. But if a One Nation vision is to be achieved, 
best practice must spread beyond the vanguard. The Commission will assess top employers 
throughout 2016 to see what progress has been made.




Child poverty overview


111


Child poverty overview

Britain’s child poverty problem

Child poverty in Britain is about average for the EU, although it is 
significantly higher than in the Netherlands, Denmark or France.1 
Fortunately, child poverty in the UK has been on a downward trend since 
the early 1990s. At its highest level in 1992, nearly three in 10 children were 
in relative poverty (see Figure CP1). On the same measure, fewer than two 
in 10 children are in poverty today. Yet there are still 2.3 million children 
living below the current statutory child poverty line. These numbers hide 
the day-to-day tragedy of child poverty, from the effects of low-quality and 
insecure housing, through a lack of new, quality clothes that other children 
take for granted, to unhappy and anxious early years.2 3 4 Child poverty 
imposes a lasting burden. When doors to opportunity are closed off early 
in life, the chance to do well as an adult is much reduced.

Progress in reducing child poverty has been welcome, but it must not 
be allowed to grind to a halt – or worse, reverse and undo years of 
improvements. If we are to achieve a One Nation Britain, first, today’s level 
of child poverty must be reduced – and then eradicated for good.

1 Office for National Statistics, Persistent Poverty in the UK and the EU: 2008-2013, 2015
2  HM Government, An Evidence Review of the Drivers of Child Poverty for Families in Poverty Now and for Poor Children 

Growing Up to be Poor Adults, 2014
3 Joseph Rowntree Foundation, A Minimum Income Standard for the UK in 2015, 2015
4 Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, Social and Emotional Learning: Skills for Life and Work, 2015




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


112


How much child poverty is there in Britain – and are things 
getting better or worse?

Measuring child poverty

Under the Child Poverty Act 2010 there are four main ways in which poverty is 
measured – and against which targets have been set for 2020/21. Although the Welfare 
Reform and Work Bill will repeal the targets, data against the measures will continue to 
be published. The main measures (which all relate to income before housing costs) are 
as follows:

Relative low income: the proportion of children who live in households with income 
below 60 per cent of the current median (adjusted for household size). This currently 
equates to an annual income of £21,691 a year for a couple with two children – or 
just short of £17,000 for a single parent with two children. The target is to reduce this 
measure to 10 per cent or less.

Combined low income and material deprivation: the proportion of children who live 
in households with income below 70 per cent of the current median who experience 
material deprivation. Material deprivation refers to individuals’ or households’ inability to 
afford particular goods typically bought in wider society. The target is to reduce this to  
5 per cent or less.

Absolute low income: the proportion of children who live in households with  
income below 60 per cent of the 2010/11 median. The target is to reduce this to  
5 per cent or less.

Persistent poverty: the proportion of children who live in households with income 
below the current median in at least three of the previous four years. The target is to 
reduce this to 7 per cent or less. (Data is not currently reported against this target.)

In 2013/14, 2.3 million children (17 per cent) were in relative poverty, and 2.6 million (19 per 
cent) lived in absolute poverty. Relative poverty and absolute poverty have decreased by 
less than half a percentage point each since 2012/13. These decreases are not statistically 
significant, so the measures can be said to have remained flat. 

On the sharpest measures of child poverty, there are 1.7 million children in combined low 
income and material deprivation (13 per cent), and half a million in severe low income and 
material deprivation (4 per cent). These have not changed since 2010. At the height of the 
recession, the fact that 1 million young people were unemployed was rightly described as 
a crisis – and more than double that number of children are in poverty. Yet unlike youth 
unemployment, poverty is not fading away with the economic recovery. Britain’s child poverty 
crisis is a stubborn one that a return to economic growth alone cannot fix.




Child poverty overview


113


Figure CP1: Relative and absolute poverty trends over the long term, 1979–2013 


0102030405060Percentage

Absolute child povertyRelative child poverty


19791980198119821983198419851986198719881989199019911992199319941995199619971998199920002001200220032004200520062007200820092010201120122013

1980 recession 1990 recession 2008 recession

Source: Institute for Fiscal Studies, Living Standards, Poverty and Inequality in the UK (supplementary data), 2014

Behind the shocking headline numbers, child poverty in Britain has changed. Once it was a 
problem of workless households – in 1996, 43 per cent of children in relative poverty were in 
working households, but now almost two-thirds (63 per cent) are.5 To be clear, having parents 
out of work still makes it more likely that a child will be in poverty; however, the majority of 
poor children are poor not because their parents cannot find work, but because their parents 
are in work with income that is too low. Despite working hard, sometimes at more than one 
job, mums and dads across the country struggle to provide adequately for their kids. The 
underlying reasons for this are complex, spanning the jobs market and welfare system. As 
described in Chapter 5 (page 141) there is much scope for government and employers to 
make a real difference for the lives of the largest group of poor children.

There is also a powerful geographic dimension to child poverty in Britain. At the broadest 
regional level, children in the south east are 70 per cent less likely to be in poverty than those 
in Wales and Northern Ireland (13 versus 22 per cent). Once housing costs are taken into 
account, relative poverty ranges from one in five children in Scotland (21 per cent) to nearly 
twice this (37 per cent) in London.

Virtually every local area of the UK – even the most affluent local authorities – have significant 
pockets of disadvantage, but it is not evenly distributed across the country.6 The proportion 
of children in low-income households varies from 5.5 per cent in Hart in Hampshire to 39 per 
cent in Tower Hamlets in London. Differences at a ward level are even more extreme.7 One-
third of children in poverty in the UK live in the most deprived 1,000 wards, whereas only one 
in 100 children in poverty live in the least deprived 1,000 wards. This illustrates the scale of 
the geographic divide in opportunity in the UK. There are 33 wards where more than half of 
children are in poverty (including 24 out of the 582 wards in Northern Ireland (see Figure CP2).

5 Institute for Fiscal Studies, Nearly Two-thirds of Children in Poverty Live in Working Families, 2015
6  This is based on HM Revenue & Customs’ estimates of children in households that claim Income Support, income-based 

Jobseeker’s Allowance or Child Tax Credit, where household income is less than 60 per cent of median. Therefore, it is not 
strictly comparable to headline poverty estimates 

7 A ward is the smallest electoral division in the UK. There are just under 9,500 each with a population in the thousands




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


114


Figure CP2: The fifth of local authority districts with the highest concentrations of  
child poverty

Orkney
Islands

Shetland
Islands

Proportion of children
in low-income families

Best 20%

Worst 20%

Data not available

Scotland

Wales

South West
South East

North


West


East of
England



East

Midlands

Yorkshire
& Humber



West

Midlands

North


East


London

Source: HMRC, Personal tax credits: children in low income families local measure: 2013, 2015. Reproduced by permission of 
Ordnance Survey on behalf of HMSO, 2015




Child poverty overview


115


What explains these trends?
Progress has been made in reducing child poverty since the 1990s, demonstrating that 
improvement is possible in the right circumstances. As Figure CP1 illustrates, between  
2000 and today, relative poverty has decreased by 9 percentage points. This is a drop of  
one-third. These most recent trends reflect decreasing worklessness in the period before the 
recession and increased support from the state for those with children.8  

More recently child poverty against the headline relative measure has flat lined, contrary to 
forecasts that it would rise (though absolute poverty is higher than in 2010, especially once 
housing costs are taken into account). Predictions were based on the effects of the recession, 
reduced welfare entitlements and employment and earnings outlooks from the Office for 
Budget Responsibility.9 Compared to the assumptions that underpinned the predictions of 
rising poverty, employment growth since 2010 has been faster than expected and earnings 
growth has been lower than expected. Faster employment growth, especially the 11 per 
cent rise in lone parent employment from 2010–14, has reduced the number of children in 
workless households and protected them from poverty. Slower earnings growth has resulted 
in falls in real earnings across the income distribution. However, low earners have been 
relatively protected as they tend to rely on the state for a greater proportion of their income. 
Additionally, low earners may have benefited from lower than expected council tax rises and 
increases in the personal allowance targeted at this group. A final consideration to bear in 
mind is that data on child poverty is produced with significant time lags – the latest data tells 
us what happened in 2013–14.

Even when trends over time are understood, it begs the question why Britain has such high 
levels of child poverty at all. After all, Britain is the fifth wealthiest country in the world, and 
today our economy is growing above the trend of many similar nations. There is no simple 
explanation, but a combination of increases in low-paid work and job insecurity, a decline 
in well-paid jobs for those with few skills, and the challenges of combining work and caring 
responsibilities across the generations all play their role. At a family level, lone parenthood 
and large families are also significant. These problems are not unique to the UK, but similar 
countries to ours have lower rates of child poverty (see Figure CP3). It seems they may have 
found better ways of reducing the incidence of child poverty.

8 Hills, J., The Coalition’s Record on Cash Transfers, Poverty and Inequality 2010–2015, 2015
9  For detail of some of these benefit changes, see Institute for Fiscal Studies, Living Standards, Poverty and Inequality in the 

UK: 2015, 2015




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


116


Figure CP3: Absolute child poverty (60 per cent of 2008 median income) across  
the OECD 


Percentage Norway Finland Denmark Slovakia Sweden Czech Republic Australia Korea Slovenia Netherlands Austria Poland Switzerland Germany Belgium Cyprus New Zealand France Japan Canada Malta Estonia Hung

aryCh


ile Portugal UKBulgaria Luxembourg Croatia Ireland Italy Turkey Romania Lithuania Iceland USAMexico Israel Spain Latvia Greece051015202530354045

Source: UNICEF, Children of the Recession: The Impact of the Economic Crisis on Child Well-being in Rich Countries, 201410 

Note: This chart is based on an absolute measure anchored to 2008

Conclusion
After a decade and a half in which child poverty fell significantly, progress appears to have 
stalled. The Commission – along with the vast majority of independent experts – believes that 
the targets in the Child Poverty Act 2010 are certain to be missed. For example, to achieve 
the relative poverty target, progress over the next five years would need to be nearly as much 
as over the last 15 years. Worse still, it seems highly likely that child poverty will increase in 
the period to 2020: the Institute for Fiscal Studies forecasts that it is likely to rise to above  
20 per cent on the headline relative poverty measure.11 This is without taking into account 
the additional £12 billion of cuts to welfare entitlements announced by the Government since 
May 2015, which will increase poverty even further. In part, this reflects adverse economic 
circumstances. But in the Commission’s view, it also reflects a clear reduction in the priority 
being given to this issue.

The Commission recognises that there are complex arguments about how best to measure 
poverty, and accepts that the target of abolishing child poverty by 2020 has ceased to be 
a realistic prospect. We welcome the Government’s continued commitment to tackling the 
root causes of poverty, but remain convinced that assessment of progress must include an 
income measure. It would be counter-intuitive for any government to claim it was successfully 
reducing poverty if this was not reflected in smaller numbers of people living on low incomes. 
As this report demonstrates, if poverty is not tackled, real opportunity will be the preserve of 
those born to better-off parents. That is hardly the mark of a One Nation Britain.

10  To enable cross-country comparison, UNICEF uses a different method to official UK statistics. The UK child poverty level 
appears higher here than elsewhere in this section.

11 Institute for Fiscal Studies, Child and Working-age Poverty in Northern Ireland over the Next Decade: An Update, 2014




Child poverty overview


117


Housing and poverty

The targets in the Child Poverty Act relate to poverty before housing costs; the situation 
looks worse when housing costs are taken into account. In 2013/14 relative child 
poverty after housing costs was 28 per cent (compared to 17 per cent before housing 
costs), and absolute poverty after housing costs was 31 per cent (compared to 19 per 
cent before housing costs).12 These differences reflect the high levels of housing costs 
in this country and the fact that housing benefit counts as a form of income, and so 
makes some households appear better-off compared to others than they actually are. 

We welcome the Government’s commitment to dramatically increase the number of 
houses built and its efforts to increase home ownership. However, it is regrettable that it 
is not taking more positive action to tackle the housing issues faced by those for whom 
home ownership is not a realistic option.

The Government is cracking down on private sector rogue landlords by creating a new 
database of offenders and introducing more stringent tests for those letting houses in 
multiple occupation.13 Its decision – announced in the 2015 Summer Budget – to cut 
social housing rents by 1 per cent will benefit tenants who pay their own rents (while 
also reducing the housing benefit bill). 

However, from April 2016 tenancies let at social rents will be capped to the amounts 
covered by relevant local housing allowances, which already have been frozen for the 
next three years. As a result housing benefit will no longer fully cover the costs that 
families pay to live in social housing.14

Traditionally, social housing was seen as the long-term option for low-income 
households, but successive governments have pushed up rents and moved away 
from providing subsidies that would support a large increase in supply. Right to Buy 
policies have led to a further diminution in the available stock. The result has been that 
the proportion of households living in the social housing sector fell to 17 per cent in 
2013/14, its lowest point since the mid-1960s.

Most of the unmet need has been absorbed by the private rented sector. The 
proportion of households with dependent children living in the private rented sector 
trebled in the decade 2003–04 to 2013–14 from 8 per cent to 24 per cent. This 
includes almost one in three lone parent families.15 Families living in this sector have 
much less stability and security than those who own their own homes or live in social 
tenancies. Just one-fifth (20 per cent) of renters have lived in their current homes for five 
years or more, despite 82 per cent saying that when choosing a home the option to live 
there for five years or more was important to them.16

In 2014–15, 9,590 social rented homes were delivered, less than half the number 
delivered in 2004/05.17 Cuts to social housing rents (plus the uncertainty that this reversal 
of policy creates in relation to future rental streams) is likely to keep this figure low. 

Against this background, it seems clear that many low-income families are likely to 
spend much or all of their lives in the private rented sector, where rents are likely to 
continue to rise dramatically. Forecasts made prior to the 2015 Autumn Statement 
suggest that private rents in England will rise by around 90 per cent in real terms 
between 2008 and 2040 – more than twice as fast as incomes. All other things being 
equal, this in turn will boost poverty rates among private renters to as high as 53 per 
cent by 2040 (compared to 43 per cent in 2008).18

12  Department for Work and Pensions, Households Below Average Income, An Analysis of the Income Distribution 1994/95–
2013/14, 2015

13 Department for Communities and Local Government, Tackling Rogue Landlords and Improving the Private Rental Sector, 2015
14 HM Treasury, Spending Review and Autumn Statement 2015, 2015
15 Department for Communities and Local Government, English Housing Survey: Table FT1241, 2015
16 Shelter, Making Renting Fit for Families: the Impact of Different Forms of Rent Regulation, 2015
17 Department for Communities and Local Government, Affordable Housing Supply: April 2014 to March 2015 England, 2015
18 Stephens, M., et al., What Will the Housing Market Look Like in 2040?, 2014


119

Chapter 5: Tackling low pay and in-work poverty

Chapter 5: Tackling low pay and in-work 
poverty

•	 1.5 million children are in poverty because their working parents do not 
earn enough to secure a basic standard of living.

•	 The risk of absolute poverty for working families after housing costs has 
increased over the last decade.

•	 20.5 per cent of UK full-time employees are in low paid jobs, compared 
to an OECD average of 17.1 per cent.

•	 Four out of 10 children in working poor households live in families 
where parents might reasonably be expected to enter work or work 
more hours.

•	 The Government aims to tackle these problems by moving the UK from 
a “low wage, high tax, high welfare society to a higher wage, lower tax, 
lower welfare society” and has a number of policies – including the 
National Living Wage – to do so.

•	 The Government’s plans will have a positive impact on some of the 
drivers of working poverty and the increased focus on tackling low pay 
and increasing parental employment is welcome. However, recently 
announced changes to Universal Credit will make many low-income 
working families significantly worse off.

•	 The Government should, as the public finances improve, revitalise 
employment incentives in Universal Credit.

•	 Employers should take more responsibility for their employees’ 
living standards with change led by a vanguard group of ‘One Nation 
Employers’ acting as a beacon for others.

•	 The Government should set a clear objective for the UK to become a 
Living Wage country by 2025 at the latest and work with business to 
develop a comprehensive pay, progression and productivity plan that 
aligns Government programmes behind that goal.

•	 This will mean halving the proportion of people who earn less than  
two-thirds of median hourly pay to 10 per cent of employees, so putting 
the UK on a par with the best performing countries in Europe.


120

State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain

5.1 Introduction
It is widely accepted that work is the best route out of poverty: children in workless families 
are almost three times as likely to be poor as those whose parents are in work.1 However, 
finding a job is, on its own, not a guarantee of escaping poverty: for example, 1.5 million 
children in working families – more than one in eight – are in poverty. Working poverty on this 
scale is a sign that something is seriously wrong in our society.

The problem of in-work poverty has a significant impact on the welfare system. Forty-four 
per cent of children in working households – almost five million children – are in families in 
receipt of tax credits, and around 12 per cent of working families with children are in receipt 
of housing benefit. The combined cost of financial support for working families with children 
through tax credits and support with housing costs was an estimated £22.6 billion a year 
in 2013–14 – 1.6 per cent higher in real terms than in 2009–10, despite significant cuts in 
entitlements to these benefits over the last few years.2 

The Prime Minister has said that he wants the country to move from “a low wage, high tax, 
high welfare society to a higher wage, lower tax, lower welfare society”,3 with responsibility for 
securing decent living standards for those in work shifting from the state towards employers 
and individuals.

The 2015 Summer Budget set out the Government’s blueprint for achieving this goal. Key 
measures include:

•	 A £12 billion reduction in welfare entitlements between 2015 and 2020;

•	 A renewed commitment to full roll-out of Universal Credit;

•	 Increased work expectations on parents of pre-school children in receipt of tax credits;

•	 A higher minimum wage for over-25s through the National Living Wage;

•	 Increases in the income tax personal allowance to £12,500 by 2020;

•	 A series of changes to business taxation and regulation intended to support businesses in 
creating higher wage jobs.

The Government’s hope is that the combined effect of these measures will help parents to 
increase their net earnings from employment (through, for example, entering employment, 
working longer hours, increasing their hourly earnings and paying less income tax), and 
reduce their living costs (for example, by moving to cheaper housing or choosing to have 
smaller families).

The risk of this approach is that while cuts in welfare entitlements are certain and affect family 
incomes immediately, the compensatory changes are less certain and will take longer to 
materialise. Unless the hoped-for impacts of the Government’s reforms on employment, 
earnings and living costs are successful in fully offsetting reductions in benefits, it will become 
more difficult for low-income families to achieve decent living standards, and there will be 
increases in child poverty and income inequality.

This chapter explores the key drivers of the UK’s working poverty problem, describes the UK 
Government’s approach towards tackling working poverty, and identifies a number of areas 
where further action could help achieve the Prime Minister’s vision.

1 All the data in this chapter about child poverty come from Department for Work and Pensions, Households Below  
 Average Income, June 2015, unless otherwise stated
2 Commission analysis using data from the Department for Work and Pensions housing benefit extract from February 2015:  
 https://stat-xplore.dwp.gov.uk/; Department for Work and Pensions, Housing Benefit Caseload Statistics, 2015; and HM  
 Revenue and Customs, Personal Tax Credits Statistics, using gross domestic product (GDP) deflators to adjust for inflation
3 David Cameron, Speech on Opportunity, 22 June 2015: https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/pm-speech-on-opportunity

https://stat-xplore.dwp.gov.uk/
https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/pm-speech-on-opportunity


121

Chapter 5: Tackling low pay and in-work poverty

5.2 Does today’s reality meet the One Nation vision?
A One Nation Britain would be one where every child whose parents are fulfilling society’s 
expectations about how many hours they should work, given their health and caring 
responsibilities, has a decent standard of living.

We are long way from achieving that vision. Too many hard-working families in Britain are 
unable to enjoy basic living standards. Two-thirds of children in poverty live in working 
households, and the best available evidence suggests that most of them – an estimated six 
out of 10 – have parents who are working sufficient hours to meet their responsibilities within 
Universal Credit.4 

The relative importance of working poverty has been growing for the last 20 years. For 
example, in 1996–97 more children in poverty lived in workless families than in working 
ones. This is in many ways the flipside of success in tackling workless poverty: the number 
of children in workless households has fallen by 36 per cent since 1997,5 and children in 
workless families are less likely to be in poverty than in the past.

The proportion of children in working families who are in relative poverty before housing  
costs – 13 per cent in 2013–14 – has changed little over time. However, after taking account 
of housing costs, recent trends are more concerning. Over the last decade, the risk of 
absolute poverty for working families after housing costs has increased from 17 per cent in 
2003–04 to 23 per cent in 2013–14, suggesting that economic growth over the last decade 
has not translated into higher living standards for low-income working families (see Figures 
5.1 and 5.2).

Figure 5.1: Proportion of children in the UK who live in working poor families


0510152025

2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 2006-07 2007-08 2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13 2013-14


Percentage


Relative low income (before housing costs)
Relative low income (after housing costs)
Absolute low income (before housing costs)
Absolute low income (after housing costs)

Sources: Institute for Fiscal Studies, Incomes in the UK, 2014; Department for Work and Pensions, Households Below Average 
Income, June 2015

4  Bradshaw, J. and Main, G., How Many Working Poor Parents Might Be Able to Work More?, March 2014. Available from  
http://spruyork.blogspot.co.uk/2014/03/how-many-working-poor-parents-might-be.html. This analysis is based on self-
reported working patterns from the Family Resources Survey. It has been assumed that the hours of work of those who say 
they are working full-time/part-time correspond to the expectations that will be set within Universal Credit

5 Office for National Statistics, Working and Workless Households, 2015

http://spruyork.blogspot.co.uk/2014/03/how-many-working-poor-parents-might-be.html


122

State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain

Figure 5.2: Proportion of children in absolute poverty after housing costs by family type 
and work intensity


Percentage All families All lone parents All couples Lone parent – full-time work Lone parent – part-time work Lone parent – not working Couple – both full-time work Couple – one full-time, one part-time Couple – one full-time, one not working Couple – one or more in full-time self employment Couple – part-time work only Couple – not working0102030405060708090100

2003-04 2009-10 2013-14


 

Source: Department for Work and Pensions, Households Below Average Income, June 2015

There are three aspects to the working poverty problem in the UK that we will focus on in the 
rest of this section. First, the extent of low pay and its impact on different groups. Second, 
the importance of second earner employment and part-time working patterns in affecting the 
chances that a family will be in working poverty. Finally, the difficulties many families face in 
escaping from working poverty.

Problem 1: The UK has more low-paid workers than most other 
developed countries.

The introduction of the National Minimum Wage in 1999 has virtually eradicated extreme low 
pay – defined as hourly pay below half of median hourly earnings – for those aged 21 and 
over in the UK. For example, the National Minimum Wage rate in April 2015 for this group 
was, at £6.50 per hour, 55 per cent of median hourly earnings of £11.75.6 

However, low pay more broadly – defined as hourly pay below two-thirds of the median – has 
been broadly static since the mid-1990s, with around 22–23 per cent of employees paid at 

6  Median hourly pay excluding overtime. Office for National Statistics, Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings, Table 1.6b, 
November 2015. We have used the April 2015 National Minimum Wage rate rather than the current rate (£6.70) to align with 
the latest reliable data on median hourly earnings


123

Chapter 5: Tackling low pay and in-work poverty

this level (see Figure 5.3).7 The UK has the eighth highest rate of low pay in the Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries: 20.5 per cent of full-time 
employees are in low pay, compared to an OECD average of 17.1 per cent.8 And the UK is a 
long way behind the best performing countries in Europe: Sweden, Finland, France, Belgium, 
Norway and Denmark all have fewer than 10 per cent of workers paid less than two-thirds of 
hourly median pay – less than half the levels of low pay seen in the UK.9 

Over the last few years, the proportion of workers who are not paid enough to achieve a 
basic minimum standard of living – defined as being paid less than the voluntary Living Wage 
rates set by the Living Wage Foundation – has increased significantly due to a combination 
of falling real earnings, high inflation faced by lower income households, and decreases in the 
generosity of in-work benefits since 2010. These trends are expected to continue over the 
next few years despite the upward pressure on pay at the bottom of the earning distribution 
associated with the introduction of the National Living Wage in April 2016.10 

The introduction of the National Living Wage will mean there will be three main types of wage 
floor in the UK: 

1. The National Minimum Wage – the statutory minimum rates for apprentices and people 
aged 24 and under;

2. The National Living Wage – the statutory minimum rate for people aged 25 and over, 
excluding apprentices;

3. The voluntary Living Wage – a scheme operated by the Living Wage Foundation: 
employers can become accredited living wage employers by paying all their staff and on-
site contractors at least this wage. 

The only true living wage – by which we mean a wage based on an assessment of the 
income that different families need to secure a basic minimum standard of living – among 
these three is the one that is set by the Living Wage Foundation.

7 Resolution Foundation, Low Pay Britain 2015, October 2015
8 OECD, OECD Employment Outlook 2015, Statistical Annex, Table O – Earnings Dispersion and Incidence of High and Low Pay, 2015
9 Eurostat, Statistics Explained: Earnings Statistics, January 2013: http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/ 
 Earnings_statistics#Earnings_and_low-wage_earners_by_sex
10 Resolution Foundation, Low Pay Britain 2015, October 2015

http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Earnings_statistics#Earnings_and_low-wage_earners_by_sex


124

State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain

Figure 5.3: Trends in low pay in the UK over the last 45 years


196819701972197419761978198019821984198619881990199219941996199820002002200420062008201020122014Percentage

Low pay: below 2/3 median
Extreme low pay: below 1/2 median
Below the Living Wage


0510152025 

Source: Resolution Foundation, Low Pay Britain 2015, 2015

There are big differences in the prevalence of low pay between different groups of the 
population. For example, analysis by the Resolution Foundation11 shows that:

•	 By gender: six out of 10 of those paid less than the Living Wage are women, and 27 per 
cent of women are paid less than the Living Wage compared to 17 per cent of men;

•	 By age: almost half (46 per cent) of those paid less than the Living Wage are aged 
between 16 and 30. Young people are two-and-a-half times more likely to be paid less 
than the Living Wage (39 per cent of those aged 16 to 30 versus 16 per cent of those 
aged 31 and above);

•	 By working pattern: almost six out of 10 (55 per cent) of those paid less than the Living 
Wage work part-time. Those who work part-time are more than three times as likely  
to be paid less than the Living Wage than those who work full-time (43 per cent versus  
14 per cent);

•	 By occupation: almost three-quarters (71 per cent) of those paid less than the Living 
Wage work in personal services, sales and customer services or elementary occupations;

•	 By industry: more than half (55 per cent) of those paid less than the Living Wage work in 
the hospitality, wholesale and retail, and administrative and support services industries;

•	 By sector: 91 per cent of those paid less than the Living Wage work in the private and 
third sectors. Those in the private sector are three-and-a-half times more likely to be paid 
less than the Living Wage than those in the public sector (28 per cent versus 8 per cent).

There is wide variation across the country in people’s ability to earn enough to support their 
families (see Figure 5.4). For example, at a regional level, the estimated proportion of workers 
paid less than the Living Wage rates set by the Living Wage Foundation varies from 19 per 
cent of employees who work in London, the South East of England and Scotland to 29 per 
cent in Northern Ireland. At a local level, it varies from 5 per cent of employees who work in 
the City of London to 42 per cent of employees who work in West Somerset.12 

11 Resolution Foundation, Low Pay Britain 2015, 2015
12 Office for National Statistics, Estimates of Employee Jobs Paid Less than the Living Wage in London and Other Parts of the  
 UK, October 2015


125

Chapter 5: Tackling low pay and in-work poverty

Figure 5.4: Proportion of employee jobs paid less than the Living Wage

Orkney
Islands

Shetland
Islands

Proportion of jobs 
below the living wage

Best 20%

Worst 20%

Data not available

Scotland

Wales

South West
South East

North


West


East of
England



East

Midlands

Yorkshire
& Humber



West

Midlands

North


East


London

Source: Office for National Statistics, Estimates of Employee Jobs Paid Less than the Living Wage in London and Other Parts of 
the UK, October 2015


126

State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain

Problem 2: Many working poor families are not fulfilling society’s 
expectations around how much they work.

The evidence is clear that for families in low-paid work to reliably escape poverty, at least one 
parent must work full-time and, for couples, both parents need to be in work:

•	 Poverty risks are relatively low where a lone parent or both parents in a couple 
are in full-time employment: 3 per cent of children with two parents in full-time work 
and 9 per cent of children with a lone parent in full-time work are in relative poverty before 
housing costs (although 20 per cent of children with a lone parent in full-time work are in 
poverty after taking housing costs into account);

•	 Poverty risks are far higher in single-earner couple families: 20 per cent of children 
in families where one parent works full-time and the other does not work are in relative 
poverty before housing costs;

•	 Children in households where no one works full-time – especially those in couple 
families – are also at high risk of poverty: 41 per cent of children in working couple 
families where no one works full-time are in relative poverty before housing costs, as are 
16 per cent of children with a single parent in part-time work.

However, more than half (56 per cent) of children in working poor families either have no 
parent in full-time work, or live in couple families where only one parent is working:

•	 Almost one in three children (30 per cent) in working poor families live in single earner  
(full-time) couple families;

•	 16 per cent of children in working poor families live in couple families where no one works full-time;

•	 11 per cent of children in working poverty live in lone parent families with a parent who is 
working part-time.

Of course, society does not expect every lone parent to work full-time and both parents in 
every couple to be in work. For example, there is widespread acceptance that lone parents 
and one parent in a couple should not be expected to work at all when their children are 
very young, and should only be expected to work part-time at family-friendly hours when 
their children are toddlers and in primary school. For example, research by the Child Poverty 
Action Group13 found that:

•	 Few people thought it was reasonable to expect lone parents and second earners in couples 
to work more than 20–25 hours a week until their youngest child was 13 years old;

•	 Only one-third of people said it was reasonable to expect lone parents and second 
earners to work outside of 9–5 Monday to Friday (although fewer than half said it was 
unreasonable, with the balance not expressing a view one way or the other);

•	 Only a fifth of people said it was reasonable to expect lone parents and second earners 
to work unpredictable hours, with 57 per cent of respondents saying that this was an 
unreasonable expectation.

The Government’s work expectations for parents that will be embedded in the welfare system 
through Universal Credit are similarly tailored to family circumstances:14 

•	 The main earner in couple families will be expected to work full-time, regardless of how old 
their children are (with some exemptions for those with limited capability for work or regular 
caring responsibilities for a disabled person);

13 Child Poverty Action Group, Round the Clock: In-work Poverty and the “Hours Question”, April 2015
14 Department for Work and Pensions, Universal Credit and Your Family, 2013 as amended by HM Treasury, Summer Budget  
 2015, 2015 (which reduced the age at which lone parents and main carers in couple families will be expected to find work,  
 from when their youngest child is five years old to when they are three years old)


127

Chapter 5: Tackling low pay and in-work poverty

•	 Lone parents and the main carer in couple families will not be compelled to find work until their 
youngest child is three years old (currently, five years old), and allowance will be made for caring 
responsibilities (for example, only expecting them to work during their child’s school hours);

•	 Lone parents and the main carer in couple families will not be compelled to find full-time 
work until their youngest child is 13 years old.

As noted earlier in this chapter, the best available evidence suggests that an estimated six out of 
10 children in working poor households live in families where parents are working the hours that 
will be expected of them under Universal Credit.15 This leaves almost four out of 10 children in 
working poverty living with parents who might be expected to enter work or work more hours. 
More than three-quarters of these children are in single-earner couple households where the 
youngest child is of school age, or couple households where no one is in full-time work. In other 
words, the key working poverty challenges in terms of parental employment are getting more 
second earners in couples into work and helping more parents in couple families to enter full-
time work (see Figure 5.5).

The good news is that there has been a lot of progress over the past 20 years in increasing 
parental employment, which is at historically high levels: 92 per cent of fathers in couples, 
73 per cent of mothers in couples and 64 per cent of lone parents were in employment in 
April–June 2015. As a result, the proportion of children in workless households is the lowest 
since records began in 1996: at 11.8 per cent of children, including 4.6 per cent of children in 
couple households and 38.5 per cent of children in lone parent households.16 

Figure 5.5 Proportion of children in working families in poverty by whether their parents 
are working enough to meet current Universal Credit requirements

Meeting Universal Credit 
requirements
Not meeting Universal 
Credit requirements
Couple: no-one in 
full-time work
Lone parent in part-time 
work – children over 13

Couple: one in full-time 
and one in part-time work 
– children over 13 
Couple: one in full-time 
work and one not working 
– children over five 

37%63%


45%10%10%35%

Source: J. Bradshaw and G. Main. How Many Working Poor Parents Might Be Able to Work More?, March 2014:  
http://spruyork.blogspot.co.uk/2014/03/how-many-working-poor-parents-might-be.html 

However, the UK still has lower parental employment rates than many OECD countries: for 
example, the lone parent employment rate in the UK remains below the OECD average.17 The 
UK also has a far higher prevalence of part-time working among lone parents and second 
earners: for example, only around a quarter of lone parents work full-time (compared to the 
OECD average of 49 per cent), and only around a quarter of couples with children are both in 
full-time work (compared to the OECD average of 38 per cent).18 This latter issue has a double 
effect on working poverty, given that part-time work tends to be lower paid and associated 
with fewer prospects for progression.

15  Bradshaw, J. and Main, G., How Many Working Poor Parents Might Be Able to Work More?, op. cit.
16 Office for National Statistics, Working and Workless Households 2015, October 2015
17 OECD, Families Database, Table LMF1.3, 2015
18 OECD, Families Database, Tables LMF2.2 and LMF2.3,  2015

http://spruyork.blogspot.co.uk/2014/03/how-many-working-poor-parents-might-be.html


128

State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain

Problem 3: Working poor families often find it difficult to escape from poverty. 

In a One Nation country, families would be able to escape working poverty by increasing their 
earnings through working more hours or developing and progressing up the career ladder 
over the course of their working lives, rather than finding themselves trapped in a dead-end 
job for years on end, or cycling between entry-level roles and unemployment.

However, many working poor families cannot earn enough to escape poverty even if they 
work long hours since they face high effective marginal tax rates which mean that if they 
increase their earnings their net income hardly changes. As noted above, the best available 
evidence suggests that 900,000 children are in poverty despite their parents working enough 
hours to meet the expectations that will be placed on them under Universal Credit.19 Their 
parents find it extremely difficult to escape poverty as, in the current tax credits system, if they 
pay income tax they will only keep £27 out of every additional £100 they earn, with the £73 
of lost earnings split between income tax (£20), National Insurance contributions (£12) and 
reductions in tax credits (£41). Working parents in receipt of housing benefit or local council 
tax support can face even higher effective marginal tax rates than this, with some parents 
seeing effective tax rates in excess of 90 per cent.20 Overall, half of people claiming tax credits 
face marginal effective tax rates in excess of 73 per cent, and a fifth face marginal effective 
tax rates in excess of 82 per cent.21 The impact of such high effective tax rates can be seen in 
the fact that four out of 10 families in working poverty who experience an increase of earnings 
of 10 per cent or more do not escape poverty.22

Furthermore, this is not just a temporary issue. Many parents who get stuck in low-paid 
work find it almost impossible to escape. Research carried out for the Commission23 
suggests that of those in low paid work in 2001 – defined as having an hourly wage less than 
two-thirds of the median – only one in seven had reliably escaped low pay a decade later in 
2011.24 

Looking only at those who were predominately in work, one in four had reliably escaped low 
pay, with most of the remainder (64 per cent) cycling in and out of low pay (although only 
12 per cent of those predominately in work were stuck in low pay throughout the period). 
Characteristics associated with getting stuck in low pay included being a single parent, working 
part-time or working in the hospitality industry or a sales occupation. However, recent trends 
in pay progression are more encouraging – our research suggests that the proportion of adults 
getting stuck in low pay has fallen significantly since the 1990s (see Figure 5.6).25 

19  Bradshaw, J. and Main, G., How Many Working Poor Parents Might Be Able to Work More?, op. cit.
20 See for example, Policy in Practice, 93% Tax?! Effective Marginal Tax Rates Explained, October 2015:  
 http://policyinpractice.co.uk/93-tax-effective-tax-rates-explained/
21 Resolution Foundation, Credit Where It’s Due, March 2015
22 Department for Work and Pensions, Child Poverty Transitions, June 2015
23 Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, Escape Plan, 2014
24 Defined as being in work and not being in low pay in each of the last three years of the decade
25 Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, Escape Plan, 2014

http://policyinpractice.co.uk/93-tax-effective-tax-rates-explained/


129

Chapter 5: Tackling low pay and in-work poverty

Figure 5.6: Proportion of low-paid workers escaping low pay over the course of a decade


0102030405060

1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000


Percentage

Cyclers
Stuck

Escapers

Decade beginning in

Source: Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, Escape Plan, 2014

5.3 How are these problems being addressed?
The UK Government has criticised efforts by previous administrations to tackle in-work 
poverty via expansion of financial support for low-paid working parents through the welfare 
system. The Prime Minister has described the system as a “merry go round… dealing with 
the symptoms of the problem: topping up low pay rather than extending the drivers of 
opportunity – helping to create well paid jobs in the first place”,26 while the Chancellor has 
said that “it cannot be right that we go on asking taxpayers to subsidise, through the tax 
credit system, the businesses who pay the lowest wages. Subsidised low pay contributes to 
our productivity problem”,27 and the Secretary of State for Work and Pensions has described 
tax credits as “a subsidy for employers which enabled the payment of lower wages”.28 

The UK Government’s revised approach for tackling working poverty is based instead around 
three key elements:

•	 Stepping up efforts to encourage and support employers to increase pay and productivity, 
especially of the lowest earners;

•	 Allowing working families to keep more of what they earn by increasing the income tax 
personal allowance and increasing childcare support;

•	 Implementing welfare reforms aimed at encouraging parents to take greater responsibility 
for increasing their income and standard of living through entering employment, increasing 
their hours of work and reducing their living costs. It is also hoped that these reforms will 
encourage employers to increase pay.

Increasing pay and productivity
The UK Government’s flagship policy for tackling working poverty is the introduction of a 
premium in the National Minimum Wage for adults aged 25 or over (excluding apprentices) 

26 David Cameron, Speech on Opportunity, 22 June 2015: https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/pm-speech-on-opportunity
27 http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201516/cmhansrd/cm150708/debtext/150708-0001.htm, column 337
28 House of Commons, Hansard Debate, 9 July 2015, Col. 486, 2015

https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/pm-speech-on-opportunity
http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201516/cmhansrd/cm150708/debtext/150708-0001.htm


130

State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain

through a new National Living Wage. As mentioned previously, this will be introduced in April 
2016 at a rate of £7.20, and is intended to increase to reach 60 per cent of median hourly 
earnings of adults aged 25 and over by 2020, subject to sustained economic growth. It will 
directly affect up to 2.8 million people over the age of 25 who otherwise would be earning less 
than the forecast National Living Wage in 2020 and indirectly affect many more, as its effects 
ripple upwards through the earning distribution.29 The Commission warmly welcomes this move.

Allowing working families to keep more of what they earn
The second element of the UK Government’s strategy is allowing working families to keep 
more of what they earn. The key policy here is increasing the income tax personal allowance, 
which will reach £11,000 in April 2016, with the Government pledging to increase it to 
£12,500 (or 30 hours at the National Minimum Wage rate for 48 weeks a year, if this is higher) 
by April 2020. The Institute for Fiscal Studies expects that a basic rate taxpayer earning more 
than £12,500 will pay £208 less tax in 2020–21 than they would have done if the 2015–16 
personal allowance were uprated with inflation.30 

Another important part of the Government’s strategy is reducing the need for households to 
spend money on childcare. Measures include increasing the maximum support for childcare 
costs available within Universal Credit from the current 70 per cent of eligible costs to 85 per 
cent in April 2016, extending the current entitlement to 15 hours per week free childcare for 
three and four year olds to 30 hours where all adults are in work, and the introduction of tax-
free childcare from 2017.

Implementing welfare reform
The final element of the strategy is the UK Government’s welfare reform programme. The key 
policy here is the implementation of Universal Credit, which the Government hopes will have 
a transformative impact on employment through, for example, improving work incentives 
for workless families, simplifying benefit taper rates, merging the in-work and out-of-work 
support systems, and improving the government’s capacity to help and support families in in-
work poverty to increase their earnings.31 

In addition, the 2015 Summer Budget announced a number of reductions in welfare 
entitlements – the vast majority of which will affect children and working-age adults in working 
households – expected to save £12 billion by 2019–20 and far more than that over the long-
term as welfare measures are fully implemented. The most important changes (see Table 5.1) 
were a series of reductions to tax credit and Universal Credit entitlements (together raising 
£5.5 billion, or 45 per cent of total savings) and freezing all working age benefits and housing 
benefit in cash terms for four years (which raises £3.9 billion, or one-third of total savings). 
While the Government has since decided to slow down the pace at which these savings will 
be delivered by maintaining the current income thresholds and taper rate in the legacy tax 
credits system, the ultimate impact on working families by the end of the parliament, when 
most families are expected to be on Universal Credit, will be similar to what was originally 
intended. 

These cuts to in-work support are of grave concern to the Commission, because they will 
cause real hardship to many working families and undermine the beneficial impact of other 
welcome initiatives such as the National Living Wage. 

However, the UK Government expects that these reforms will change the behaviour of people 
in receipt of benefits by, for example, encouraging them to enter employment, work longer hours 
or reduce their living costs by moving to cheaper accommodation or having smaller families. 
For example, recent analysis of the early impact of Universal Credit for single, unemployed 
claimants in the 10 Pathfinder areas found that claimants were 6 per cent more likely to be 

29 Office for Budget Responsibility, Economic and Fiscal Outlook, July 2015
30 Institute for Fiscal Studies, Taxes and Benefits: The Parties’ Plans, IFS Briefing Note BN172, April 2015
31 Department for Work and Pensions, Universal Credit: Welfare that Works, November 2010; Department for Work and  
 Pensions, Universal Credit: Impact Assessment, December 2012


131

Chapter 5: Tackling low pay and in-work poverty

in work nine months after starting their claim compared to similar Job Seekers Allowance 
claimants as Universal Credit was “making it more worthwhile and easier for people to accept 
short-term temporary work”.32 The Government also hopes that reductions in in-work support 
will lead to increases in earnings due to the impact of the resulting decrease in effective pay 
rates on labour supply – they believe that employers will be forced to increase pay in order to 
be able to continue to attract staff.

The overall impact of welfare reforms on family incomes is uncertain given the impact that 
such radical changes could have on parental employment and hours of work. However, it 
seems certain that many low-income working families with children will see big reductions 
in their income over the next few years, with lone parents, single-earner couples and large 
families seeing particularly large falls (see Figure 5.7). While things have altered a bit due to 
the policy changes made in the 2015 Autumn Statement, the distributional impact of changes 
to tax and benefits implemented between 2015–16 and 2019–20 remains similar.33

Figure 5.7: Impact of the 2015 Summer Budget on household incomes in 2020


1st

(poorest)

2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th
(richest)


Mean change in income, £ annual


Equivalised net household income

-1,000



-800




-600




-400




-2000200Change in income (%)-10-8-6-4-202


Change in net income, without National Living Wage (£)
Change in net income, with National Living Wage (£)
Change in net income, without National Living Wage (%)
Change in net income, with National Living Wage (%)

Source: Resolution Foundation, Higher Ground: Who Gains from the National Living Wage, 2015 

32  Department for Work and Pensions, Universal Credit – Estimating the Early Labour Market Impacts: Updated Analysis, 
December 2015

33 Resolution Foundation, O, Blessed Revisions: Fiscal Windfall and What To Do With It, 2015


132

State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain

Measure Savings in 
2019–20  
(£ million)

% of 
total 

savings

Notes

Uprating: freeze working-
age benefits, tax credits and 
local housing allowances for 
four years from 2016–17 in 
cash terms

£3,885 32.2 Frozen in cash terms: equivalent to a 6.4 
per cent real terms cut between 2015–16 
and 2019–20 based on Office for Budget 
Responsibility (OBR) Consumer Price Index 
(CPI) projections

Tax Credits: reduce income 
thresholds in tax credits and 
work allowances in Universal 
Credit from April 2016

£3,310 27.4 The income threshold in tax credits – allowed 
earnings before benefits begin to be  
reduced – were planned to be reduced 
from £6,420 to £3,850. Universal Credit 
work allowances will be abolished for non-
disabled childless claimants, and reduced to 
£192 per month for those receiving support 
for housing costs (e.g. a 27 per cent cut in 
work allowances for single parents from the 
previous planned level of £263 per month), 
and £397 per month for those who are not 
(e.g. a 46 per cent cut in work allowances 
for single parents from the previous planned 
level of £734 per month)

The 2015 Autumn Statement announced 
that the Government would not proceed with 
reductions in income thresholds in tax credits 
while retaining cuts in work allowances 
in Universal Credit. This will reduce total 
savings from this measure to £2,745 million 
in 2019–20

Housing benefit: reduce 
social sector rents by 1% 
each year for four years from 
2016–17

£1,320 10.9 This will increase the disposable income 
of social tenants who pay part of their rent 
themselves – social rents are expected 
to decrease by 10 per cent in real terms 
between 2015–16 and 2019–20 (based on 
OBR CPI projections) – so will improve living 
standards of many families currently in social 
housing

Tax credits: limit child 
element to two children for 
new births in tax credits 
and new claims in Universal 
Credit

£1,055 8.7 This will not affect existing claimants with a 
continuous claim unless they have additional 
children

Tax credits: remove family 
element in tax credits and 
Universal Credit, and the 
family premium in housing 
benefit, for new claims

£555 4.6 This will mean a cut of up to £545 per year 
for families with children in receipt of tax 
credits or Universal Credit 

Employment and Support 
Allowance: align Work-
Related Activity Group rate 
with Jobseeker’s Allowance 
for new claims

£445 3.7 From April 2017, the benefit rate paid to 
new claimants of Employment and Support 
Allowance (ESA) placed in the Work Related 
Activity Group (WRAG) will be reduced to 
align with the Jobseeker’s Allowance rate. 
Similar changes will be made in Universal 
Credit

Table 5.1: Cuts in the welfare budget announced in the 2015 Summer Budget 


133

Chapter 5: Tackling low pay and in-work poverty

Measure Savings in 
2019–20  
(£ million)

% of 
total 

savings

Notes

Benefit cap: Reduce 
to £20,000 (£23,000 in 
London)

£405 3.4 The benefit cap will be cut from £26,000 to 
£20,000 for: 

a. Childless couples where no one works 
>30 hours per week; 

b. Couples with children where either no one 
works >16 hours per week, or combined 
working hours are <24 hours per week;

c. single parents working fewer than 16 
hours per week. 

Lower caps will apply for single adults with 
no children working fewer than 30 hours per 


week


Tax credits: increase tax 
credits taper rate to 48%

£345 2.9 The tax credit taper was planned to increase 
from 41 per cent to 48 per cent of gross 
income from April 2016 (Universal Credit 
rates would have been unaffected)

The 2015 Autumn Statement announced that 
the Government would not proceed with this 
measure

Housing benefit: support 
for mortgage interest –  
change from welfare 
payment to a loan

£255 2.1 Will allow the state to recoup the costs of 
support for low-income owner-occupiers

Housing benefit: pay to 
stay – higher income social 
housing tenants to pay 
market rents

£245 2.0 Social tenants with incomes of £30,000 per 
year (£40,000 in London) will pay a market 
rent or near-market rent, with additional 
income from council tenants accruing to the 
Exchequer 

Tax credits: reduce income 
rise disregard in tax credits

£180 1.5 Reducing income disregard from £5,000 to 
£2,500

Housing benefit: end 
automatic entitlement for 
out-of-work 18–21-year-olds

£35 0.3 There will be some exemptions made in 
circumstances where the Government 
considers it to be reasonable to support a 
young person in living independently

Tax credits: Universal Credit 
parent conditionality from 
when youngest child turns 
three

£35 0.3 Introducing a new expectation that lone 
parents and main carers in couples will work 
at least part-time when their children are 
aged three years old (currently five years old)

Total savings by 2019–20 £12,070 100%


134

State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain

The Commission was especially concerned about the plans announced in the 2015 Summer 
Budget to reduce the income thresholds in tax credits and work allowances in Universal 
Credit, and to increase the taper rate in tax credits from 41 per cent to 48 per cent. These 
changes would have resulted in millions of families in low-paid work who are ‘doing the 
right thing’ and working as much as society expects them to, seeing their annual income 
fall by thousands of pounds on 1 April 2016.They also would have made it more difficult for 
these families to work longer hours or find a more highly paid job in order to make good the 
difference: the effective marginal tax rate of parents who pay income tax and receive tax credits 
was planned to increase from at least 73 per cent in the current system to at least 80 per cent. 

These changes were counter to the Government’s objective to create “a country that backs 
those who work hard and do the right thing”34, would have worsened working poverty and 
would have set back the Government’s ambitions to improve social mobility. The Government 
deserves much praise for thinking again and deciding against implementing these cuts in April 
2016. The delay will give families more time to adjust to the changes to the benefit system, 
allow the introduction of the National Living Wage to have a bigger impact on gross earnings 
of the low paid than otherwise and, on current plans, mean that no existing claimants lose 
out provided they have a continuous tax credit claim over the next few years unless they 
experience a significant change in circumstances.

However, cuts in Universal Credit work allowances are still going ahead. It will be very difficult 
for many affected families to increase their hours of work and hourly pay to avoid big cuts to 
their incomes compared to the current system. For example, a lone parent working full-time 
at the minimum wage who receives no support with their housing costs will see a reduction 
of £2,600 per year – £50 per week – in their income from this measure in isolation.35 The 
combined effect of income tax, National Insurance and the Universal Credit taper will mean 
that Universal Credit claimants who pay income tax will only keep 24 per cent of any increase 
in their earnings: this means that the parent in this example will have to increase their earnings 
by some £210 per week – or 72 per cent of expected gross full-time earnings at the minimum 
wage in 202036 – to make up the income losses they will face as a result of the reduction in 
their work allowance. The £39 per week increase they will see in their earnings as a result of 
the introduction of the Living Wage37 will help a little, but is not on the scale required to make 
up the losses. 

A second potential issue is the rules around transitional support for those transferring 
from the tax credit system to the Universal Credit system and the extent of changes in 
circumstances that trigger the ending of such support. Given that many families will now be 
due substantially lower awards under Universal Credit than under the tax credits system, 
there will be greater incentives for claimants to avoid a change in circumstances that triggers 
the ending of transitional support. The Government needs to take care that the system is 
well-designed to avoid this.

34 Prime Minister’s Office, PM Sets Out His Vision for the Country in a One Nation Queen’s Speech, 27 May 2015
35 Their Universal Credit entitlement will be reduced by 65 per cent of their net income between the old (£734/month) and new  
 (£397/month) work allowances
36 Based on Office for Budget Responsibility forecasts, the National Minimum Wage will be an expected £8.25 per hour in 2020  
 – 35 hours work at this hourly rate gives a weekly gross income of £289
37 The Office for Budget Responsibility forecast that the National Living Wage in 2020 will be £9.35 per hour - £1.10 per hour  
 higher than the expected National Minimum Wage rate


135

Chapter 5: Tackling low pay and in-work poverty

5.4 How can more progress be made?
The UK Government’s strategy will have a positive impact on some of the key drivers of 
working poverty. The focus on tackling low pay and increasing parental employment is 
particularly welcome. However, there are several implementation risks, and some of the 
changes that the Government has announced will have a negative impact. This section looks 
at the opportunities and risks around tackling each of the three working poverty problems 
identified earlier in the chapter:

•	 Tackling low pay;

•	 Increasing parental employment and hours of work;

•	 Making it easier to escape working poverty.

Tackling low pay
We welcome the introduction of the National Living Wage as an important first step in tackling 
in-work poverty. We believe that it could make a real difference:

•	 It will provide a significant boost to the earnings of parents in low-paid work. Based on 
OBR forecasts, someone aged over 25 working 35 hours a week at the statutory minimum 
would earn £39 per week, or £2,000 per year more in 2020 before adjusting for inflation as 
a result;38 

•	 It will lead to a significant decrease in the extent of low pay. The Resolution Foundation 
forecast that the proportion of employees paid less than two-thirds of the median 
hourly wage will decrease from 21 per cent in 2014 to 19 per cent in 2020, bringing the 
prevalence of low pay down to levels last seen in 1985;39 

•	 Those who remain in low pay will also benefit significantly. The low pay gap – the total 
increase in pay necessary to bring every employee up to two-thirds of median earnings – 
will almost half, from £7.9 billion in 2014 to £4.4 billion in 2020;40 

•	 It could save small but significant sums of public money (around £800 million per year) if 
the Government was prepared to take action to avoid the unintended consequences of 
the National Living Wage on increasing the state pension and working-age benefits.41 

The Government will need to address a number of issues to ensure that the National Living 
Wage’s potential in tackling in-work poverty can be maximised.

First, there is a risk that the introduction of the National Living Wage could have an 
unintended consequence in reducing employment growth. The big increase in the wage 
floor that it represents – equivalent to an 11 per cent year-on-year change on the National 
Minimum Wage rate that applied in April 2015 – means that the UK will have one of the 
highest statutory minimum wages in the world. Employers might respond in a number  
of ways:

•	 Reducing employment and hours of work. The OBR has forecast that employment will 
decrease by 60,000, with total weekly hours worked decreasing by 4 million, although it 
notes that impacts are highly uncertain;

•	 Cutting back on non-pay conditions of employment, such as holiday pay, staff discount 
cards and childcare support;

38 Office for Budget Responsibility, Economic and Fiscal Outlook, July 2015. The Office for Budget Responsibility forecasts that  
 the National Living Wage will be £9.35 an hour, and the National Minimum Wage will be £8.25 an hour, by 2020
39 Resolution Foundation, Low Pay Britain 2015, 2015
40 Resolution Foundation, Low Pay Britain 2015, 2015
41 Office for Budget Responsibility, Economic and Fiscal Outlook, July 2015. This is the total direct impact on income tax  
 receipts, National Insurance contributions, VAT receipts, corporation tax receipts, out-of-work benefits and in-work benefits,  
 and excludes the knock-on effects on uprating of the state pension and other benefits


136

State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain

•	 Increasing the use of zero hour and short-hour contracts to give more flexibility to adjust 
labour costs with demand;

•	 Substituting young employees or self-employed contractors not entitled to the National 
Living Wage for older employees who are;

•	 Investing in capital equipment such as self-checkouts to replace employees;

•	 Increasing the prices charged for goods and services, or accepting lower profits;

•	 Redesigning jobs and production processes to try and increase the productivity of low-
paid employees.

Second, the National Living Wage will have a far bigger impact in some areas of the country, 
some industries and some occupations than others. Government will need to work with 
employers to mitigate undesirable side-effects that this could have on employment in parts of 
the economy that are particularly vulnerable. The recommendations we made last year about 
the need to give the Low Pay Commission a more proactive remit around tackling low pay are 
even more relevant now, given the introduction of the National Living Wage:

•	 While London will be hardly affected by the introduction of the National Living Wage – 
fewer than 10 per cent of jobs in London pay less than £7.20 per hour – there are 80 local 
authority districts in the UK where more than one in five jobs are paid at or below this level;42 

•	 By 2020 the National Living Wage will affect six out of 10 workers in the cleaning industry, 
half of workers in the hospitality and residential care industries, and more than four out of 
10 workers in the retail and support services industry;43 

•	 The combined impact on the introduction of the National Living Wage with expected 
above inflation increases in the National Minimum Wage is expected to increase payroll 
costs for frontline social workers by £3.9 billion in 2020. This is in addition to the severe 
demographic and financial pressures on social care that the sector will need to deal with 
over the next few years. There is a risk that these additional pressures lead to increased 
rationing of social care and knock-on costs for other public services, such as the NHS;44 

•	 The government will be effectively setting pay for 15 per cent of private sector employees 
by 2020 – a huge change in the labour market.45 

Third, many parents who will see a pay rise as a result of the National Living Wage will not 
see a big rise in their overall incomes, as increases in income tax payments and National 
Insurance contributions and reductions in in-work benefits eat away much of the gains. For 
example, lone parents will only keep on average one-quarter of any increases in their pay 
resulting from the National Living Wage.46 Unless high marginal effective tax rates are reduced, 
the impact of the National Living Wage on living standards will be limited for many families.

Fourth, the National Living Wage is not a true living wage. It is set at a far lower level than 
the voluntary living wages based on family living costs and household incomes which are 
promoted by the Living Wage Foundation, and now adopted by more than 2,000 employers 
covering 68,000 employees.47 It is crucial that the Government continues to support and 
encourage employers to go further than the new statutory minimum, especially in those 
sectors and areas where this will have a limited impact on total labour costs: the voluntary 
Living Wage is set to increase rapidly over the next few years as the flipside of cuts in in-
work support, with the proportion of employees paid below the voluntary Living Wage set 

42 Office for National Statistics, Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings, 2015
43 Resolution Foundation, Taking Up the Floor: Exploring the Impact of the National Living Wage on Employers, 2015
44 Resolution Foundation, Care to Pay: Meeting the Challenge of Paying the National Living Wage in Social Care, November 2015
45 Resolution Foundation, Low Pay Britain 2015, 2015
46 Resolution Foundation, Higher Ground: Who Gains from the National Living Wage, 2015
47 Living Wage Foundation, Living Wage Rate Increases Announced as Campaigners Call for More Businesses to Go Beyond  
 Legal Minimums, 30 October 2015


137

Chapter 5: Tackling low pay and in-work poverty

to increase from 22 per cent to 30 per cent between 2014 and 2020.48 This is especially 
important in high-cost areas such as London, where the National Living Wage will make little 
difference to pay and is far below what is necessary to allow working families to sustain a 
basic standard of living without substantial financial support from the state.

Finally, the direct positive impact of the National Living Wage on the public finances is offset 
by its unintended impacts on the value of the state pension and working-age benefits. The 
OBR expects that there will be £1.1 billion of direct savings from higher receipts from income 
tax, National Insurance and lower in-work benefit payments. After accounting for direct costs 
arising from higher out-of-work benefit payments and lower corporation tax revenue, the net 
direct gains are £800 million per year. However, based on current policy, three-quarters of this 
will be lost through indirect knock-on effects into the state pension (which the Government has 
guaranteed will rise in line with average earnings growth, and which will be somewhat higher as 
a result of the National Living Wage) and working-age benefit uprating (inflation is also expected 
to be higher as a result of the National Living Wage). It is entirely feasible for the Government to 
claw back these unintended effects of the National Living Wage on the public purse by making 
compensatory reductions to these other benefits.49 

Increasing parental employment and hours of work
Successive governments have sought to reduce child poverty by encouraging more women with 
dependent children, especially lone parents, to take on paid work through a combination of policy 
measures including:

•	 Improving work incentives through policies such as the introduction of Working Tax Credit 
and increases in the income tax personal allowance;

•	 Significantly increasing work expectations on lone parents, expecting them to look for 
work when their youngest child is five years old rather than 16 years old – as it was in 
2008 before the introduction of Lone Parent Obligations;

•	 Providing targeted support to help lone parents enter employment;

•	 Extending the availability of free and subsidised childcare – for example, through the 
introduction of 15 hours a week free childcare for all three- and four-year-olds and the 
Childcare Tax Credit;

•	 Encouraging employers to use flexible working arrangements to help parents combine 
work and family life.

The Government is taking action intended to drive further increases in the maternal employment 
rate. For example, the introduction of Universal Credit will introduce the same work expectations 
for main carers in couples in receipt of tax credits as currently exist for lone parents, 
expectations on lone parents and second earners are set to increase further by requiring them 
to enter employment when their youngest child is three years old from April 2017, and the 
other childcare measures discussed earlier in the chapter will also help support employment.

However, other government policy changes mean that this drive may not lead to a significant 
shift towards full-time working among lone parents and second earners.50 For example:

•	 The introduction of Universal Credit will result in a significant decrease in the incentive 
for second earners to enter employment and progress in work, as a higher proportion of 
earnings are clawed back from their benefit payments;

•	 There is a risk that many parents will choose to reduce their hours of work once the 
income supplements within Working Tax Credit at 16 and 30 hours in the current system 
have been removed.

48 Resolution Foundation, Low Pay Britain 2015, 2015
49 Office for Budget Responsibility, Economic and Fiscal Forecast, July 2015
50 Resolution Foundation, Credit Where It’s Due, 2015


138

State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain

The net impact of changes to Universal Credit announced in the 2015 Summer Budget on 
work incentives is largely negative, due to significant reductions in the generosity of work 
allowances. Analysis by the Resolution Foundation concludes that: 

  The stated aim to boost the incentive to enter work has been significantly reduced… these 
changes will do very little to improve the incentives for low paid families to find a path into 
work and then to progress – seen as a key route out of poverty – and for many they will 
make a difficult situation worse.51

The introduction of in-work conditionality in Universal Credit may mitigate some of these 
issues, but the system is still under development and policymakers are still far from clear 
about how it will work in practice. Relying solely on this untested system to prevent parents 
from acting on the increased financial incentives to reduce their working hours that exist 
in Universal Credit compared with the current tax credit system – especially families that 
currently work more hours than the proposed hours requirements, or where parents earn 
more than the National Minimum Wage – is risky. Further action is required to ensure that 
work incentives within Universal Credit and the development of the in-work conditionality 
system support the overall goal of tackling working poverty.

Making it easier to escape working poverty
As we have stated in previous reports, the introduction of Universal Credit provides a 
big opportunity to help people to progress in work, and to help ensure that entry-level 
employment is a springboard to higher earnings in the future, rather than a dead end with 
no prospects for development and progression. Action will be required by employers and 
government to ensure that entry-level employment can become a more reliable start of a 
journey to escaping in-work poverty than it currently is.

In the current tax credit system, those stuck in low-paid or low-hours employment are 
given little support and encouragement to progress. The move to Universal Credit could be 
transformative in encouraging more people in low-paid work to aspire to progress and linking 
them up with practical support to help them do so. However, as highlighted above, there 
is still limited understanding of what will be effective in helping people to progress in work, 
as the Government continues to test different approaches during 2015 and 2016 ahead of 
determining its core in-work approach.52 

One important barrier to progression is that for some parents the relatively low financial 
returns from moving one step up the career ladder may not outweigh the downsides of career 
progression, such as a changing work–life balance, disruption to social relationships at work 
and the risk that promotion just doesn’t work out. Our research into this issue53 found that 
in many businesses, a promotion only brought a pay rise of 30–50p per hour (or £10–£20 
per week). After taking account of the fact that many in receipt of tax credits would only see 
around a quarter of these gains due to increases in tax and a reduction in in-work benefits, it 
is clear that not seeking promotion may be a rational decision for many in low-paid work.

This issue is likely to become more pressing over the next few years. The introduction of the 
National Minimum Wage was associated with significant compression at the lower end of 
the pay distribution with, for example, the proportion of employees paid within 50p of the 
statutory minimum doubling from 5 per cent to 10 per cent in the decade 2001–11.54 Further 
pay compression is expected as a result of the introduction of the National Living Wage, and 
there is a risk that this will result in pay escalators grinding to a halt.

Leaving financial incentives aside, factors affecting progression opportunities identified in our 
research included:

51 Resolution Foundation, A Budget for Workers? The Impact of the Summer Budget on Work Incentives in Universal Credit, 2015
52 Department for Work and Pensions, Universal Credit at Work – Spring 2015, 2015
53 Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, Escape Plan, November 2014
54 Resolution Foundation, Low Pay Britain 2014


139

Chapter 5: Tackling low pay and in-work poverty

•	 The organisational culture of employers, including whether policies to encourage and 
support pay progression are in place and implemented – for example, developing career 
ladders, supporting those in lower-paid roles to progress and ensuring that promotion 
opportunities are seen to be fairly allocated;

•	 The line manager role in encouraging employees to progress and helping them to do so 
through prioritising development of their staff;

•	 Internal limits to progression – there are likely to be fewer opportunities for progression 
than there are able staff at the level below looking to move on, with a risk that encouraging 
staff to aspire to move up the ladder ends up discouraging many who find their 
aspirations frustrated;

•	 A perception that securing promotion requires going ‘above and beyond the call of duty’ 
– for example, through a willingness to work unpaid overtime, forgo holiday entitlements, 
not take time off sick or for family emergencies, and attending work at short notice, freezing 
out those with caring responsibilities. The increasing use of more flexible forms of employment 
such as short hours and zero hours contracts may exacerbate this issue;

•	 Worries among employees about the risks of promotion – for example, around capability 
to progress, work–life balance, not enjoying a new role and disruption to their social 
relationships at work.

5.5 Conclusion and Recommendations
If the Government’s strategy to improve social mobility and reduce child poverty by making 
the UK into a higher pay, lower tax, lower welfare society is to have any chance of success, 
three conditions will need to be satisfied:

•	 Employers will need to take more responsibility for their employees’ living standards by 
helping them develop their skills, become more productive and progress up the pay scale 
and combine work and family life;

•	 The Government will need to set a clear goal for the UK to become a Living Wage country 
by 2025, and develop a comprehensive pay, progression and productivity strategy to 
achieve that goal, building on the strong foundations that will be laid by the introduction of the 
National Living Wage and the implementation of Universal Credit;

•	 The Government will need to revitalise work incentives in tax credits and Universal Credit 
so it can more effectively meet its aspiration to make work pay, encourage people to 
progress in work, and ensure that everyone who ‘does the right thing’ can enjoy decent 
living standards.

Recommendation 1: Employers should take more responsibility for their 
employees’ living standards with change led by a vanguard group of ‘One 
Nation Employers’ who can act as a beacon for others.

There is a long tradition in the UK and elsewhere of visionary business leaders recognising 
the importance of ensuring that their workers are able to enjoy a decent standard of living 
because it makes good business sense as well as making good social sense. An increasing 
number of large businesses in traditionally low-paying sectors have signed up to the Living 
Wage set by the Living Wage Foundation, and many other employers make developing their 
staff and helping them get on in life a core business priority. More and more employers are 
realising that these kinds of activities are a win-win with a range of benefits – not just for 
workers, but for businesses in terms of greater staff loyalty, retention, productivity and  
service quality.


140

State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain

The Government has said that it wants to build on this. It expects employers to take a lot 
more responsibility for supporting their employees’ living standards and helping them get 
on in life by, for example, filling the gap in working households’ budgets that will be left 
by cuts in in-work support through the benefit system, and increasing their investment in 
apprenticeships and adult skills.

Realising this profound shift in responsibility from the state to the private sector will require 
all UK employers to develop strategies to improve the living standards of their lowest-paid 
employees. Government should catalyse change here by introducing a vanguard group of 
‘One Nation Employers’ who act as a beacon for others. The commitments made by a One 
Nation Employer55 should include:

•	 Pay and security – become accredited Living Wage employers with the Living Wage 
Foundation, and minimise the use of zero hour and short-hour contracts, only using 
them at the margins to manage fluctuating resource demand rather than as standard 
employment contracts for most staff;

•	 Line management – increase managers’ focus on developing the staff who work for 
them, including providing practical training for managers on how to be effective in helping 
their staff develop and by rewarding them on the basis of how they retain and develop 
their staff, as well as business outcomes such as profit and sales;

•	 Communication – ensure that all workers are able to access information on job and 
development opportunities, even if they work remotely or have no access to intranet 
resources, recognise the value of low-paid roles in internal communications, and use 
human resources data to develop more effective communication with low-paid workers;

•	 Skills and progression – develop and communicate clear progression pathways out 
of low-paid roles, make development opportunities accessible to all staff, and consider 
how to develop incremental progression steps to reward staff for higher productivity and 
incentivise development;

•	 Job design – seek out opportunities to redesign low-paid roles, in order to drive 
productivity improvements by, for example, giving more autonomy, discretion and ability 
to innovate to employees in low-paid roles, and looking for ways to improve the scope for 
workers in service sectors to add value by improving the customer experience;56 

•	 Supporting employees with living costs – increase the focus of benefits-in-kind on 
support for low-paid workers, such as staff discounts and loans for one-off costs such as 
deposits for rented accommodation and season tickets.

55 Built on work carried out on behalf of the Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission in Business in the Community,  
 Beyond Pay: An Inquiry into Improving Low-Income Employment, 2015
56 See for example, Confederation of British Industry (CBI), A Better Off Britain: Improving Lives by Making Growth Work for  
 Everyone, 2014; ACAS, Building Productivity in the UK, 2015; UK Commission for Employment and Skills, Growth Through  
 People, 2014; and Ton, Z., The Good Jobs Strategy, 2014 for case studies and research on how changes in job design can  
 boost productivity


141

Chapter 5: Tackling low pay and in-work poverty

The Scotland Business Pledge

The Scottish Government launched the Scotland Business Pledge in May 2015.57 By 
making the Pledge, businesses demonstrate their commitment to the goals of boosting 
productivity, competitiveness, employment, fair work, workforce engagement and 
development and to delivering them through their actions and future plans. 

The Pledge involves nine individual strands of business improvement activity which 
many companies across Scotland have already adopted:

1. Paying the Living Wage – ideally via formal accreditation, but at the very least 
paying the Living Wage for all employees aged 18 and over;

2. Not using exploitative zero hours contracts – committing to appropriate use of 
zero hour contracts linked to seasonal work, resilience or highly variable workloads, 
and providing similar employment rights to other staff;

3. Supporting progressive workforce engagement – committing to putting in place 
effective best practice management systems, e.g. a people plan, skills strategy, 
employee engagement systems and so on;

4. Investing in youth – committing to support young people into employment, e.g. 
partnerships with schools, careers advice, apprenticeships, attaining Investors in 
Young People status;

5. Making progress on diversity and gender balance – committing to developing 
a better balance in the firm, e.g. by signing up to Partnership for Change to work 
towards gender balance on boards by 2020;

6. Committing to an innovation programme – committing to implement an innovation 
strategy;

7. Pursuing international business opportunities – demonstrating the actions 
being taken to generate new international business or expand to new markets;

8. Playing an active role in the community – demonstrating how the business 
provides benefits to the local community, e.g. supporting community activities, 
volunteering, contributing to charity and so on;

9. Committing to prompt payment – committing to pay suppliers within 60 days, 
and working towards a norm of 30 days.

Signatories must be paying the Living Wage and meeting at least two of the other 
principles immediately and make a commitment to achieving all nine over time. 
Businesses making a Pledge are allowed to display the Scottish Business Pledge logo 
on their website and elsewhere.

The website for the initiative sets out the details about each component of the pledge 
in a user-friendly way, including a summary of its business benefits, why it is included in 
the pledge, why it is good for Scotland, and how to access help in order to be able to 
meet that component of the pledge.

It is still too early to gauge the impact that the Scotland Business Pledge has had on 
business practices in Scotland, but so far 151 businesses have signed up.

Further details are available from https://scottishbusinesspledge.scot

57 Nicola Sturgeon, Launch of the Scottish Business Pledge, speech at Tynecastle Stadium, Edinburgh, 26 May 2015

https://scottishbusinesspledge.scot


142

State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain

Recommendation 2: The Government should set a clear objective for 
the UK to become a Living Wage country by 2025 at the latest, and 
work with business to develop a comprehensive pay, progression and 
productivity plan that aligns Government programmes behind that goal.

The Commission’s report last year recommended that the Government set itself an objective 
for the UK to become a living wage country by 2025 at the latest. The introduction of the 
National Living Wage – and the commitments that the Government has made to increase its 
value to 60 per cent of median hourly earnings by April 2020 – is a very welcome first step 
towards this goal.

The ultimate goal should be for the UK to make the transition from a low-pay, low-productivity 
economy to a high-pay, high-productivity economy where everyone earns enough to secure a 
decent standard of living and those in low-paid roles are able to develop their skills, become 
more productive and progress over the course of their working lives.

The next stage of this journey is for the Government to commit to Britain becoming a Living 
Wage country by:

•	 Reducing the proportion of people who earn less than two-thirds of median 
hourly pay to 10 per cent of employees. This would halve the proportion projected 
to be in low pay against this measure in 2020 and put the UK on a par with the best 
performing countries in Europe;

•	 Reducing the proportion of people who earn less than the living wages set by 
the Living Wage Foundation to 15 per cent. This would halve the proportion of those 
projected to be in low pay against this measure in 2020, and return it to pre-recession levels;

•	 Reducing the proportion of people who get stuck in low pay for more than a 
decade to 10 per cent. This would halve the proportion of the population who get stuck 
in low pay compared to the period 2002–12.

The Government should set intermediate milestones towards achieving these ambitious goals 
by 2025. Critically, the introduction of the National Living Wage – and further increases in its 
value – will need to be built on productivity improvements if it is to be sustainable, and avoid 
the risk of the unintended consequences for those whom the policy is intended to help. The 
Government cannot afford to cross its fingers and hope that these potential adverse impacts 
will not happen in practice. It will need to address them.


143

Chapter 5: Tackling low pay and in-work poverty

Key planks of a strategy to make the UK a living wage country by 2025

A shared low pay and earnings progression strategy between the Department 
for Business, Innovation and Skills, Department for Work and Pensions and the 
Treasury, to maximise the effectiveness of their programmes (e.g. investment in adult 
skills training and careers advice support) in achieving the goals of tackling low pay and 
helping low-income parents to progress in work.

A revitalised role for the Low Pay Commission, giving it a broader, forward-looking 
remit to tackle low pay, including to make recommendations about what would be 
required to increase productivity to allow the 2020 target for the National Living Wage 
to be achieved, and to look beyond the statutory wage floors to cover the issue of low 
pay more broadly.

A detailed implementation plan for the National Living Wage, including carrying 
out analysis to ensure that its possible labour market consequences are understood 
much better than they are at the moment to inform mitigation strategies, looking at 
the scope for using targeted cuts in business taxation and regulation to support those 
areas, industries and business which are most affected and considering how faster 
progress can be made in those sectors that are least vulnerable to increases in pay at 
the bottom of the earnings distribution.

Lining up existing policies behind the strategic goal of creating a living wage 
country, including the financial incentives for work programme providers, deployment 
of the adult skill budget, public sector procurement, support with childcare costs and 
ensuring that the new in-work support regime in Universal Credit looks beyond those 
on the National Minimum Wage or working few hours.

Introducing more stringent transparency requirements, such as making the publication 
of pay ratios and the proportion of workers paid below the living wages set by the Living 
Wage Foundation a requirement for listed companies and public sector employers.

Developing stronger partnerships with business to improve productivity 
at the bottom of the labour market, and improve living standards, including 
encouraging employers to become One Nation Employers (see above) and to rebuild 
careers ladders and upgrade skills, learning from programmes such as Boston Skillworks 
in the USA and the UK Commission for Employment and Skills’ Futures Programme.

Creating a virtuous circle, by recycling the £800 million direct savings from 
higher tax receipts and lower welfare spending arising from the introduction of the 
National Living Wage into anti-poverty policies.


144

State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain

Recommendation 3: Revitalising employment incentives in Universal Credit.

We strongly support the aims of Universal Credit, and believe that it could have a 
transformational impact on work incentives through the simplification and responsiveness to 
fluctuations in income that it will bring; through smoothing the high marginal deduction rates 
that some claimants face; and through allowing more support and encouragement to be 
given to help those in working poverty increase their earnings.

However, the impact of fiscal pressures on the shape of work incentives in the programme 
and on the extent of in-work support risk the original aspirations set out by the architects of 
Universal Credit back in 2009 not being delivered. Worse still, there is a risk that incentives to 
progress in work for many families could end up being worse than they were in the pre-2010 
system. This would be a missed opportunity.

The immediate priority must be taking action to ensure that the introduction of Universal 
Credit does not make families with children who ‘do the right thing’ (in terms of working as 
much as society expects them to) worse off than they would be under the current system. 
That means reversing the cuts to Universal Credit work allowances enacted through 
the Universal Credit (Work Allowance) Amendment Regulations 2015 before they are 
implemented in April 2016. 

The medium-term objective should be to make improvements to Universal Credit to improve 
work incentives by introducing a work allowance for second earners in couple households, 
adjusting work allowances in step with changes in direct taxation and integrating free school 
meals and council tax support in the system to avoid creating new cliff edges. 

The longer-term objective should be to return Universal Credit to its original aspirations once 
the national debt starts to fall. Work allowances should be returned to the level originally 
planned in 201258 and uprated in step with increases in earnings since then in order to 
improve work incentives. The taper rate in Universal Credit should be reduced from 65 per 
cent to 55 per cent – as originally envisaged by the designers of Universal Credit59 – to 
provide better incentives for low-paid workers to progress in work.

58 Department for Work and Pensions, Universal Credit: Welfare That Works, November 2010
59 Centre for Social Justice, Dynamic Benefits: Towards Welfare That Works, September 2009




Chapter 6: Reducing persistent poverty


145


Chapter 6: Reducing persistent poverty

•	 Over one million children live in persistent poverty. This is caused by a 
complex range of interrelated factors.

•	 Families in persistent poverty are often struggling with the combined 
effects of having relatively few skills; a disability or ill health; and high living 
costs. 

•	 The Government’s emphasis on getting these families into work is right, 
but to succeed it will need to focus harder on tackling the multi-causal 
nature of persistent poverty.

•	 The Government should set a goal of ensuring that by 2020 the UK 
is one of the top five Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD) countries for having the fewest children living 
in workless households. This would involve reducing the number of 
children in workless households by half a million and would require a 
significant reduction both in the number of workless couples and in the 
number of lone parents who do not work. 

•	 This new national effort should be led by a refocused and rebranded 
Troubled Families initiative tasked with offering personalised help to get 
persistently poor families into secure employment, and operating closely 
with the new Work and Health programme and Jobcentre Plus advisors.

•	 To encourage people to invest more of their time and resources into 
acquiring new skills, long-term unemployed adults should be given 
personal learning accounts.  

6.1 Introduction
Most people in poverty eventually find a way to improve their situation, often within a couple 
of years of the events that set them back.1 But some people get stuck for much longer.2 
Persistent poverty has severe long-term consequences for those it affects and reducing it 
should be a top priority in any country. But despite many initiatives on the part of Government 
and others to address the problem, there is currently no cohesive drive to do so. It is time to 
put that right. 

Lacking any financial cushion, families in persistent poverty are more likely than those in 
temporary poverty to fall behind on their household bills and to run out of money by the end 

1 ONS, Persistent Poverty in the UK and EU, 2008-2013, 2015
2 Persistent poverty is defined in the UK as having less than 60 per cent of current median income for at least three of the  
 previous four years




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


146


of the week.3 Furthermore, living in persistent poverty has a long-term effect, particularly 
on children. Not only does growing up in a persistently poor family make for a miserable 
childhood, but it is likely to damage a child’s health, lower their educational performance and 
reduce social mobility.4 

Misconceptions about why people end up in this situation are rife. When asked, the public 
tend to cite parental alcohol/drug addiction and family breakdown as some of the main 
causes of child poverty.5 But the reality is that households in persistent poverty share many 
characteristics with families who experience poverty only temporarily. These include being 
low skilled, having more than three children or experiencing a long-term disability and 
illness. What sets them apart, however, is that they are more likely to be suffering from the 
concentrated effects of a number of these factors at the same time.

The UK Government has made clear that it is committed to tackling the causes of poverty, 
but it has yet to publish a detailed anti-poverty strategy. This is disappointing, particularly 
at a time when substantial welfare cuts are being made. The Commission believes that 
action is needed now. It is time to review our approach to persistent poverty and to adopt 
new strategies, with a special focus on reducing the number of children living in workless 
households. Although good progress has been made, Britain still lags behind many other 
OECD members on this measure. We can and must do better.

6.2 Does today’s reality meet the One Nation vision?
Ideally, in a One Nation country poverty would be a thing of the past. At a minimum, child 
poverty would be a transient experience and would not inflict lasting damage into adulthood. 
We are far from being that country.

Approximately 2.3 million children live in poverty in the UK.6 Although there are no official 
estimates for persistent child poverty since 2008,7 the long-term trend has been for between 
50 and 70 per cent of children in poverty to experience it persistently rather than temporarily.8 
If we assume that the rate of persistent child poverty is still in line with this pattern, this 
would imply that between 1.1 million and 1.6 million children are living in persistently poor 
households, a number which even at the lower end is far too high. 

Younger children are more likely to experience persistent poverty. The Millennium Cohort 
Study (MCS), which monitors the experiences of a group of children born in 2000-01, found 
that, in 2012–13, while fewer than half (47 per cent) of the MCS children had never been 
touched by income poverty, around one in six (17 per cent) children had been poor in at 
least four of the five MCS surveys that have taken place so far (Figure 6.1).9

3  Department for Work And Pensions, The Circumstances of Persistently Poor Families with Children: Evidence from the 
Families and Children Study (FACS), 2008

4 JRF, Does Money Affect Children’s Outcomes?: A Systemic Review, 2013
5 National Centre for Social Research, Child Poverty in Britain, 2013
6  Department for Work and Pensions, Households Below Average Income: An Analysis of the Income Distribution 1994/95 – An 

Analysis, Tables 4a and 4b, 2015. To enable international comparisons relative poverty is defined in this chapter as below 60 
per cent of contemporary median income, before housing costs. However, relative income poverty among children after 
housing costs stood at 28 per cent or 3.7 million children in 2013/14

7 This was the last year for which the British Household Panel Study (BHPS) (on which the DWP relied for its estimate) was in  
 operation. Since then the BHPS sample has since been amalgamated into the much larger Understanding Society study  
 which started in 2009. With sufficient time having now elapsed to gather the four years of data required, persistent poverty  
 estimates covering the period 2010–2013 should be published next year
8 HMG, Consultation on Setting the 2020 Persistent Child Poverty Target, 2014
9 Centre for Longitudinal Studies. MCS Age 11 Initial Findings, 2013




Chapter 6: Reducing persistent poverty


147


Figure 6.1: Poverty across the five surveys of the MCS


01020304050

Five timesFour timesThree timesTwice poorOnce poorNever poor


Percentage 


Source: Centre for Longitudinal Studies. MCS Age 11 Initial Findings, 2013

Britain’s performance on persistent child poverty is similar to that of most of its European 
neighbours. Set against the EU’s richest member states (and Iceland), we stood roughly in 
the middle of the league table in 2012 (the last year for which there was data), with a rate of 
persistent child poverty that was slightly lower than the average.10 However, our performance 
was significantly below that achieved by countries such as Denmark, proof that low levels of 
persistent child poverty are entirely possible in advanced economies.

10  The EU 15 are: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, 
Portugal, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom. The league table excludes Sweden and Ireland, neither of which 
submitted data for 2012; Eurostat, Persistent at-risk-of-poverty rates, online database, 2012, http://knoema.com/ilc_li21/
persistent-at-risk-of-poverty-rate-by-sex-and-age-source-silc

http://knoema.com/ilc_li21/persistent-at-risk-of-poverty-rate-by-sex-and-age-source-silc




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


148


Figure 6.2: Persistent poverty rate in 2012 


051015202530Percentage Norway Iceland United Kingdom Finland Austria Netherlands Luxembourg Portugal Belgium Greece Spain France Italy Germany EU 15 average

Source: SILC 

As well as being too high persistent poverty in the UK is unevenly spread. The MCS Study 
cited above found greater shares of children in persistent poverty in Wales and Northern 
Ireland than England and Scotland (21 per cent and 19 per cent, compared to 16 per cent 
and 13 per cent), a reflection of long-standing regional disparities in wealth and economic 
opportunities.11 In the following sections we explore in more detail the causes of persistent 
poverty and why a more focused strategic response to it is necessary.

Problem 1 – Persistent poverty is typically the product of multiple factors 
with different households facing different challenges. 

At its most basic level, persistent income poverty arises from a long-term imbalance between 
the incomes of families and the costs of meeting their basic needs. But the precise routes by 
which different families arrive at this situation span a huge number of individual choices and 
circumstances. Many people demonstrating some of the main observable risk factors will not 
fall into persistent poverty, for instance because of support from their wider family. This poses 
a serious challenge to policymakers when trying to arrive at interventions which are most likely 
to benefit the largest numbers of people.

The Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) recently tried to fill this gap with a major 
evidence review of the causes of child poverty, focusing particularly on the factors that make 
it harder for families to escape. Thirteen family and child characteristics were measured 
against three criteria: the degree of certainty that a characteristic affects child poverty; the 
strength of that effect; and the number of people affected. 

11 Centre for Longitudinal Studies, MCS Age 11 Initial Findings, 2013




Chapter 6: Reducing persistent poverty


149


The top five factors to emerge from this exercise are listed in Table 6.1. At the head of the 
list was worklessness and low earnings, underpinned by analysis showing that working 
even temporarily leads to a substantial reduction in the odds of experiencing persistent 
poverty. Specifically, a poor two-parent family where one parent is temporarily employed is 
around five times less likely to experience persistent poverty than a poor family where both 
parents are persistently out of work.12 The MCS Age 11 survey also suggests worklessness 
is a major factor, with half of the children it surveyed in persistent poverty living in workless 
households.13

Table 6.1: The impact of various factors driving child poverty14

% of 
children in 
persistent 
poverty

Probability of leaving 
poverty

Probability of  
re-entering poverty

Long-term worklessness 
and low earnings 

38% If household head is 
employed 
+40%  

If a second adult is 
employed 


+60%


If household head is 
employed 


-50%


If a second adult is 
employed 


-50%


Low parental 
qualifications

20% If household head has  
A levels or above 


+20%


If household head has  
A levels or above  


-25%


Larger families (three 
or more dependent 
children) 

25% If an additional child 
joins the household 


-20%


The presence of a 
child aged 1–5 in the 
household 


-30%


If an additional child 
joins the household 


+35%


Lone parenthood 23% If there is an extra adult 
in the household 


+25%


Data unavailable

Parental disability/ 
ill health

22% Data unavailable Data unavailable

Source: Low Income Dynamics 1991-2008; Household Below Average Incomes 2011/12

Because some of the studies that influenced the exercise were several years old the 
Commission asked the Office for National Statistics (ONS) to apply the five risk factors to 
more recent data on persistent child poverty to check that they were still exerting a large 
effect. This new analysis confirmed that the associations identified by the evidence review 
remained strong (Table 6.2), but it also brought out an important point – if anything significant 
differentiates families in persistent poverty from ones in temporary poverty it is that the former 
are more likely to suffer from several of the factors at the same time. For example, in 2013 just 

12 Barnes, M., Conolly, A., and Tomaszewski, W., The Circumstances of Persistently Poor Families with Children:  
 Evidence from the Families and Children Study (FACS), DWP: London, 2008
13 Centre for Longitudinal Studies, MCS Age 11 Initial Findings, 2013
14 This is a simplified version of a table 4 originally published in DWP, An Evidence Review of the Drivers of Child Poverty  
 for Families in Poverty Now and for Poor Children Growing up to be Poor Adults, 2014




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


150


4 per cent of children in households with one risk factor were in persistent poverty compared 
with 35 per cent of children in families experiencing four or more risk factors (Table 6.3).  

Table 6.2: Dependent children living in persistent poverty or not by family 
characteristics, 2013

One adult 
families

Large 
families

Low parental 
qualifications

Long-term 
illness or 
disability

Long-term  
workless 
families

Persistent 
poverty

N 395,000 265,000 234,000 222,000 190,000

% 49 33 29 28 24

Not in 
persistent 
poverty

N 1,681,000 2,700,000 1,104,000 1,429,000 895,000

% 16 25 10 13 8

Source: EU-SILC, General Lifestyle Survey

Table 6.3: Persistent poverty rate for dependent children experiencing different 
numbers of entrenchment characteristics, 2013

Number of characteristics experienced All with 
dependent 

children0 1 2-3 4-5

Persistent poverty 
rate (%)

3 4 20 35 7

Source: EU-SILC, General Lifestyle Survey

This layering effect is best understood looking at specific family types. For instance, the ONS 
analysis for the Commission suggests that more than one-third of children in persistent poverty 
now live in families with three or more dependent children, and nearly one-third live with a 
parent who has a long-term illness or disability (Table 6.2). On one level this is unsurprising – 
the estimated cost for a household led by a parent couple to achieve a minimally acceptable 
standard of living (as defined by the general public for each additional child) in 2015 rises by at 
least one-third if they have more than two children.15 A similar issue occurs with many families 
with disabled adults. Analysis by the disability charity Scope suggests that on average, disabled 
people spend £550 a month on costs directly associated with their disability, while one in 10 
spends over £1,000 per month on additional costs arising from their disability.16 

But in addition to generating additional costs these factors can also affect earning capacity. 
Large families in persistent poverty are more likely to have children of pre-school age and the 
DWP’s own research indicates that many parents are willing to forego higher incomes from 
paid work in order to spend time caring for their children when young.17 This is particularly 
true for lone parents; of those who have three or more children just 38 per cent are in work.18 
This contrasts with the situation for couple households. Finding it far easier to share the 

15 Hirsch, D., The Cost of a Child in 2015, CPAG: London, 2015
16 Brawn, E., Priced Out: Ending the Financial Penalty of Disability by 2020, 2014
17 DWP, Making Decisions about Work in Low-income Couple Households: A Report to the Child Poverty Unit, 2014
18 ONS, Family Size in 2012, 2013




Chapter 6: Reducing persistent poverty


151


responsibilities for caring and undertaking paid work, 87 per cent of couples with three or 
more children have one adult in work.19 

Families with disabled adults may find it harder to meet their additional costs due to problems 
with finding suitable high-quality employment – the rate for people with disabilities continues 
to be significantly less than for people without a disability or limiting health condition (Table 
6.4). When work is found it is also more likely to be low paid – the proportion of employees 
with a work-limiting disability in low pay is around 10 per cent higher than for other 
employees.20 

Table 6.4: Comparative employment status, Equality Act core disabled/not classified as 
Equality Act core disabled, 2015

Economically 
active

In Employment Unemployed Economically 
inactive

Classified as Equality Act 
core disabled and/or work 
limiting disabled only

53.9 47.9 11.2 46.1

Not classified as Equality 
Act core disabled and/or 
work limiting disabled

83.4 79.4 4.8 16.6

Source: Labour Force Survey, April–June 2015

Other risk factors affecting smaller groups of people can also be significant, for instance 
ethnicity. The MCS Age 11 survey data showed that 56 per cent of the children interviewed of 
Pakistani and Bangladeshi origin were in persistent poverty (the rates for other ethnic minority 
groups, such as children of mixed ethnicity were much lower). Both groups are more likely 
to have large families than other ethnicities and although most are couple households,21 thus 
increasing the scope to share caring responsibilities and work at the same time, they also 
suffer from some of the highest unemployment levels (17 per cent are unemployed versus  
7 per cent of white British people).22  

Problem 2 –The causes and consequences of persistent child poverty are 
not being addressed in a strategic way.

Although enshrined as a target in the Child Poverty Act 2010, reducing the number of 
children living in persistent poverty has not received sustained attention from policymakers or 
civil society. In part this may be explained by the lack of regular official data in recent years.23 

Since the causes of persistent poverty and temporary poverty are largely the same, it is 
tempting to assume that activity designed to tackle the latter will also bring down the former. 
The Child Poverty Strategy 2014 to 2017, for example, contains no specific section outlining 
how persistent child poverty should be addressed. It focuses on tackling worklessness to 
reduce levels of child poverty. There is some justification for this. The United Kingdom has 
made progress over the last 20 years in reducing the number of children living in workless 
households (down from 19.8 per cent of all children to 11.8 per cent), but it remains behind 
much of the OECD on this measure (see Figure 6.3).24

19 ONS, Family Size in 2012, 2013
20 Heslop, P., Disabled People and Their Relationship with Poverty, PSE: UK, 2013
21 Connolly, H., and Raha, C., ‘Households and families’, in Dobbs, J., Green, H., and Zealey, L., (eds), Focus on Ethnicity  
 and Religion, Palgrave Macmillan, 2006
22 DWP, Labour Market Status by Ethnic Group: data to September 2013, 2014
23 This was the last year for which the British Household Panel Study (BHPS) (on which the DWP relied for its estimate) was in  
 operation. Since then the BHPS sample has since been amalgamated into the much larger Understanding Society study  
 which started in 2009. With sufficient time having now elapsed to gather the four years of data required, persistent poverty  
 estimates covering the period 2010–2013 should be published next year
24 Office for National Statistics, Working and Workless Households, 2015




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


152


Figure 6.3: Children by household employment status in the OECD, 2013


020406080100Slovenia Austria Finland Luxembourg Netherlands Estonia Denmark Malta Portugal Romania Czech Republic United States Germany Cyprus Latvia Percentage Poland Italy OECD average France Slovak Republic Lithuainia Hungary Bulgaria Ireland Belgium Greece Australia United Kingdom Spain

Working – all adults working Working – at least one adult working, 
at least one adult not working

Jobless – all adults not working

Source: OECD

Note: Data was not submitted to the OECD from Canada, Chile, Iceland, Israel, Japan, Korea, Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, 
Sweden, Switerzerland, Turkey and Croatia

However, tackling persistent poverty through a focus on worklessness will only be effective if it 
is based on a clear understanding of the barriers that individually and in combination prevent 
people from seeking and finding paid work. As it currently stands the Child Poverty Strategy 
contains no clear measures for assessing progress against long-term worklessness and lacks 
a detailed plan for how underlying labour market disadvantages, whether related (for example) 
to ethnicity, disability or a lack of skills among adults, are to be addressed.

The further issue is that conflating the two types of poverty potentially obscures how the 
experience of persistent poverty can itself push workless parents further from the labour 
market. A ‘discouraged worker effect’ has been long observed to be a product of protracted 
periods of worklessness.25 The compound effects of that pessimism, coping with multiple 
issues and having to juggle very tight finances can make the prospect of paid work seem ever 
more remote.26 

25 Jahoda, M., Employment and Unemployment: A Social-psychological Analysis, 1982
26 Shildrick, T., et al., Poverty and Insecurity: Life in Low Pay, no Pay Britain, 2012




Chapter 6: Reducing persistent poverty


153


This phenomenon helps explain reports from Work Programme advisors that as many as 
half of their clients have no serious intention of seeking work.27 This is in stark contrast to 
other studies which have reported that the vast majority of long-term unemployed people 
would like to find a job.28 It is difficult to know what the truth of the matter is here, with both 
sets of evidence relying on subjective viewpoints for their results. But interviews done by 
Tracy Shildrick and colleagues with families who have long-term histories of worklessness 
indicate that it is perfectly possible for a person to clearly understand the advantages of being 
employed, but at the same time believe their situation – relative to others in the labour market 
– to be so poor as to render intensive efforts at job search pointless.29 

Problem 3: Low skills are an increasingly sure route to persistent poverty.

A leading British researcher in this field, Steven Jenkins, has found that if the head of a household 
in persistent poverty has A levels, they are 20 per cent more likely to exit poverty and, having 
left poverty, around 25 per cent less likely to re-enter it (all other factors being equal).

The low skills problem can manifest itself in a number of ways. For instance, Pakistani and 
Bangladeshi families who are in persistent poverty typically have more problems in reading 
and speaking English than those who are better off.30 Indeed, separating this from other 
factors (education level, family type and ethnicity), having English as a first language has been 
found by one study to reduce the risk of being in persistent poverty by 5 per cent.31 

The impact of low skills is also seen in the case of lone parent households, who make 
up a large proportion of the families in persistent poverty (30 per cent in the MCS Age 11 
survey;32 49 per cent in the ONS data). While there has been a welcome increase in one-
parent employment (63 per cent in 2014 compared to 43 per cent in 1996), the positive 
consequences have been limited by the fact that single mothers (who represent 91 per cent 
of lone parents) are twice as likely to be in low-paid work (such as cleaning or catering) as 
mothers in couples.33 

In part this is because lone parents gravitate towards industries with flexible working patterns.34 
It also may be the case that increased welfare conditionality is pushing some qualified lone 
parents into jobs which under-utilise their skills.35 However, a crucial factor is the low skills 
many lone parents have to begin with. A third (32 per cent) of single parents only have GCSE 
or equivalent level qualifications, compared to less than a quarter of couple parents and less 
than a fifth (17 per cent) of people without dependent children. Just 11 per cent of single 
parents have a degree-level qualification or higher, compared with 23 per cent of couple 
parents and 20 per cent of people with no dependent children.36 

Some of this appears to be rooted in the age at which people first have children. With the 
economy generating fewer manual and lower-skilled jobs on which it is possible to support a 
family through earnings alone, the vast majority of young people now postpone parenthood in 
order to pursue qualifications (Table 6.5).

27  Dunn, A., ‘Activation worker’s perception of their long term unemployed clients’ attitudes towards employment’, Journal of 
Social Policy, Volume 42 / Issue 04, 2013

28 Dean, H., and Taylor-Gooby, P., Dependency Culture: The Explosion of a Myth, 1992
29 Shildrick, T., et al., Poverty and Insecurity: Life in Low Pay, no Pay Britain, 2012
30  Fisher, P., and Nandi A., Poverty Across Ethnic Groups Through Recession and Austerity, 2015
31 Ibid.
32 Insert Centre for Longitudinal Studies, MCS Age 11 Initial Findings, 2013
33 ONS, Families in the Labour Market 2014, 2014
34  Coleman, N., and Riley, T., Lone Parent Obligations: Following Lone Parents’ Journeys from Benefits to Work, 2012
35 Dewar, L., Is the Work Programme Working for Single Parents? An Analysis of the Experience of Single Parents on  
 the Work Programme, 2014
36 ONS, Social Trends 39, Chapter 3, 2009




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


154


Table 6.5: Live births by age group of mother and father, 2012 (England and Wales)

Percentage of live births by age group

Under 20 20–24 25–29 30–34 35–39 40–44 45  
and over

Mothers 4.6 18.2 27.7 29.6 15.7 3.8 0.3

Fathers 1.7 11.2 21.9 29.4 21.0 10.0 4.8

Source: Office for National Statistics, analysis undertaken by Policy Exchange37

Among mothers who had their first child before 20, only 2.1 per cent will go on to have 
degree-level qualifications or the equivalent, while nearly a quarter have no qualifications 
whatsoever. Over time this disadvantage sticks and plays out in a range of negative ways, 
with mothers who had their children young being much more likely to be unemployed or to be 
working part time (Table 6.6). 

Table 6.6: Employment rates of UK single mothers by the estimated age that they  
had their first child, 2008–12

Estimated age lone mother had first child

16–19 20–23 24–29 30–34 35+ All

Full time 8.90% 15.30% 27.40% 36.20% 30.90% 23.70%

Part time 21.70% 31.80% 34.90% 36.80% 34.50% 32.40%

Unemployed 17.10% 13.20% 8.90% 7.70% 7.40% 10.80%

Inactive 52.30% 39.70% 28.80% 19.30% 27.30% 33.10%

Source: Labour Force Survey, analysis undertaken by Policy Exchange

6.3 How are these problems being addressed?
A number of important factors have – to varying degrees and in different combinations – the 
power to place obstacles in the path of parents seeking and finding work. These are: a lack 
of skills; poor health and disability; damaged morale stemming from long-term poverty and 
worklessness; and heavy caring responsibilities. The Government’s approach to unravelling 
these knots of disadvantage is made up of several parts: a range of measures focused on 
motivating and supporting people (especially the long-term workless) to take up work; help 
to access basic skills training; and measures to tackle structural disadvantages in the labour 
market.38 

Tackling long-term worklessness

The Government has significantly increased the level of contact between out-of-work benefit 
claimants and employment advisors to provide more support to those looking for work. 
Indeed, the UK has built a reputation as a leading moderniser in this area.39 While certain 
groups are exempt from the requirement to either prepare for or find work, progressively 

37 Tinsley, M., Parenting Alone: Work and Welfare in Single Parent Households, Policy Exchange, 2014
38  Because the expanding childcare offer is discussed at length in Chapters 1 and 5 of this report we do not discuss it in this 

section
39 OECD, Connecting People with Jobs: Activation Policies in the United Kingdom, 2014




Chapter 6: Reducing persistent poverty


155


more individuals are becoming obliged to do so. Until relatively recently lone parents were 
not required to look for work until their youngest child was 16. The 2001 introduction of 
mandatory Work Focused Interviews changed this so that lone parents and the main carer of 
a child in a couple responsible for a child older than one year but younger than five became 
required to attend periodic interviews with Jobcentre advisors to discuss their plans for 
getting ready to seek work. The implementation of Lone Parent Obligations in 2008 led to 
further change with lone parents whose youngest children were above a certain age threshold 
and who were deemed able to work treated similarly to other Jobseeker’s Allowance 
claimants in that they were required to be available for and actively trying to find paid work. 

This changed in 2014 when people with children aged three or four became subject to a 
requirement to attend courses, volunteer, or undertake other work-related activities. It will 
soon change again under provisions in the Welfare Reform and Work Bill. Subject to final 
agreement from Parliament, all parents will be expected to be available for and actively seek 
work from the time their youngest child turns three in order to claim Universal Credit.40 

To make employment more attractive the value of many out-of-work benefits relative to real-
world costs has also been reduced. The 2015 Summer Budget announced that all working-
age benefits, including child benefit, will be frozen for at least four years. The Budget also 
announced that from 2016, the maximum that out-of-work families can receive on benefits 
will be decreased from £26,000 to £23,000 a year in London, and £20,000 outside London.41 
For families already on the cap, their net income will reduce by £3,000 a year (£58 a week) 
in London, and £6,000 a year (£115 a week) outside London. Other families with benefits 
between the old and new limits will see their incomes reduced by smaller amounts.42 

If claimants are on benefits for long stretches of time (between six and 12 months) and have 
not found work they can be referred to the Work Programme by their Jobcentre advisors. 
This aims to offer more intensive job search support. Services are delivered through providers 
(or ‘primes’) from the private, public and voluntary/community sectors. Many of the providers 
manage networks of sub-contractors who deliver some or all of the employment support 
services on their behalf. Contracts between primes and the DWP are structured on a 
payments-by-results basis. Since its inception in 2011, more than 1.7 million people have 
been referred to the programme, making it the largest such programme in UK history.43 

Providers are allowed to set the rules for their schemes based on local economic and 
employment conditions. Consequently, the rules for qualifying to take part in the Work 
Programme vary from area to area. Jobseeker’s Allowance claimants aged between 18 
to 24 are expected to take part; as are people aged over 25 who have been out of work 
for 12 months or more, as well as Employment and Support Allowance claimants, who 
are expected to be fit for work within 12 months. People on Income Support or Incapacity 
Benefit can volunteer to take part but are not obliged to. If after two years, people on the 
programme fail to secure work, responsibility for them returns to Jobcentre Plus. At this point, 
the claimant is placed on a more intensive regimen of job search, mandatory work-training 
placements and more frequent meetings with their advisor (under the Help to Work banner). 

Between 2015 and 2017, the majority of Work Programme contracts will end. The 
Government’s commissioning strategy, published last year, gave strong clues as to 
its intentions: a continuing role for the prime contractor model for large-scale national 
programmes alongside smaller-scale contracts when commissioning specialist services, 
particularly for people furthest from the labour market. Government has also signalled its 
intention to allow Jobcentre Plus greater freedom to work in partnership with Local Enterprise 
Partnerships and local authorities, including pooling resources where appropriate.44 

40 HM Government, Welfare Reform and Work Bill, 2015
41 HM Treasury, Summer Budget 2015, 2015
42 Hirsch, D., The Cost of a Child in 2015, 2015
43 DWP, Quarterly Work Programme National Statistics to Dec 2014, 2015
44 DWP, Commissioning Strategy, 2014




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


156


For people with disabilities listed in the Equalities Act 2010, more specialised support is 
available through Work Choice, a specialist employment programme delivered by a prime 
provider in 28 areas. As with the Work Programme, prime providers sub-contract with a 
range of other specialist or niche providers to support disabled people deemed both eligible 
and suitable by Disability Employment advisors. Advisors work with claimants to set goals, 
help them secure training and work with employers to discuss relevant adjustments, drawing 
from statutory funding to pay for workplace adjustments where necessary. The majority of the 
support Work Choice provides takes place in mainstream employment, but some provision is 
delivered through supported businesses – workplaces historically set up specifically to offer 
employment to people with disabilities.45 

Alongside this the Government offers help to employers to make reasonable adaptations in 
the workplace as well as challenging employers to think about the prejudices that they may 
hold in employing people with health conditions and disabilities through the Access to Work 
programme.46 It has also recently been placing a welcome emphasis on prevention. In the 
wake of the Black Review of Sickness and Absence, the Government has committed to a 
number of reforms which aim to keep the 300,000 people who have a job, but who fall ill 
each year, from drifting too far away from the labour market.47 The Fit for Work programme, 
for example, is currently being rolled out across England and Wales, advising GPs, employers 
and employees to help them develop a progressive back-to-work plan at an early stage of 
sickness absence.48 The Government has also over the last two years spent £500,000 in its 
its ‘Disability Confident initiative’, an awareness campaign which aims to help businesses 
become more confident about recruiting people with disabilities.

Finally, the Government is introducing a number of changes to benefit rules to increase work 
incentives for sickness and disability claimants, including an announcement that support for 
those allocated to the Employment and Support Allowance (ESA) work-related activity group 
(claimants who are not currently fit for work but who are predicted to be within the year) 
would be reduced to the same level as that received by iJobseeker’s Allowance claimants. 

The Government also recognises that some households may need to work through a number 
of complex problems prior to finding work and it seeks to respond to this via the Troubled 
Families programme. In recent months, it has signalled a desire to reorient this programme 
to focus more squarely on worklessness. In April 2015 the number of employment advisors 
embedded within existing Troubled Families teams in councils doubled to more than 300. 
Their role is to work alongside family key workers who provide intensive support to whole 
families, and provide specialist employment advice and support. Practical support takes the 
form of CV writing, job interview skills and alerting families to training opportunities and job 
vacancies in the area. The placements are funded with an additional £10 million provided 
jointly by the DWP and the Department for Communities and Local Government.

The evolution of the Troubled Families programme has been gradual but steady. Applying 
to England only, the programme’s original focus was on households placing high demands 
on public resources and causing harm to their communities through anti-social behaviour. A 
single family worker was assigned to each family to offer intensive support around a range 
of issues including problems in the home, with health, and with accessing jobs. In late 2014, 
the programme moved into its second phase, with the intention that councils start working 
with a larger group of 400,000 families.49 Eligibility for the scheme was widened, with families 
who meet the following criteria now being eligible: having a child or children already subject 
to a Child Protection Plan, or suspected to be in need of one; having members at risk of 
worklessness at a young age; having a history of domestic violence or abuse; having children 
or adults who suffer from a range of health problems.

45  Purvis, A., Foster, S., Lane, P., Aston, J., and Davies, M., Evaluation of the Work Choice Specialist Disability Employment 
Programme – Findings from the 2011 Early Implementation and 2012 Steady State Waves of the research, CESI (for the DWP), 


2013


46 Ibid.
47 DWP, Health at Work: An Independent Review of Sickness Absence, 2011
48 See http://fitforwork.org/about/ for further information
49 DCLG, Understanding Troubled Families, 2014

http://fitforwork.org/about/




Chapter 6: Reducing persistent poverty


157


Training and support with skills

The training routes available to unemployed people to redress important skills gaps depend 
on their age, existing skills and the length of their benefit claim. For adults who have been 
on benefits for a long time, Jobcentre Plus no longer funds or commissions pre-employment 
training directly. Instead, advisors refer people on to courses being delivered by colleges 
and training providers using Skills Funding Agency money. Indeed, unemployed adults with 
English/English for speakers of other languages (ESOL) and maths needs are now a major 
source of referrals to the courses in these subjects available through further education and 
community learning providers. Most are referred at the Pre-Work Programme stage of their 
benefit claim by their Jobcentre Plus advisor.50 

For younger people aged 16 to 24 (and for young people with Learning Difficulty 
Assessments up to academic age 25) who want to work, but who need extra help to gain an 
apprenticeship or job, traineeships are available. These last a maximum of six months and 
the core content is a high-quality work placement, work preparation training, and English 
and maths. Providers and employers are granted flexibility to bring the elements together in 
the best way to engage and support individual trainees. If adults are in training programmes 
of more than 16 hours a week, they normally lose their entitlement to benefits but in March 
2014, the DWP relaxed the 16-hour rule to allow claimants to take part in traineeship 
programmes for up to 30 hours a week, without affecting their Jobseeker’s Allowance 
entitlement. 

The centrepiece of the Government’s skills strategy is the apprenticeship programme, where 
it has set a target for three million apprenticeships to be entered into in England between 
2015 and 2020. This programme is not targeted on the unemployed and those who are 
furthest from the labour market are unlikely to be able to take it up. Survey data suggests the 
majority of apprentices were either already working (many for the firm concerned) or applied 
via a college or learning provider.51 There are no formal referral routes between apprenticeship 
programmes and the unemployment service but vacancies can be advertised through the 
online Universal Job Match system managed by Jobcentre Plus and claimants who meet the 
basic requirements are encouraged to apply for opportunities by advisors. 

6.4 How can more progress be made?
The Commission welcomes the priority that the Government gives to reducing worklessness 
and supports its decision to increase the contact between people who have been out of work 
for long periods and the employment support service. With the value of out-of-work benefits 
falling relative to real-world costs, it would be unconscionable to leave people who are (or 
could become) capable of securing work alone for long stretches while they and their families 
make do on ever-shrinking incomes. However, the Commission has serious doubts about 
whether the system as currently set up can deliver a fall in the number of long-term workless 
households that is sufficiently large to lead to a sizeable reduction in the number of children in 
persistent poverty. Our concerns are threefold. 

First, labour market disadvantages are an important factor in the worklessness of many 
persistently poor households but the Government’s actions do not match the scale of 
the problems. Second, the employment support system is currently too impersonal and 
mechanistic, leading to inappropriate referrals and ineffective interventions. Third, the work 
currently being done to boost people’s skills is generally insufficient to help them plot a 
realistic route out of poverty. 

50 NIACE, The Work Programme: What is the Role of Skills?, 2012
51 BIS, Evaluation of Apprenticeships: Learners, 2012




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


158


Tackling structural labour market disadvantages – more activity is needed 
to match the scale of the challenges

The Government’s commitment in its 2015 election manifesto to halving the disability 
employment gap was laudable but as of yet there has been little detail of how this will be 
achieved in practice. This is a glaring omission, especially when the data and wider trends 
point to the headwinds against this target getting stronger. Analysis of the Labour Force 
Survey by the disability charity Scope shows that hundreds of thousands more disabled 
people are leaving work than moving into it each year, in direct opposition to the wider 
employment trends for the non-disabled.52 

This is a large challenge and the Government’s current activity in this area (a modest 
awareness-raising campaign and some employer-focused work around prevention) will not be 
sufficient in magnitude to turn the tide. Specialist employment support and clear targets for 
making more of Britain’s workplaces more inclusive should be the priority. This would include 
a greater push to encourage flexible working – 40 per cent of all employed disabled people 
say that modified hours have made the difference to them staying in work; 36 per cent of 
those out of work say that modified hours could have helped them retain their job.53 

In the case of ethnic minorities, the current situation is very mixed. Overall, the picture 
continues to show continuing ethnic minority disadvantage compared to the white British 
majority group. There is, however, a considerable difference in unemployment rates between 
ethnic groups. For example, Indian and Chinese workers report relatively high earnings and 
employment rates whereas people from Pakistani and Bangladeshi backgrounds have less 
good outcomes. The majority of black and mixed ethnicity groups appear in the middle. 
Some local authorities are also performing less well than others in terms of unemployment. 
For example, Birmingham features among the top five local authorities for unemployment for 
several ethnic groups (for example, Indian, Pakistani, Chinese and African). Concentrated 
pockets of unemployment are particularly notable for people with an African background 
in London and parts of the North of England, and in the North West for people with a 
Pakistani background.54 

The Government’s work on tackling the ethnic minority employment gap is led by the 
Ethnic Minority Employment Task Force. Policy is driven under three headings: building 
employability; connecting people to work; and promoting equal opportunities in the 
workplace. Among its main interventions are: work to improve diversity and equality in public 
procurement; the launch of an online toolkit for employers to examine any intrinsic bias; and 
the development of a portal aimed at helping local authorities to access information on ethnic 
minority employment data for their area. 

The latter initiative is a reflection of the growing awareness that a more vigorous approach at 
the national level needs to be complemented by area-based policies to tackle labour market 
inequalities locally. Elements of a successful strategy would include:

•	 Employment support services undertaking targeted outreach at inactive, unemployed or 
under-employed adults and from ethnic minority groups;

•	 Jobcentre and Work Programme recruiting staff who reflect the local population;55 

•	 Local Enterprise Partnerships supporting and encouraging businesses to create more 
diverse workforces;56  

•	 The public sector taking a lead in recruiting people from ethnic minority groups, particularly 
those who face systematic disadvantage.57 

52 Scope, A Million Futures: Halving the Disability Employment gap, 2014
53 DWP, Fulfilling Potential: Building Understanding, 2013
54 Catney, G., and Sabater, A., Ethnic Minority Disadvantage in the Labour Market, 2015
55 NAO, Increasing Employment for Ethnic Minorities: A Summary of the Research Findings, 2008
56 Catney, G., and Sabater, A., Ethnic Minority Disadvantage in the Labour Market, 2015
57 Ibid.




Chapter 6: Reducing persistent poverty


159


These types of actions are more likely to occur if there is also clear national leadership. The 
Prime Minister’s commitment in the run-up to the General Election for there to be 660,000 
more black minority ethnic (BME) people in employment by 2020 sounded impressive, but 
actually merely reflects the changing makeup of the working age population (as more BME 
people enter the labour market) over the next five years and will require no action by the 
Government for the target to be achieved.58 Creating more stretching employment targets for 
ethnic minority groups which systematically appear most disadvantaged should be a policy 
priority.

Tackling long-term worklessness – a need for greater personalisation

The job requirements for Jobcentre Plus staff are constantly evolving. As Universal Credit 
is rolled out, the vision is for staff to be freed from simple administration to focus on the 
employment outcomes that matter most. This is a welcome recognition of the need for 
change. Time and again studies have identified the design features which are key to welfare-
to-work programmes being successful. 

First, the timing of interventions is crucial: the longer someone is out of the labour market, the 
more distanced they become, underlining the importance of early intervention.59 However, 
this needs to be balanced with evidence that shows it is important to wait until someone’s 
condition or circumstances are stable before intensive engagement is undertaken. Second, 
supporting some people back into work can take time and ideally requires continuity of 
provision.60 

The current system only partially embodies these principles. Time would be saved if people’s 
circumstances were considered in the round from the outset of their welfare-to-work journey. 
At present access to various programmes of support is determined by benefit type, a crude 
mechanism which often focuses on only one set of constraints a family may be experiencing 
(such as disability) and potentially excludes others which need to be addressed. Work 
Programme providers have noted repeatedly that a person’s benefit-type does not necessarily 
provide an accurate proxy for the level of support they require.61 Instead, capability to work 
and referrals to specialist support should be determined by the whole of a household’s 
circumstances, not just by one aspect such as ill health or length of time outside work. 

A version of such reform was recently proposed by the DWP select committee which 
suggested claimants could be categorised in one of three ways: 

•	 Relatively work-ready claimants with a good record of employment in the last four years;

•	 Intermediate support group: claimants with some characteristics restricting their 
employability, such as lack of qualifications or skills, and a poor record of employment in 
the last four years;

•	 Intensive support group: claimants with complex or multiple barriers to working, including 
significant physical or mental ill health; drug or alcohol dependency; housing problems or 
homelessness; and no record of employment in the last four years.62 

Adoption of this approach would be a step forward, but it still fails to take account of the wider 
set of circumstances within a family – alongside their individual characteristics – that can hold 
people back from working. Instead the Government should adopt the Australian model. There, a 
wide range of information – including household circumstances, previous benefit, unemployment 
and employment history, skills and qualifications, language skills, proximity to centres of 

58 Khan, O., Employment Targets for Ethnic Minorities will not Reduce Racial Inequalities, University of Manchester blog:  
 June 19, 2015
59 OECD, Activating Job Seekers: How Australia does it, 2012
60  Mueller, M., and Patton, M., ‘Working with poor families: Lessons learned from practice’, In Guttman, D., and Sussman, M., 

(eds.), Exemplary Social Intervention Programs for Members and their Families (pp65-90), 1995
61 House of Commons, Welfare to Work, 2015
62 House of Commons, Welfare to Work, 2015




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


160


employment, transport arrangements, ethnicity, country of origin, any specific workplace needs, 
history of complex needs and criminal record – are considered in a holistic way. 

Modelling work undertaken for the DWP by Simon Matty suggests that segmentation tools 
which incorporate the full circumstances surrounding a claimant (as reported by the claimant 
through surveys) are better at predicting their likelihood of becoming long-term unemployed 
than models which only rely on administrative data (such as the length or nature of a claim, 
for instance those due to long-term illness).63 This would enable resources to be targeted to 
where they are most likely to be needed.

The integration of the main working-age benefits into Universal Credit and the current 
rethink of the work capability assessment (WCA) offer Government a perfect opportunity to 
consider a change of this kind. A real-world assessment and segmentation process could be 
integrated into the claimant commitment process with advisors trained in identifying the key 
issues faced by specific households and determining what support is most likely to enable 
them to find work. Claimants would then be referred to suitable programmes.

This leaves the question of the nature of support. After a poor start, the Work Programme 
is now performing at similar levels to the New Deal programmes it replaced and the DWP is 
forecasting further improvements over the rest of its contractual life. However, the programme 
is much more effective with some groups than others. For example, outcomes for those aged 
between 18 and 24 are better than for older claimants (Figure 6.4).

Figure 6.4: Job outcomes as a proportion of referrals by participant characteristics 
(June 2011–June 2015)


05101520253035Percentage Men Women People with a disability Lone parents Ethnicity: White Ethnicity: BME Age 18–24Age 25–49Age 5

0+ To


tal

Source: DWP: Information, Governance and Security Directorate; Inclusion calculations

63  Matty, S., Predicting Likelihood of Long-term Unemployment: The Development of a UK Jobseekers’ Classification Instrument, 2013




Chapter 6: Reducing persistent poverty


161


The Work Programme also continues to disappoint in relation to people claiming Employment 
and Support Allowance (ESA). Of the 284,000 people on ESA or incapacity benefit who 
had moved on to the Work Programme between June 2011 and August 2014, just 7 per 
cent (18,800) secured a sustained job.64 The results are an inevitable function of the type of 
support available through the Work Programme, where a ‘work first’ approach (job search 
support to get people quickly into work) dominates. Most participants received help with CVs, 
job search and interview techniques, which may be of particular value to younger claimants. 
There is less emphasis on human-capital based approaches (for example, training or health 
improvement programmes).

This critique is borne out by surveys of participants which report that providers strive to 
create friendly, mutually respectful relationships between participants and staff, but refer 
few participants to training provision or to support designed to address specific barriers 
to employment (for example, health conditions, accommodation problems or caring 
responsibilities).65 For example, just 29.4 per cent of people who had a health condition that 
made work difficult were offered support related to their condition.66 

After two years on the programme, the roughly 70 per cent of people who don’t get a 
job face the prospect of intense oversight from Jobcentre Plus through the Help to Work 
progamme.67 Claimants are expected to be on a training scheme, mandatory work-activity 
placement or intensive work preparation within days of finishing and can lose their benefits 
if they fail to comply. They also have to attend the Jobcentre far more frequently than other 
jobseekers, with weekly signing-on being routine and some people required to do so daily.

For people with disabilities, more tailored support is available through Work Choice. Although 
subject to some teething troubles, the programme has achieved better employment outcomes 
than the Work Programme to date, and qualitative evaluations generally provide positive reports 
of this intervention.68 Looking at a six-month cohort of Work Choice programme starts between 
1 July 2014 and 31 December 2014, there were 7,490 starts to Work Choice in this period. Of 
these, 4,290 (57.3 per cent) had obtained a job outcome by 30 June 2015.

The stark difference in performance vindicates the Government’s decision – announced in the 
Autumn Statement – to ensure a strong future for specialist employment support by replacing 
the Work Programme with a new Work and Health Programme once the contracts come 
to an end. The fact that funding for the Access to Work Scheme is to be increased in real 
terms and the Fit for Work service expanded suggests that the Government is preparing for 
a big additional push on this front, something we entirely support, particularly if alongside it 
substantial efforts are made to make Britain’s workplaces more inclusive. 

But this leaves open the question of what the journey back to work for long-term unemployed 
people who are technically fit to work now should look like. Assuming jobs are available 
locally, the evidence suggests success is most likely to be achieved when an individual is 
ready and willing to seek work69 and trusts the motives and skills of those helping them. 
Based on claimant surveys this trust in part depends on those in the system being willing to 
listen to the claimant and modify their approach around the claimants’ specific needs rather 
than being governed purely by contractual or institutional imperatives.70 

64  Davies, B., In Safe Hands? Rethinking Employment Pathways for ESA Claimants with Mental Health Problems, 2014
65  Meager, N., Newton, B., and Sainsbury, R., Work Programme Evaluation: The Participant Experience Report, 2014
66  Meager, N., Newton, B., Foley, B., Sainsbury, R., Corden, A., Irving, A., Lane, P., and Weston, K., Work Programme 

Evalution: Interim Meta Report, 2013
67 Quarterly Work Programme National Statistics to December 2014
68 Purvis, A., et al, Evaluation of the Work Choice Specialist Disability Employment Programme, 2013
69  Dunn, A., ‘Activation worker’s perception of their long term unemployed clients’ attitudes towards employment’, Journal of 

Social Policy, Volume 42 / Issue 04, 2013
70 DWP, Work Programme Evaluation: The Participant Experience Report, 2014




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


162


Given the Government’s ongoing commitment to the Jobcentre model,71 the most efficient 
way to achieve this would be by instituting more active and continuous partnerships between 
harder-to-help claimants and Jobcentre advisors assigned to them for the long term. For this 
reason we support the decision to shorten the amount of time people need to wait before 
receiving more intensive support from the Help to Work programme. But the choice should 
not be a binary one between Jobcentre delivered services and more specialist support. 
Instead claimants and their advisors – having undertaken a more rounded assessment of 
the kind described above – should be enabled to plot more personalised journeys back to 
work, drawing on mainstream Jobcentre services, suitable elements of the specialist provision 
that will be available through the Work and Health programme, as well as any other locally 
commissioned specialist services. 

Underpinning this would be a denser network of referral pathways and protocols that 
allowed for the maximum possible flexibility (although subject to the current conditionality 
rules). This would allow claimants and their coaches to more quickly modify their approach 
as the situation evolves. This should include a more systematic harnessing of the skills 
being developed within the Troubled Families programme. Feedback from Troubled 
Families providers indicate that family workers are skilled at building mutually respectful but 
challenging relationships through home visits.72 Of the available workforce they are best 
placed to successfully engage people who are despondent about their prospects due to 
years of living with a range of serious problems which, combined, have kept them out of the 
labour market.73

Tackling low skills and qualifications

For the new approach outlined above to have real purchase there also needs to be a step 
change in our approach to skills. Research published in 2012 by the DWP revealed that 
31.2 per cent of long-term Jobseeker’s Allowance claimants had either no qualifications or 
unclassifiable qualifications.74 

The current welfare-to-work model is based on the assumption that participants should find 
a job first through which they will then gain new skills that increase their chances of staying in 
work. Unfortunately, for the majority of people with substantial skill deficits, the current ‘work 
first’ approach falls down because there are not enough jobs for which employers are willing 
to recruit people without a basic level of English, maths, ICT and employability skills.75 Other 
research suggests that people in low-paid work are the least likely group to receive training 
support from their employers, limiting their scope for progression once in work (assuming 
they are able to secure a job on the basis of having basic skills).76 

The Coalition Government sought to partly address this problem by introducing skills 
conditionality. This entails Jobcentre Plus referring claimants to a skills training provider, 
Further Education College or Next Step advisor with potential benefit sanctions for non-
participation. Because of the length of time it takes to develop English, maths or ESOL skills, 
learning providers tend to offer intensive provision for unemployed adults. Although many 
people find employment on completion of a Level 1 course, others may encounter problems 
finding sustained employment on that basis (the success rate is currently running at 46 per 
cent for Level 1 graduates securing sustained job outcomes).77 

At least some participants would benefit from progressing from English, maths and ESOL 
at Level 1 to short course Level 1 or Level 2 vocational skills provision. This is backed up by 

71 House of Commons, The Government’s Response to the DWP Select Committee Report: The Role of Jobcentre Plus  
 in the Reformed Welfare System (HC 479), 2014
72 London Councils, Troubled Families Programme: Lessons for Future Public Service Reform, 2014
73 Shildrick, T., MacDonald, R., Furlong, A., Roden, J., and Crow, R., Are Cultures of Worklessness Passed Down the  
 Generations?, 2012
74 DWP, Mental Health in Context: The National Study of Work-Search and Wellbeing, Research Report 810, 2012
75 NIACE, The Work Programme: What is the Role of Skills?, 2012
76 UKCES, Engaging Low-skilled Employees in Workplace Learning, 2012
77 Gray, R., and Lockhart-Smith, A., Personal and Social Development Provision: Content, Format and Impact, 2015




Chapter 6: Reducing persistent poverty


163


new research suggesting that those in possession of Level 2 qualifications are much less 
likely to be out of work.78 Interviews with long-term workless people also reveal that they are 
keenly aware that much of the skills training they are provided with is of a low level and at 
best equips them for routine, poorly paid work.79 The offer of higher-level training and what it 
represents in terms of a genuine route for progression could increase engagement levels. 

But, at present, steady progression from basic skills training to higher qualifications is a 
goal rather than a reality. A key barrier is that learning providers may find that the costs of 
supporting participants to achieve higher level skills are not fully covered by the funding 
they can draw down, or that they have used up their Skills Funding Agency budgets in their 
delivery of learning to other learners.80 In this case, the learning provider may have to ask the 
Work Programme provider to contribute to the costs of the skills provision. No reliable data is 
available on the number of referrals Work Programme providers make to training providers, 
but participant surveys suggest they are relatively few. 

Support for the long-term workless has also been affected by the fact that the non-
apprenticeship adult skills budget has been reduced by almost a quarter (24 per cent) in 
2015/16 as the Skills Funding Agency tries to balance its own reduced funding with the need 
to deliver stretching apprenticeship targets. Casualties of this approach include funding for 
mandatory ESOL programmes that were introduced for Jobseeker’s Allowance claimants with 
poor spoken English as a condition for their continuing to receive benefits.81 

The in-year cuts are part of a wider trend that has seen the further education budget reduced 
by one-third over the last parliament. As a result participation has dropped by almost 11 
per cent (more than 350,000 fewer adults) in education and training.82 The decision made 
during the Spending Review to freeze spending in cash terms (depending on inflation; a 
real-terms cut) on 16- to 19-year-old education in school sixth forms, sixth form colleges and 
further education colleges, as well as the budget for adult skills participation, will mean that 
community learning providers will need to look for further efficiencies. 

It is vital that changes to provision do not disadvantage people who need extra help 
to become more employable, especially since many will not be eligible to join the 
apprenticeships programme if their skills fall short of requirements. The decision to initiate a 
series of locally led Area Reviews – announced in the Autumn Statement – provides a chance 
to think systematically about how to use skills funding to deliver a further reduction in the 
numbers of long-term unemployed. 

We would argue that the priority must be to create more robust progression ladders so that 
people without qualifications can achieve basic skills and then higher level skills. Part of this 
will be about ensuring that funding for Level 1 and Level 2 course provision can be protected. 
But realistically, to deliver a noticeable upswing in the numbers of adult learners both 
employers and individual claimants (once in work) will have to be persuaded to contribute 
more of their own resources. With no prospect of any additional public funding, the respective 
responsibilities of the state, employers and individuals in relation to building human capital 
need to be set out much more clearly. 

78  Bibby, D., Buscha, F., Cerqua, A., Thomson, D., Urwin, P., Estimation of the Labour Market Returns to Qualifications Gained 
in English Further Education, 2014

79 Shildrick, T., MacDonald, R., Furlong, A., Roden, J., Crow, R., Are Cultures of Worklessness Passed Down Through the  
 Generations?, 2012
80 NIACE, The Work Programme: What is the Role of Skills?, 2012
81 Skills Funding Agency, Changes to Funding Allocations for 2015 to 2016, 2015
82  Skills Funding Agency, Further Education and Skills: Learner Participation: Outcomes and Level of Highest Qualification Held, 



2015

State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


164


6.5 Conclusions and Recommendations 
The UK has rightly been praised for its jobs success, with the number of children in workless 
households falling from 16.2 per cent in 2010 to 11.8 per cent in 2015 and the parental 
employment rate at record highs.83 But as levels of worklessness fall, the question of how 
best to help those who are still unemployed becomes more pressing. The recommissioning 
of the Work Programme creates an obvious window to look at the system in total and to 
consider adjustments to engage and help more of those who are at some distance from 
finding a job and who are in persistent poverty. The full roll-out of Universal Credit also 
provides a major opportunity in this regard, freeing up Jobcentre staff from paperwork to 
focus on the key tasks of assessing need, commissioning specialist services and building 
strong relationships with their clients. The prize is a more agile welfare-to-work system  
that fosters the agency of its highest-need clients and expands their sense of what might  
be possible. 

Recommendation 1: The Government should set a goal to make the UK, 
by 2020, one of the top five countries in the OECD for having the fewest 
number of children in workless households. 

The top five countries in the OECD all have fewer than 7.8 per cent of children living in 
workless households84 – this compares with 11.8 per cent in the UK.85 The target is a realistic 
but challenging one. It is in line with the current performance of the two best-performing 
English regions – the South East and the East of England. And it requires the rate of increase 
in the proportion of children living in working households seen over the last five years – 1 per 
cent per year – to be maintained for the rest of the decade.86 

Achieving it would involve a reduction of almost 500,000 in the number of children who live 
in workless households – or about a third. This goal could be reached if the UK employment 
rate for families with dependent children were brought into line with those in Sweden and 
Denmark – 75 per cent of lone parents (currently 64 per cent) and 97 per cent of couples with 
children (currently 95 per cent) are in work in these countries.87 

In addition to the labour activation policies already being undertaken, achieving this target 
would require a concerted push to tackle some of the biggest structural disadvantages 
currently at play in the labour market. This would involve movement on a range of fronts, with 
employers, local authorities and education providers playing major roles. The advent of City 
Deals provides an obvious template through which regions can begin to set ambitious targets 
for themselves and then start to align local skills strategies, their work supporting businesses 
and partnerships with Jobcentre Plus to maximum effect.

Recommendation 2: The Government should reform the welfare-to-work 
system to put personalisation at its heart. 

A system that better understands the people it serves will also be a more effective system. 
The Government should carry out a feasibility review of how the roll-out of Universal Credit 
could be exploited to create the basis of a richer client record and risk-management tool, and 
it should commit to a timetable for its delivery. Because Universal Credit is designed around 
households rather than individuals it should be possible to use the HMRC data it contains, 
supplemented by other information such as that generated by WCA assessments and case 
files from Troubled Families workers to identify the individuals and families at greatest risk of 

83 ONS, Working and Workless Households, 2015
84 OECD, Familes Database: Table LMF1.1, 2015
85 Office for National Statistics, Working and Workless Households, 2015
86 Office for National Statistics, Working and Workless Households, 2015
87 OECD, Families Database: Tables LMF1.3 and LMF2.2, 2015




Chapter 6: Reducing persistent poverty


165


persistent poverty due to worklessness. This would enable Jobcentre teams to plan which 
people they need to provide more support to, both in terms of time as well as money. 

Having identified individuals at the greatest risk, the system should then aim to ensure they 
can rely on at least one fixed point during what could be a long welfare-to-work journey. This 
is the relationship between them and their Jobcentre work coach/advisor. Even when referred 
to the Work Programme and Work Choice regular contact should be maintained.

The Government should also ensure that advisors and their clients are given greater freedom 
to tailor the approach as time passes; the number of clients left marooned on programmes 
which have exhausted its suite of interventions should be a tiny minority. Contract flexibilities 
are needed so clients and their advisors can opt to enter and exit programmes at the right 
time for the former, rather than only at the time agreed between the DWP and the prime provider. 

Recommendation 3: The Troubled Families programme should be 
renamed and formally brought into the welfare-to-work system.

People with long histories of worklessness, low skills or disabilities (with many of these issues 
experienced simultaneously) are more likely to benefit from intensive, personalised support 
from the start of their welfare-to-work journey as well as investment, where necessary, in their 
human capital. The skills developed by Troubled Families staff over the past five years should 
be harnessed more systematically.

Based in the public sector, Troubled Families can more easily cross organisational boundaries, 
aligning local health and social care services with the needs of their client. Caseworkers also 
have a good track record of developing trusting relationships with their clients and a deep 
understanding of their overall circumstances. 

In line with a broader remit the programme’s name should be changed to one with less 
stigmatising connotations and more in keeping with the substance of its work, for example, 
the Fresh Start or Families into Work programme. The number of people it aims to help 
(400,000) should stay the same but the eligibility criteria should be restricted to groups most 
at risk of worklessness and persistent poverty and entry into the programme jointly agreed 
between Troubled Families teams working in councils and Jobcentre staff.

Recommendation 4: Introduce personal skills budgets to help people 
make the leap from basic English and maths to higher-level skills.

The Government should encourage and empower those furthest from the job market by 
giving them a personal skills budget. One possible model is that proposed by the National 
Institute for Adult Education. Their ‘Help to Train ISA’ mirrors the Government’s ‘Help to Buy 
ISA’ and involves a basic starting element from the DWP or Department for Education which 
can be topped up by contributions from employers and the individuals (assuming claimants 
find work). Such an account could also be supplemented by routing funds from other public 
services, such as mental health or housing since these agencies also have a stake in securing 
a better outcome for the individual concerned.

The objective should help to develop a system and culture of greater shared investment in 
learning – from learners, employers and the state. It would of course be important to take 
the lessons of the Individual Learning Account experiment but there are strong ideas for 
safeguarding against the mistakes that led to fraud in that instance. Unique Learner Numbers, 
personal learning records and the register of training organisations could all help to ensure the 
money was spent properly. 

Since basic English and maths continue to be funded by the Skills Funding Agency, the focus 
should be on using the accounts to help more people on low incomes who have graduated 




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


166


from such training to move on to achieve Level 2 and 3 qualifications. People aged over 
25 who have been on a benefit and have completed a Level 1 course or below and not 
progressed further should be the priority. They are rarely eligible for course fee concessions 
after that age and are most likely to need pooled funding from agencies and/or an employer 
in order to progress.




Chapter 7: Social mobility and child poverty in Scotland


167


Chapter 7: Social mobility and child 
poverty in Scotland

•	 Child	poverty	in	Scotland	is	lower	than	in	the	rest	of	the	UK,	but	140,000	
children	are	still	growing	up	in	poor	families.	

•	 While	Scotland	has	fewer	workers	paid	less	than	the	Living	Wage	than	
the	rest	of	the	UK	and	more	mothers	in	couples	work,	almost	one	in	five	
employees	are	low	paid.	

•	 There	is	still	a	long	way	to	go	to	achieve	the	vision	of	eradicating		
child	poverty	in	Scotland,	and	the	Scottish	government	will	need	to	
put	in	place	a	new	institutional	framework	to	replace	the	Child	Poverty	
Act	2010.		

•	 Scotland	has	similar	social	mobility	problems	to	the	rest	of	the	UK,	
with	children	from	poorer	backgrounds	doing	worse	than	their	peers	
throughout	the	educational	system.	

•	 There	has	been	a	welcome	increased	focus	on	social	mobility,	but		
this	has	not	yet	been	translated	into	improved	outcomes	for	less		
well-off	children.	

7.1 Introduction
The Scottish Government has made social justice a core priority. It has an active programme 
to deliver inclusive growth and tackle child poverty, and is making progress towards its 
goals. Its approach is similar in some respects to the approaches taken elsewhere in the UK, 
but has a number of important differences. For example, in contrast to England, Scotland 
proposes to retain a long-term commitment to meeting the child poverty targets currently set 
out in the Child Poverty Act 2010, and while social mobility has been a major policy issue in 
England for at least five years, only recently has it become one in Scotland.

The challenges facing Scotland are not dissimilar to those facing the rest of the UK. 
Independent forecasters are expecting child poverty in Scotland to rise over the next 
few years – as in the UK as a whole – not least because of the impacts of welfare reform 
on the incomes of low-income families. For example, in November 2014 the Institute for 
Fiscal Studies published projections for child poverty in Scotland which suggested that the 
proportion of children in relative poverty would increase by 7 per cent and the proportion of 
children in absolute poverty would increase by 20 per cent, between 2013–14 and 2020–21.1 

1  Institute for Fiscal Studies, Child and Working-age Poverty in Northern Ireland over the Next Decade: An Update, IFS Briefing 
Note BN154, November 2014. This projected that between 2013–14 and 2020–21 the proportion of children in relative 
poverty before housing costs would increase from a forecast 20.0 per cent to 23.4 per cent, and the proportion in absolute 
poverty before housing costs would increase from a forecast 22.6 per cent to 27.1 per cent




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


168


These challenges have grown since last year, with the announcement of a further £12 billion 
of discretionary cuts in the UK welfare budget targeted on children and working-age adults by 
the incoming UK Government that are not factored into these projections.

In some ways, Scotland is better placed to respond to these challenges than other parts of 
the UK. The proportion of children in poverty in Scotland against the headline measures is 
the lowest of all the constituent countries of the UK and decreased between 2012–13 and 
2013–14. There are relatively few children in workless households: the parental employment 
rate is relatively high. Housing costs are low compared to the rest of the UK, meaning that 
child poverty after housing costs is lower than in any other country or region of the UK.

The most important development around social mobility in Scotland over the last 12 
months is the increasing focus among policymakers on tackling the large and unacceptable 
educational attainment gap between rich and poor that exists in Scotland. This is a very 
welcome development. The key challenge is delivering on changes that can make a real 
difference. Scottish society – including central government, local government, schools, further 
education (FE) colleges, universities, parents and employers – will need to come together to 
make the vision of a fair Scotland a reality.

7.2 Current position
The most recent annual report on the child poverty strategy in Scotland noted that 2013–14 
saw significant falls in child poverty against the relative and absolute poverty measures 
in the Child Poverty Act 2010, although poverty after housing costs was flat and material 
deprivation increased.

The Scottish Government’s self-assessment of progress in tackling the drivers of poverty 
was that out of the 37 indicators in its measurement framework, performance was improving 
against four indicators, worsening against two indicators and being maintained against 30 
indicators (time series data could not be reported against the remaining indicator).2  

The rest of this section explores trends in child poverty and social mobility in more detail, 
comparing the progress being made in Scotland to elsewhere in the UK, and looking in more 
detail at the progress being made in improving social mobility beyond the headline indicators 
in the measurement framework.

Child poverty

On the whole, trends in child poverty are encouraging although there is still a long way to go 
to hit the targets set out in the Child Poverty Act 2010. Against the headline targets, child poverty 
is lower in Scotland than in the UK as a whole, and has been falling over time. In 2013–14:

• Relative child poverty before housing costs was 14 per cent, compared to 17 per cent in
the UK as a whole and 21 per cent five years earlier in 2008–09;3

• Absolute child poverty before housing costs was 15 per cent, compared to 19 per cent in
the UK as a whole and 20 per cent five years earlier in 2008–09;

• Material deprivation before housing costs was 13 per cent, the same as in the UK as a
whole. This has been rising over the last two years from 9 per cent in 2011–12;

• Relative and absolute poverty before housing costs were both at half the levels seen in
1999–2000 – a significant achievement.

2 Scottish Government, Annual Report for the Child Poverty Strategy for Scotland, October 2015
3  All data on child poverty in this chapter is taken from Scottish Government, Poverty and Income Inequality in Scotland: 

2013–14, 2015 unless otherwise stated




Chapter 7: Social mobility and child poverty in Scotland


169


After taking account of housing costs, Scotland has the lowest child poverty rate of any 
part of the UK. For example, in the three years ending 2013–14, 24 per cent of children in 
Scotland were in absolute poverty after housing costs, compared to 31 per cent in England 
and 25 per cent in the best performing English region (the South East).4  

However, despite this good performance relative to the rest of the UK, progress against the 
absolute child poverty after housing costs measure stalled in the mid-2000s and the rate has 
been increasing since 2010–11. As a result, child poverty against this measure was the same 
in 2013–14 as it was almost a decade earlier in 2004–05.

The trends in one of the key drivers of child poverty – employment – are also encouraging:

•	 The proportion of children in Scotland who live in workless households has decreased 
rapidly in recent years and is slightly lower than the UK average – only 10.9 per cent of 
children in Scotland live in workless households compared to 15.8 per cent in 2012 and 
11.8 per cent in the UK as a whole;5 

•	 More than six out of 10 (62.5 per cent) children in Scotland live in households where all 
adults are in work, making Scotland the region with the most ‘fully working’ households in 
the UK – for example, only 54.6 per cent of children in England live in households where all 
adults are in work;6 

•	 Scotland has the second highest parental employment rate of any region of the UK: 
83.2 per cent of people with dependent children are in work. This is driven by very high 
employment of mothers in couples; 79.6 per cent of whom are in work compared to 71.9 
per cent in England. However, lone parents in Scotland have a relatively low employment 
rate – only 62.2 per cent are in work (compared to, for example, 69.8 per cent in the East 
of England and 69.2 per cent in Wales).7 

Working poverty is becoming relatively more important in Scotland, although this is mainly 
due to success in tackling workless poverty rather than any significant increase in the 
prevalence of working poverty:

•	 56 per cent of children in poverty in Scotland have at least one parent who is in work 
compared to, for example, 43 per cent in 2009–10;

•	 However, the proportion of all children who are in working poor households has been 
slowly trending downwards over time – in 2013–14, approximately 7 to 8 per cent of 
children were in working poor households, compared to 9 to 10 per cent in 2007–08, and 
12 to 13 per cent in 1998–99; although there has been relatively little change over time 
after taking housing costs into account;8 

•	 A key driver of working poverty is low pay – according to the Office for National Statistics, 
441,000 jobs in Scotland pay less than the Living Wage or 19 per cent of jobs. This means 
that Scotland has the joint lowest prevalence of low pay in the UK, along with London 
and the South East of England. However, there is a lot of variation between different local 
areas: the proportion of jobs paying less than the Living Wage ranges from 13.6 per cent 
in Edinburgh to 33.0 per cent in Angus;9 

•	 Another key driver of working poverty is work intensity – children in households where 
parents do not work many hours or in couple households where only one parent works 

4 Department for Work and Pensions, Households Below Average Income 2013/14, 2015
5 Office for National Statistics, Working and Workless Households, 2015
6 Ibid.
7  Office for National Statistics, Employment Rates Broken Down by Region and Year, April to June, 1996 to 2015, Ad Hoc 

Labour Market Release 004861, 10 November 2015
8  These estimates have been calculated by establishing a lower and upper bound for the level of working poverty in each year 

from published data on the level of child poverty and the proportion of children in poverty who live in working households, 
which are both rounded to the nearest percentage point

9 Office for National Statistics, How Many Jobs Are Paid Less than the Living Wage in Your Area, 12 October 2015




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


170


are far more likely than other children to be in poverty. While the Commission is not aware 
of any evidence that looks at Scotland specifically, evidence for the UK as a whole, cited 
earlier in this report, suggests that 37 per cent of children in working poor households 
live with parents who would be considered to have some ‘work capacity’ under Universal 
Credit rules.10 

Social mobility

While there is a shortage of good-quality published data on social mobility in Scotland, what 
does exist suggests that Scotland – in common with the rest of the UK – has a serious social 
mobility problem. Those from less well-off backgrounds fall behind their peers in the early 
years, and wide educational attainment gaps persist through compulsory school, post-16 
education and higher education (HE) and drive worse outcomes during adult life.

Early years
The Scottish Government does not collect or publish any national data that can be used 
to assess trends year-to-year in cognitive development over the early years of life and 
development gaps between children from different social backgrounds.

However, there is evidence from the Growing Up in Scotland survey – based on two representative 
samples of 5,000 children born in 2004–05 and 6,000 children born in 2010–11 – that there 
are significant gaps by social background in cognitive and social development. For example:

•	 By the age of five, children from the highest-income quintile are on average around 13 
months ahead of their peers in the lowest-income quintile in their knowledge of vocabulary, 
and 10 months ahead in their problem-solving ability;11 

•	 Children from the lowest-income quintile are significantly more likely to exhibit a range 
of behavioural difficulties on entry to primary school, compared to their peers from the 
highest-income quintile – they are more than twice as likely to display conduct problems 
(43 per cent versus 19 per cent), peer problems (24 per cent versus 12 per cent), 
emotional symptoms (16 per cent versus 6 per cent) and hyperactivity (30 per cent versus 
12 per cent).

While international comparisons are difficult to make, evidence from the Millennium Cohort 
Study12 suggests that the gap in cognitive development between children from less well-off 
backgrounds and others is bigger in Scotland than in England, concluding that: “In Scotland 
it is the poorest children that perform less well than their low-income counterparts in England; 
high income children in Scotland continue to out-perform high-income children in England 
throughout the first seven years.”

10  Bradshaw, J. and Main, G., How Many Working Parents Might be Able to Work More?, 19 March 2014  
http://spruyork.blogspot.co.uk/2014/03/how-many-working-poor-parents-might-be.html

11  Scottish Government, Tackling Inequalities in the Early Years: Key Messages from the Growing Up in Scotland Study, 2015
12  Taylor, C., Rees, G. and Davies, R., Devolution and Geographies of Education: The Use of the Millennium Cohort Study for 

‘Home International’ Comparisons across the UK, 2013

http://spruyork.blogspot.co.uk/2014/03/how-many-working-poor-parents-might-be.html




Chapter 7: Social mobility and child poverty in Scotland


171


School age
The availability of data on the attainment of school-age children is somewhat better than 
for the early years, with some survey data published on attainment in primary and early 
secondary school and national data published on school leavers, which both include some 
information about attainment gaps. However, there is still a severe lack of systematic data 
published compared to some other parts of the UK, especially England, although this is being 
resolved through the introduction of national testing by the new National Improvement Framework.

A specific problem with data on the school attainment gap in Scotland is that all the published 
statistics define disadvantage based on ‘living in a deprived area’, rather than on individual 
characteristics. Given that more than half – 54 per cent – of children in low-income families in 
Scotland (defined using the HM Revenue & Customs (HMRC) Children in Low Income Families 
measure) live outside of the most deprived 20 per cent Scottish Index of Multiple Deprivation 
(SIMD) areas, this means that official statistics – and policy interventions aiming to improve 
the attainment of children from disadvantaged backgrounds – risk ignoring the low attainment 
of many children from poorer families due to them not living in the most deprived areas.13 

The Scottish Survey of Literacy and Numeracy14 measures the performance of 10,000 
children in Scottish schools against literacy and numeracy on an alternating yearly basis, 
with performance reported for children in P4 (at age 8–9), P7 (at age 11–12) and S2 (at age 
13–14). Children from the most deprived third of areas do a lot worse than their peers across 
the age range.15 Focusing on attainment in the second year of secondary school:

•	 In numeracy, children in disadvantaged areas are twice as likely as those in advantaged 
areas to fail to meet expected levels – 52 per cent do not achieve expected levels (versus 
24 per cent), only 25 per cent (versus 52 per cent) perform well, and only 3 per cent 
(versus 13 per cent) perform very well;

•	 In reading, children in disadvantaged areas are three times as likely as those in 
advantaged areas to be assessed as not performing well – 5 per cent do not achieve 
expected levels (versus 1 per cent), 68 per cent (versus 90 per cent) perform well, and  
29 per cent (versus 53 per cent) perform very well;

•	 In writing, children in disadvantaged areas were twice as likely to fail to meet expected 
levels – 19 per cent do not achieve expected levels (versus 9 per cent), 12 per cent (versus 
25 per cent) perform well, and only 1 per cent (versus 4 per cent) perform very well;

•	 In listening and talking there was not as much difference between children in 
disadvantaged areas and those in advantaged areas – a similar proportion of children 
fail to meet expected levels (18 per cent versus 16 per cent), although there are bigger 
differences in terms of performing very well (19 per cent versus 28 per cent).

The most recent published data on performance in Standard and Higher level qualifications 
by disadvantage has three important limitations:

•	 It merges all school leavers together so performance cannot be differentiated by age;

•	 It does not attempt to assess attainment at ‘expected levels’ (e.g. five or more awards at 
Scottish Credit and Qualifications Framework (SCQF) Level 4/5 or above at the end of S4), 
and only reports data for achieving ‘one or more pass’ at each of the SCQF levels;

•	 It looks at the highest level of qualification achieved and so, for example, records a single 
D grade at Higher level as a better qualification than any number of Standard Grades.

13  HMRC, Children in Low Income Families: Local Measure, 2011 was used to estimate how many children in poverty lived in 
each of the 6,501 Scottish data zones (2001 boundaries). Scottish Government, Scottish Index of Multiple Deprivation 2012, 
2012 was used to calculate what proportion of children in poverty lived in data zones in the bottom SIMD quintile

14 All data in this paragraph is taken from Scottish Government, The Scottish Survey of Literacy and Numeracy, 2015
15  The data defines ‘disadvantaged areas’ as the most deprived third of areas and ‘advantaged areas’ to be the least deprived 

third of areas




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


172


With those caveats, the data suggests that there are very big disadvantage gaps in the 
attainment of school leavers. In 2013–14, compared to children in the least deprived 10 per 
cent of areas, children in the poorest 10 per cent of areas were:

•	 Seven times more likely to leave school without achieving one or more Standard Grades at 
Credit level – SCQF level 5 – or better (30.3 per cent versus 4.3 per cent);16

•	 Less than half as likely to achieve at least one pass at Higher level (36.8 per cent versus 
82.7 per cent);

•	 Less than one-fifth as likely to achieve at least one pass at Advanced Higher level (6.9 per 
cent versus 37.6 per cent).

Data from 2012–13 suggests that those from the most deprived 10 per cent of areas are less 
than half as likely to achieve five or more Standard Grades at Credit level or better than those 
in the least deprived 10 per cent of areas: 38 per cent versus 85 per cent (data against this 
measure is no longer published so more recent data is not available).17 

However, there is evidence of some improvement over the last couple of years. For example, 
the proportion of children in the most disadvantaged 10 per cent of areas achieving at least 
one Higher pass increased from 30.0 per cent in 2011–12 to 36.8 per cent in 2013–14; and 
the proportion failing to achieve at least one Credit grade at Standard level decreased from 
37.6 per cent in 2011–12 to 30.3 per cent in 2013–14.

Unpublished data18 on attainment of school leavers who are registered for free school meals 
also shows big disadvantage gaps. Compared to their peers, school leavers registered for 
free school meals are:

•	 Less than half as likely to leave school with five or more Standard Grades at Credit level or 
better (32.5 per cent versus 67.8 per cent);

•	 Half as likely to leave school with numeracy skills at SCQF Level 5 or above (31.1 per cent 
versus 63.7 per cent);

•	 Little over half as likely to leave school with literacy skills at SCQF Level 5 or above (41.8 
per cent versus 74.4 per cent).

•	 Only around a quarter as likely to leave school with an Advanced Higher qualification (5.4 
per cent versus 20.6 per cent).

There are also large gaps in the attainment of school leavers registered for free school meals 
between different local areas in Scotland (see Figure 7.1):19 

•	 Five out of six young people registered for free school meals in Aberdeen City left school 
without numeracy at SCQF Level 5, and the same proportion left without five Standard 
Grades at SCQF Level 5. Only 35 out of 276 school leavers registered for free school 
meals in Aberdeen and Aberdeenshire in 2013–14 – barely one in eight – left school with a 
single qualification at Higher level or above, including at most four students registered for 
free school meals who left school with an Advanced Higher qualification;

•	 By contrast, more than half of young people registered for free school meals in East 
Dunbartonshire left school with numeracy at SCQF Level 5 or better, and a similar 
proportion left with one or more Higher qualification.

16  All data on school leaver attainment and destinations is taken from Scottish Government, Attainment and School Leaver 
Destinations: Supplementary Data, June 2015 unless otherwise stated

17  Education (Scotland) Bill, SPICe Briefing 15/9, 23 April 2015. Data is only published up to 2012/13. Note that holding any 
Higher qualification is defined as better than five or more passes at Standard Grade, so some of these children will not have 
achieved at this level

18  The Scottish Government kindly made available unpublished analysis on the attainment of school leavers in 2013/14 by 
whether they were registered for free school meals by local authority area

19 Ibid.




Chapter 7: Social mobility and child poverty in Scotland


173


International comparisons of outcomes for school-age children in Scotland suggest that 
the attainment gap is similar to in the rest of the UK. For example, the Programme for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) study concludes that while there are “deep levels 
of inequality in Scotland, particularly between pupils from different socio-economic groups”, 
the evidence “suggests that there is little to differentiate Scotland in terms of socio-economic 
inequality from the rest of the UK”.20 

Figure 7.1: Educational attainment of school leavers registered for free school meals: 
proportion achieving five or more Standard Grades at SCQF Level 5 or better 

Glasgow


City




East

Renfrewshire



East

Dunbart-
onshire



West

Dunbart-
onshire

Clackmann-
anshire

Inverclyde



Renfrews




hire


North

Lanarkshire



West

Lothian

Falkirk

Highland

Aberdeenshire

Moray



Fife


Angus

Stirling

Perth and Kinross

Dumfries and Galloway

Scottish Borders

South
Lanarkshire



East

Ayrshire

South
Ayrshire



East

Lothian

Midlothian

North Ayrshire


Na h-Eileanan an Iar

Argyll and Bute City of Edinburgh

Aberdeen


City


Orkney Islands

Dundee City


       

40.0% and above

30.0% to 39.9%

20.0% to 29.9%

19.9% and below

Shetland
Islands

% registered free school 
meals pupils achieving 
five standard 
qualifications at Level 5+

Source: Unpublished analysis on the attainment of school leavers in 2013/14 by whether they were registered for free school 
meals by local authority area, provided by the Scottish Government

20  Machin, S., McNally, S. and Wyness, G., Education in a Devolved Scotland: A Quantitative Analysis, LSE Centre for 
Economic Performance Special Paper 30, May 2013

Glasgow


City




East

Renfrewshire



East

Dunbart-
onshire



West

Dunbart-
onshire

Clackmann-
anshire

Inverclyde



Renfrews




hire


North

Lanarkshire



West

Lothian

Falkirk

Highland

Aberdeenshire

Moray



Fife


Angus

Stirling

Perth and Kinross

Dumfries and Galloway

Scottish Borders

South
Lanarkshire



East

Ayrshire

South
Ayrshire



East

Lothian

Midlothian

North Ayrshire


Na h-Eileanan an Iar

Argyll and Bute City of Edinburgh

Aberdeen


City


Orkney Islands

Dundee City


       

40.0% and above

30.0% to 39.9%

20.0% to 29.9%

19.9% and below

Shetland
Islands

% registered free school 
meals pupils achieving 
five standard 
qualifications at Level 5+

% registered free 
school meals pupils 
achieving five standard 
qualifications at Level 5+




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


174


Destinations after leaving school and higher education
While the proportion of young people aged 16 to 19 in Scotland who are not in employment, 
education or training is the lowest since records began (at 8.4 per cent in 2014, compared to 
11.3 per cent in 2013), there are big gaps by social background. For example:

•	 Almost one in six school leavers from the most deprived 10 per cent of areas are 
unemployed nine months after leaving school – meaning that they are more than six times 
as likely to be unemployed than those in the least deprived 10 per cent of areas (15.9 per 
cent versus 2.5 per cent);

•	 Little over one in five school leavers from the most deprived 10 per cent of areas enter HE 
within nine months of leaving school – meaning that they are a little over one-third as likely 
to do so (21.0 per cent versus 62.6 per cent);

•	 Almost one-third of school leavers from the most deprived 10 per cent of areas enter FE within 
nine months of leaving school – meaning that they are more than twice as likely to do so 
than those in the least deprived 10 per cent of areas (32.6 per cent versus 13.7 per cent);

•	 Looking at destinations of school leavers registered for free school meals (2012–13 
data), barely one in eight (12.8 per cent) had entered HE nine months after leaving school 
(compared to 39.8 per cent of other school leavers), and more than one in five (21.7 per 
cent) were unemployed (compared to 9.6 per cent of other school leavers).21 

There is a significant disadvantage gap in HE participation in Scotland. Overall, HE 
participation rates in Scotland are high: more than half (55.0 per cent) enter HE by the age 
of 30, and almost half (45.8 per cent) do so by the age of 20.22 However, little more than 
a quarter (27.6 per cent) of young people from the most disadvantaged areas enter HE 
by the age of 20, compared to almost two-thirds (65.1 per cent) of those from the most 
advantaged areas.23

There are also big disadvantage gaps in the type of HE in which students participate. Those 
from disadvantaged areas are far more likely than other Scottish entrants to enrol in sub-
degree courses at FE colleges rather than study towards degree-level courses in universities, 
especially at the most academically selective institutions:

•	 More than half of young HE entrants from the most disadvantaged areas study at FE colleges, 
making them more than two-and-a-half times more likely to do so than young HE entrants 
from the most advantaged areas (58 per cent versus 23 per cent);

•	 Little more than one-third of young HE entrants from the most disadvantaged areas study 
towards a degree, making them only half as likely to do so as young HE entrants from the 
most advantaged areas (35 per cent versus 70 per cent).24 

This is important given that sub-degree qualifications have significantly lower lifetime benefits 
than degrees. For example, evidence from England suggests that the average net lifetime 
benefit of an undergraduate degree in present value terms is £121,000 for men and £82,000 
for women compared to, for example, the lifetime benefits of a Higher National Diploma 
(HND) of £21,000 for men and £70,000 for women.25 

Therefore, young people from the most deprived areas are doubly disadvantaged compared 
to their peers. They are less than half as likely to enter HE in the first place and, if they 

21 Scottish Government, Attainment and Leaver Destinations: Supplementary Data 2012/13, 2014
22 Scottish Funding Council, Higher Education Students and Qualifiers at Scottish Institutions, 2013–14, 2015
23  Ad hoc analysis carried out for the Commission by the Scottish Funding Council. In the rest of this section, ‘most 

disadvantaged’ refers to entrants from the most deprived 20 per cent of SIMD areas and ‘least disadvantaged’ refers to 
those from the least deprived 20 per cent of SIMD areas

24  Ibid.
25  Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, The Returns to Higher Education Qualifications, BIS Research Paper 45, 

June 2011 




Chapter 7: Social mobility and child poverty in Scotland


175


do, they are twice as likely to study towards sub-degree-level qualifications which have 
significantly lower returns in the labour market. 

The net effect is that those from the most advantaged areas are more than four-and-a-half 
times as likely to participate in degree-level higher education by the age of 20 as their peers in 
the most disadvantaged areas:

•	 Fewer than one in 10 young people from the most disadvantaged areas begin to study 
towards a degree by the age of 20 (9.8 per cent);

•	 Almost half of young people from the most advantaged areas begin to study towards a 
degree by the age of 20 (45.7 per cent).26 

Comparing Scotland higher education participation to the rest  
of the UK

Young people in Scotland – including those from the most disadvantaged areas – are 
significantly more likely to participate in higher education than people in the rest of the 
UK. For example, as Table 7.1 shows, far fewer young people in Scotland live in areas 
with low rates of participation in higher education than elsewhere in the UK.

  Table 7.1: Proportion of young people who live in low (bottom 20 per cent) and high 
(top 20 per cent) participation areas, 2005–09

Country Proportion of young people 
living in low participation 
areas

Proportion of young people 
living in high participation 
areas

Scotland 9.9 28.1

Northern Ireland 14.6 27.3

England 20.8 19.1

Wales 25.2 15.3

  Source: Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE), POLAR3 data, 2012: http://www.hefce.ac.uk/analysis/ 
yp/POLAR/POLAR3,data/ 

  Note: This is based on the combined participation rate of those aged 18 between 2005 and 2009 participating in higher 
education between 2005–06 and 2010–11. Low participation areas are the bottom 20 per cent UK-wide and all have young 
participation rates of below 21 per cent. High participation areas are in the top 20 per cent UK-wide and all have young 
participation rates of above 47 per cent.

However, participation in higher education in Scotland is less likely to involve attending 
university than elsewhere in the UK, especially for those from the most disadvantaged 
backgrounds. For example, data published by UCAS shows that entry rates via an 
application through the UCAS system are significantly lower in Scotland than elsewhere 
(Table 7.2).


  

26  Ad hoc analysis carried out for the Commission by the Scottish Funding Council providing updated data on Table M of Scottish 
Funding Council, Participation Rates for Entrants to Scottish Higher Education in 2012–13, October 2014 by SIMD quintile

http://www.hefce.ac.uk/analysis/yp/POLAR/POLAR3,data/




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


176


  Table 7.2: UCAS entry rate at age 18 for young people living in low participation 
areas (bottom 20 per cent) and high participation areas (top 20 per cent), 2014

Country UCAS entry rate at age 18 – 
low participation areas (%)

UCAS entry rate at age 18 – 
high participation areas (%)

Scotland 9.5 33.6

Northern Ireland 17.4 44.9

England 18.2 45.9

Wales 16.7 42.8

 Source: UCAS, End of Cycle Report 2014, 2015

The difference between the two measures is driven largely by two key factors. First, 
as noted above, the average level of deprivation of low participation areas is higher 
than elsewhere in the UK so it is not a like-for-like comparison. Second, the Scottish 
HE system differs significantly to that in the rest of the UK. The UCAS participation 
rate excludes around one-third of young undergraduate entrants in Scotland – those 
studying towards HE qualifications in FE colleges. These excluded entrants are 
disproportionately from disadvantaged areas: as highlighted above, 58 per cent of 
young Scottish entrants from disadvantaged areas study at courses in FE colleges.

So which is the best comparison to use in assessing which country is doing best on 
social mobility in terms of HE access? Ideally we would be able to look at participation 
rates of disadvantaged students (rather than those from low participation areas) by 
level of study: whether students from disadvantaged backgrounds in each country 
are studying towards first degree qualifications or sub-degree qualifications such as 
foundation degrees, HNDs and Higher National Certificates (HNCs). Unfortunately, published 
data on this does not exist, although it seems certain that disadvantaged students in Scotland 
are less likely than disadvantaged students elsewhere in the UK to be doing degree-level 
courses.27

We would also need to be able to compare the post-HE outcomes of those from 
disadvantaged backgrounds across the UK in order to shed light on which model of HE 
was most effective at supporting social mobility.

In terms of fair access to the most selective universities, the four ancient universities –  
St Andrews, Edinburgh, Glasgow and Aberdeen – are as socially unrepresentative as the  
20 English Russell Group universities:

•	 Entrants to higher education from the most disadvantaged areas are less than half as likely 
as the rest of the population to enter the four ancient universities, with only 8.1 per cent 
entering these institutions compared to 17.0 per cent of other entrants;

•	 Looking at young, full-time first degree entrants to ancient universities,28 only 76.0 per cent 
are from state schools, and only 13.1 per cent are from working-class backgrounds29 
(compared to 75.5 per cent from state schools, and 14.2 per cent from working-class 
backgrounds in the 20 English Russell Group universities);

•	 Based on the benchmarks set by the Higher Education Statistics Agency – which 
estimate what admissions would be from widening participation groups if they admitted a 
representative sample of those ‘with the grades’ across the UK – there are 415 ‘missing’ 

27  For example, analysis by HEFCE concluded that 82 per cent of young HE entrants from the 20 per cent most disadvantaged 
areas in the UK as a whole were studying towards first degree courses. This compares to only 35 per cent of young entrants 
from disadvantaged areas in Scotland, based on Scottish Funding Council statistics

28  Further analysis of Higher Education Statistics Agency, Widening Participation of Underrepresented Groups, 2015 provided 
to the Commission by the Higher Education Statistics Agency

29  Defined as being in National Statistics Socio-Economic Classification (NS-SEC) groups 5–7 – ‘routine and manual’ occupations




Chapter 7: Social mobility and child poverty in Scotland


177


students from state schools (meaning a 6 per cent increase in state students would 
be necessary to meet the Agency benchmarks); and 260 ‘missing’ students from less 
advantaged socio-economic backgrounds30 (meaning a 16 per cent increase in less 
advantaged students would be necessary to hit the benchmarks) – again, similar to the  
20 English Russell Group universities.31 

Finally, on access to higher education, evidence highlighted in the Commission on Widening 
Access interim report shows that Scottish students are far more likely than their peers to live 
in the family home while studying: more than half of Scottish students live at home compared 
to less than one-third of other UK students, with those from disadvantaged backgrounds 
most likely to live at home. The research suggests that this is due to Scottish students being 
more debt-averse than young people elsewhere in the UK; with many young people seeing 
loans to support their living costs as a ‘last resort’, in part due to misconceptions about 
student debt and how it is repaid.32  

This evidence led the Commission on Widening Access to conclude that it is “concerned that 
young people in Scotland may well be making less than optimal decisions about their future 
because they do not have access to accurate and detailed advice and guidance on student 
finance”. They also drew attention to worries about the impact that the student finance 
system may be having on retention rates, degree class and students’ ability to make the most 
of their higher education experience.33 

Adulthood
There is less information about differences by social background in outcomes during 
adulthood. Looking at overall labour market outcomes and adult skills,34 Scotland is similar to 
the rest of the UK:

•	 The working age adult employment rate in the year to June 2015 was 72.9 per cent – the same 
as in the UK as a whole – and the unemployment rate was slightly higher than the UK as a whole;

•	 The proportion of people in work who were in managerial, professional and associate 
professional occupations (Standard Occupational Classification 1, 2 and 3) was 41.6 per 
cent in Scotland, compared to 43.9 per cent in the UK as a whole;

•	 Average hourly earnings in Scotland in April 2014 were £11.72 per hour compared to 
£11.61 per hour in the UK as a whole;

•	 The proportion of 16–64-year-olds not qualified to the equivalent of GCSE or higher 
(National Vocational Qualification (NVQ) level 2 and above) was 25.2 per cent in Scotland, 
compared to 26.9 per cent in the UK as a whole.

Looking at access to top jobs in Scotland, our recent Elitist Scotland research35 shows that: 

•	 Almost one-quarter (23 per cent) of people at the top of Scottish society who were 
educated in Scotland attended private schools for their secondary education. This includes 
45 per cent of senior judges, 32 per cent of top media professionals and 28 per cent of 
UK-educated business leaders. While a lower proportion of those in top professions in 
Scotland were educated privately than in Great Britain as a whole,36 there is still significant 

30  Defined as being in National Statistics Socio-Economic Classification (NS-SEC) groups 4–7 – this includes all from ‘routine 
and manual backgrounds’ and those whose parents are self-employed

31  Commission analysis using the methodology described in the Commission’s, Higher Education: The Fair Access Challenge, 
June 2013

32  Minty S., Young People’s Attitudes towards Tuition Fees and Debt in Scotland and England, paper for British Educational 
Research Association conference, 16 September 2015

33 Commission on Widening Access, Interim Report, November 2015
34  Data taken from Office for National Statistics Annual Population Survey and the Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings via 

https://www.nomisweb.co.uk/
35 Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, Elitist Scotland, 2015
36 Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission, Elitist Britain, 2014

https://www.nomisweb.co.uk/




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


178


over-representation, given that less than 6 per cent of secondary pupils in Scotland are 
educated privately; 

•	 43 per cent of people at the top of Scottish society studied for a first degree at one of  
the four ancient universities in Scotland. This includes 66 per cent of senior judges,  
50 per cent of top media professionals and 46 per cent of Scottish MPs. This limits the 
social diversity of the top of Scottish professions: for example, the data presented above 
shows that only 13 per cent of full-time, first degree entrants to these universities are from 
working-class backgrounds (National Statistics Socio-Economic Classification 5–7). 

Looking at housing market outcomes:

•	 In common with the rest of the UK, the proportion of households headed by a young adult 
(16 to 34-year-olds) who own their own home has fallen significantly over the last 15 years, 
from 53 per cent in 1999 to 30 per cent in 2014. Over the same period, the proportion 
renting privately has more than trebled, from 13 per cent in 1999 to 41 per cent in 2014;37 

•	 While this decline in owner-occupation among young adults has not translated into a big 
increase in the numbers of families with children living in the private rented sector to the 
same degree as in England, there are still 83,000 families with children in Scotland living in 
private rented housing (13.5 per cent). This may have a negative impact on some of these 
children, as private rented housing tends to be less stable and more expensive than other 
tenures. There is wide local variation in the proportion of children who live in the private 
rented sector – for example, in Edinburgh, more than 20 per cent of families with children 
live in the private rented sector, including 33 per cent of children in single parent families.38  

7.3 Key policies
There were no major changes in the Scottish Government’s strategic approach towards 
tackling child poverty since our report last year, with 2015 the second year covered by the 
Child Poverty Strategy for Scotland 2014–2017 published in 2014.39 

The strategy established three main goals for the Scottish Government in tackling child 
poverty and developed a set of 12 intermediate outcomes that will help these goals to be 
achieved – with progress being measured using 37 indicators in the strategy’s measurement 
framework:

•	 Pockets – maximising household resources:

	 •	 Maximised	financial	entitlements	of	families	on	low	income;

	 •	 Reduced	household	spend	of	families	on	low	income;

	 	•	 	Families	on	low	income	are	managing	finances	appropriately	and	accessing	all	
financial entitlements;

	 •	 Parents	are	in	good-quality,	sustained	employment	in	line	with	skills	and	ambitions.

•	 Prospects – improved life chances of children in poverty:

	 	•	 	Children	from	low-income	households	have	improved	levels	of	physical	and	mental	health;

	 	•	 	Children	from	low-income	households	experience	social	inclusion	and	display	social	
competence;

37 Scottish Government, Scotland’s People Annual Report: Results from 2014 Scottish Household Survey, 2015
38  Scottish Government, Scotland’s Census 2011, Table DC4104SC – Tenure by Occupancy Rating (Rooms) by Household 

Composition, 2011
39 Scottish Government, Child Poverty Strategy for Scotland 2014–2017, 2014




Chapter 7: Social mobility and child poverty in Scotland


179


	 	•	 	Children	from	low-income	households	have	improving	relative	levels	of	educational	
attainment, achieving their full potential;

	 	•	 	Children	from	low-income	backgrounds	are	in	good-quality,	sustained	employment	in	
line with their skills and ambitions.

•	 Places – children from low-income households live in well-designed, sustainable places:

	 •	 	Children	from	low-income	households	live	in	high-quality	sustainable	housing;

	 •	 	Children	from	low-income	households	grow	up	in	places	that	are	socially	sustainable;

	 	•	 	Children	from	low-income	households	grow	up	in	places	that	are	physically	sustainable;

	 	•	 	Children	from	low-income	households	grow	up	in	places	that	are	economically	
sustainable.

Key policy initiatives identified by the Scottish Government40 that aim to help support their 
efforts to meet the statutory child poverty targets include:

•	 Mitigation of the impact of welfare reform. The Scottish Government will be spending 
£104 million on this in 2015–16, including the Welfare Fund (£38 million), support for those 
subject to removal of the spare room subsidy (£35 million) and the council tax reduction 
scheme (£23 million) among other things;

•	 Promoting inclusive growth and fair work. The Scottish Economic Strategy, published 
in March 2015, focuses on tackling inequality as one of two key strategic objectives in 
Scotland’s new economic framework (alongside improving competitiveness). A central 
part of this is the Fair Work agenda: job security, fair reward and opportunities for personal 
and workplace development. Initiatives as part of this include the Fair Work Convention 
(a cross-society advisory body involving employer and employee representatives, who 
are tasked with developing a fair employment and workplace framework for Scotland by 
March 2016), the Scottish Business Pledge (see page 141) and the Scottish Government 
becoming an accredited Living Wage organisation.

A major development since our report last year is the significantly increased focus of the 
Scottish Government on improving social mobility and the acknowledgement that, in 
common with the rest of the UK, gaps in life chances between rich and poor in Scotland are 
unacceptably high. As the First Minister, Nicola Sturgeon, has said: 

  The attainment gap doesn’t simply hold back young people who deserve a fair chance 
to fulfil their potential – it impoverishes all of us as a society. That’s why closing the gap is 
a defining challenge for the government I lead and for our society as a whole… we must 
never, ever become content to shrug our shoulders and accept that [factors beyond the 
school gates] make under-attainment in our schools inevitable for some young people.41 

The Scottish Government has introduced a number of policy initiatives aiming to make a 
reality of this commitment to improve social mobility in Scotland, including:

•	 Plans to increase entitlements to free, high-quality early learning and childcare provision to 
30 hours per week during term-time for all three- and four-year-olds and disadvantaged 
two-year-olds, by 2020;

•	 Placing a new statutory duty on local authorities and Scottish Government ministers to 
take action to narrow the socio-economic educational attainment gap and publish reports 
on progress through the Education (Scotland) Bill 2015;

40  Scottish Government response to the Commission’s Call for Evidence 2015
41 Nicola Sturgeon, A World Leader in Education, speech at Wester Hailes Education Centre, Edinburgh, 18 August 2015




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


180


•	 Developing a new National Improvement Framework for Scottish Education with a key 
goal of closing the attainment gap, which will introduce national standardised assessment 
of literacy and numeracy in P1, P4, P7 and S3 – to be implemented nationally from 2017, 
allowing the performance of the school system for the most disadvantaged children to be 
tracked and reported on annually;

•	 Providing £100 million funding for the Scottish Attainment Challenge over four years, 
targeted at primary schools in deprived areas of Scotland and aiming to improve children’s 
literacy, numeracy, health and well-being;

•	 Expanding entitlement to the Education Maintenance Allowance, increasing income 
thresholds by 20 per cent (to £24,421 for those in families with only one child and £26,884 
for those with two or more children), extending eligibility to cover part-time study – 
meaning that 57,000 young people in Scotland (63 per cent more than in 2013–14) will be 
eligible for support of £30 per week to stay in education post-16 from January 2016;

•	 Setting a long-term ambition to equalise the chances of university access between 
children in the most and least deprived areas in Scotland, and establishing the 
independent Commission on Widening Access to look at the evidence on widening 
participation, identify best practice and propose new targets, due to report in Spring 2016.

7.4 Reflections

Child poverty strategy

The most recent Scotland child poverty strategy42 provides a comprehensive and coherent 
framework informing the Scottish Government’s approach. The ‘logic model’ approach used 
in the strategy’s outcomes framework ensures that there is a clear understanding of the 
intermediate outcomes being sought by the strategy as the building blocks for achieving the 
ultimate goal of eradicating child poverty in Scotland. This can inform the development and 
detailed design of policies that are able to make a real difference as well as identify gaps in 
the strategic approach. The new measurement framework is also a very positive development 
and gives far better information on the progress being made towards achieving the Scottish 
Government’s ambitions than was previously available. Other parts of the UK can learn a lot 
from the strategic approach taken in Scotland.

Looking ahead, there are a number of ways in which the Scottish approach to tackling 
poverty could be enhanced to help drive progress over the next few years:

•	 Increase clarity about what good progress in each of the intermediate outcomes looks like. 
There is little sense in the strategy of the scale of progress that will be required in each of 
the intermediate outcomes for the ultimate goal of eradicating child poverty in Scotland 
to be achieved. Being more specific about what the ambitions of the Government are 
for improvement in the intermediate outcomes over the next few years will help to focus 
efforts;

•	 Increase the focus on taking advantage of the opportunities from welfare reform, as well as 
on mitigating its risks. While undoubtedly cuts in benefits will create significant challenges 
for attempts to reduce child poverty, there are also potential opportunities from welfare 
reform more broadly. For example, the introduction of Universal Credit will mean more 
scope for a targeted approach to tackling working poverty, through providing in-work 
support geared towards helping parents increase their pay and work more hours;

42 Scottish Government, Child Poverty Strategy for Scotland: Our Approach 2014–2017, 2014




Chapter 7: Social mobility and child poverty in Scotland


181


•	 Increase the focus on helping more parents enter work and increase their hours of work. 
There is limited emphasis placed on tackling worklessness, helping more parents into work 
and helping parents to work more hours within the current strategy. Eradicating poverty 
will require further progress on all of these things. Forty-four per cent of children in poverty 
in Scotland live in workless households and – if Scotland is similar to the UK as a whole – 
encouraging more primary caregivers in couple families with school-age children to enter 
employment, and to increase their hours of work when their children reach their teens, will 
be key to future success in tackling working poverty;

•	 Reviewing the indicators used to measure progress towards achieving intermediate 
outcomes. There is scope to improve some of the indicators used in the strategy’s 
measurement framework, to help them better measure progress towards the intermediate 
outcomes. For example, the overall parental employment rate is only a partial measure 
of success in achieving employment outcomes that are sufficient to tackle poverty 
(intermediate outcome 4). Work intensity – whether all parents in a household are in work 
and how many hours are worked – is also important. To give a second example, the lack 
of any indicator of attainment in Standard or Higher exams, or one looking at HE access, 
is an important omission in trying to measure the extent to which children in low-income 
households are achieving their potential (intermediate outcome 7);

•	 Do more to support and encourage local authorities and other public bodies to  do their bit 
to tackle poverty in their local areas. There is much variation between different local areas 
in how they attempt to tackle poverty in their areas. For example, the strategic approach 
taken by Renfrewshire – through establishing a Tackling Poverty Commission43 whose 
recommendations informed the recent Renfrewshire Tackling Poverty Strategy44 – is one 
from which other local areas in Scotland could learn. In addition, the Scottish Government 
could learn from the approaches taken in England (the Child Poverty Act 2010 gave local 
authorities in England a range of duties around tackling poverty) and Wales (through the 
duties given to public authorities through the Children and Families (Wales) Measure 2010).

An important task for the next Scottish Government will be developing a new institutional 
framework for tackling poverty in Scotland, replacing the current statutory framework in 
the Child Poverty Act 2010 once the changes that the UK Government is making to it are 
enacted. At a minimum, we suggest that the new Scottish framework should include:

•	 A statutory basis in Scottish law embedding the new institutional framework for tackling 
poverty and improving social mobility in Scotland;

•	 A duty on Scottish ministers to produce a child poverty strategy which, at the very least, 
mirrors the current duties set out in UK law;

•	 New duties on local government and other public bodies that require them to contribute to 
the cross-national effort to eradicate child poverty in Scotland;

•	 New accountability arrangements that, for example, formally set out the role that will be 
played by the Independent Adviser on Poverty or successor arrangements;

•	 A new measurement framework that is able to track progress towards the ultimate goal of 
eradicating child poverty and towards achieving the broader intermediate outcomes.

43 Renfrewshire council, Tackling Poverty in Renfrewshire: Report of Renfrewshire’s Tackling Poverty Commission, 2015
44 Renfrewshire council, Tackling Poverty 2015–2017, 2015




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


182


Social mobility

We strongly welcome the increased emphasis on tackling the unacceptable gaps that exist 
in Scotland between the life chances of children from rich and poor backgrounds, and 
the recent policy developments geared towards tackling them. The key challenge for the 
Scottish Government is turning rhetoric into reality and delivering – in collaboration with other 
institutions in Scottish society – on policies that can make a real difference.

One barrier to developing an effective strategy to improve social mobility is the lack of  
high-quality public data on the issue. This frustrates analysis of the problems and 
understanding of what the issues are, how best to tackle them and the effectiveness of 
different policy interventions at improving social mobility. If Scotland is serious about social 
mobility, it needs to develop easily accessible and comparable data that sets out how well 
poorer children are doing relative to others at each stage of their education. Scotland can 
learn a lot from the English approach to collecting and publishing comprehensive data on 
social mobility outcomes. Some areas to address include:

•	 Developing a new national school-readiness measure that is able to track year-to-year 
trends over the whole of Scotland in gaps in early years development and the success (or 
otherwise) of policy interventions that are intended to close the gap;

•	 Developing a new national primary attainment measure to track year-to-year trends in the 
attainment gaps at the end of primary school;

•	 Developing a clearer measure of attainment by age 16 (the end of S4) based on gaps in 
achieving at ‘expected levels’ in the new National 5 exams e.g. five passes at National 5 
including English and maths;

•	 Developing clearer measures of attainment by age 18 (the end of S6) based on gaps in 
achieving different thresholds of performance at Higher level and at Advanced Higher level 
e.g. three or more Higher qualifications, three or more Higher qualifications at CCC or 
above, and so on;

•	 Developing new individual-level metrics of disadvantage in addition to growing up in a 
deprived area, acknowledging that more than half of the poorest children in Scotland do 
not live in the most deprived areas;

•	 Improving data transparency by ensuring that data on disadvantage gaps is easy 
to access, published at local authority level, published in sufficient detail to allow a 
sophisticated understanding of the issues driving them to be built up, and taking an open 
data approach to help academics and others uncover interesting patterns. The approach 
taken by the Department for Education in England may provide a good model;

•	 Policymakers and educational professionals should utilise the emerging evidence base 
being developed by the Education Endowment Foundation to inform the development of 
policy in the early years and in school.

A further priority for action is higher education. The debate on access to HE in Scotland is 
focused largely on access to any HE rather than on differences by social background in the 
type or quality of HE accessed. There are a number of issues which the Commission for 
Widening Access will need to focus on as it develops its recommendations:

•	 The suggestion made in the interim report of the Commission for Widening Access 
that “current outreach activity may be having a limited impact on overall participation” 
is a major cause for concern, as is the conclusion that the lack of evidence on the 
effectiveness of access activity in Scotland makes it “very difficult to make informed 
judgements on how best to invest and ensure appropriate return on the significant sums of 




Chapter 7: Social mobility and child poverty in Scotland


183


public and institutional resources that are being spent on access programmes”.45 We also 
agree with the conclusion that there needs to be a lot more co-ordination of access activity 
in Scotland to ensure that it is coherent and maximise its impact. Resolving these gaps 
must be a key priority.

•	 As highlighted above, young people from deprived areas are heavily concentrated in FE 
colleges studying towards sub-degree qualifications which have lower returns and are 
not as good at facilitating access into the top jobs in Scotland, while their peers from 
the wealthiest areas are far more likely to be studying at the elite universities in Scotland 
towards degrees that prepare them for entry to elite professions. This is a real issue for 
social mobility in Scotland, and it is essential that there is more emphasis on getting 
young people from deprived backgrounds into full-time, first degree-level qualifications in 
university that hold out the prospect of being able to compete for top jobs. Key to this will 
be tackling the attainment, aspiration, HE access and student funding barriers that prevent 
this. The final report of the Commission must propose targets around participation of 
young people from disadvantaged backgrounds in first degree programmes at universities 
and at the highly selective ancient universities, in addition to the targets that will be 
proposed for participation in higher education overall.

•	 Further attention needs to be given to the student support system in Scotland, especially 
for disadvantaged students. Despite there being no tuition fees in Scotland, the poorest 
students can still graduate with debts of up to £23,000 for a four-year first degree 
programme if they take advantage of the full means-tested loans available to them. 
Scottish graduates face higher loan repayment costs in the early part of their careers 
(9 per cent of gross income above £17,355, compared to 9 per cent of gross income 
above £21,000 in England), meaning for example that a Scottish graduate earning 
£29,000 would repay £1,050 in the first year of their career (or 4.7 per cent of their post-
tax earnings) compared to the £720 (or 3.2 per cent of their post-tax earnings) paid by 
a similar English graduate. While debt levels facing the poorest university students in 
Scotland are still only about 60 per cent of the level that their peers in England accrue for 
a typical first degree programme,46 many of the lowest earning Scottish graduates will also 
end up paying more for their degrees than their peers in England, as the impact of the 
more generous repayment terms for low-earning graduates in England exceeds the impact 
of the higher debt and interest charges that English students face.47 The evidence cited 
earlier in this chapter suggests that student debt and associated worries about it among 
students is having a real impact on the decision-making and higher education choices 
being made by poorer students in Scotland.

Finally, more focus should be given to working with others to reduce child poverty and 
improve social mobility. Scotland has some good practice here that the rest of the UK could 
learn from: around working with employers to improve low-paid employment through the 
Scottish Business Pledge, launched earlier this year; and through efforts to promote the Living 
Wage in Scotland. This approach could be usefully replicated in a social mobility context for 
graduate employers, with the goal of improving access to elite professions, helping employers 
to do their bit in narrowing the school attainment gap and helping poorer children to aim high 
and achieve their potential. The UK Government’s Social Mobility Business Compact is worth 
looking at as a model for how employers can be helped to get involved.

45 Commission on Widening Access, Interim Report, November 2015
46  See Lucy Hunter Blackburn, Submission to Commission on Widening Access, 2015 https://adventuresinevidence.files.

wordpress.com/2014/06/annex-to-access-commission-evidence.docx for a fuller discussion of levels of student debt 
accrued in Scotland relative to other parts of the UK

47  See for example Scottish Parliament, SPICe Briefing 13/78: Student Loans and Repayments, November 2013 which 
suggests that the lowest earning 20 per cent of graduates would face lower lifetime repayments in the English system with a 
loan of £36,000, than in the Scottish system with a loan of £16,000

https://adventuresinevidence.files.wordpress.com/2014/06/annex-to-access-commission-evidence.docx




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


184


7.5 Conclusions and Recommendations
Scotland is relatively well placed to tackle child poverty, with outcomes that compare well 
with other parts of the UK. Out of the 12 devolved nations and English regions, Scotland has 
the lowest rate of child poverty after housing costs, the second highest parental employment 
rate, the fourth lowest proportion of children in workless households, and the third lowest 
prevalence of low-paid jobs.

However, there is no room for complacency. There is still a very long way to go to eradicate 
child poverty in Scotland. Continued fiscal consolidation over the next few years will pose a 
number of challenges and social mobility outcomes appear to be as bad in Scotland as they 
are in England.

The big priorities over the next few months should be to develop a new institutional 
framework in Scotland to replace the Child Poverty Act 2010, ensuring that the increased 
focus on social mobility is translated into improved outcomes, and ensuring that the new 
powers available to the Scottish Government once the Scotland Bill 2015–16 becomes law 
are used effectively to drive progress on social mobility and child poverty. 

We make four main recommendations for action that the Scottish Government could take to 
help drive further progress over the next few years:

•	 Develop a new child poverty and life chances framework for Scotland to build on and 
replace the provisions currently contained in the Child Poverty Act 2010;

•	 Collect and publish better data on social mobility and increase data transparency;

•	 Ensure that the Commission on Widening Access focuses on improving the effectiveness 
of investment in widening participation, access to degree programmes in university as well 
as higher education more generally, and the impact of the student support system and 
student debt levels on the choices made by Scottish students;

•	 Work with Scottish employers to improve social mobility, through building on the Scottish 
Business Pledge to develop a Scottish Social Mobility Business Compact aimed at 
graduate employers.




Chapter 8: Social mobility and child poverty in Wales


185


Chapter 8: Social mobility and child 
poverty in Wales

•	 Child poverty in Wales is higher than in other UK countries and is 
expected to increase in the next few years.

•	 Trends in employment are moving in the right direction, but Wales has 
higher rates of low pay than other UK countries, keeping many children 
in poor working families.

•	 Educational attainment in Wales at all levels, especially for the poorest 
children, remains unacceptably low despite recent improvements and 
is significantly below other parts of the UK in terms of Programme for 
International Student Assessment (PISA) assessments.

•	 The Welsh Government has a welcome focus on tackling disadvantage 
with a large number of programmes and policies, but a more targeted, 
evidence-based approach is needed.

•	 More focus is needed to help people move up the social ladder, to 
accompany commendable efforts to help people at the bottom.

•	 The top priorities for action are to get more good teachers into 
disadvantaged schools, and to work more closely with employers to 
improve pay and career prospects.

8.1 Introduction
The Welsh Government has made tackling child poverty a priority: it has an active programme 
to reduce disparities in income and educational attainment. Its approach is similar in some 
respects to the approaches taken elsewhere in the UK, but there are some differences. For 
example, in contrast to England, Wales has renewed its long-term ambition to meet the child 
poverty targets currently set out in the Child Poverty Act 2010. It has given less priority to the 
issue of social mobility.

Child poverty in Wales, as in the rest of the UK, remains stubbornly high, and independent 
forecasters expect it to increase in the next few years, mainly due to the impact of welfare 
reform on low-income families. For example, the Institute for Fiscal Studies has published 
projections suggesting that the proportion of children in relative poverty in England and Wales 
would increase by 5 per cent, and the proportion of children in absolute poverty would increase 




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


186


by 6 per cent, between 2013–14 and 2020–21.1 Since the IFS completed this work, the UK 
Government has announced a further £12 billion of cuts to the welfare budget which will 
primarily have an impact on children and the working-age population; these more recent 
changes are not factored into these projections.

The Welsh Government has sought to improve the life chances of the country’s children by 
commissioning several reviews of the country’s education system. If the recommendations 
from these reviews are accepted, this will lead to radical changes to the curriculum and 
assessment arrangements, from Foundation Phase to Key Stage 4. These changes are 
overdue, and the Commission commends the Welsh Government for recognising that urgent 
action is needed.

8.2 Current position
The challenges facing Wales in making progress towards a more socially mobile society with 
lower rates of child poverty are more severe than in the rest of the UK. In particular, Wales 
continues to face tough challenges in relation to child poverty:

•	 Absolute child poverty after housing costs rose to 34 per cent in the three-year period 
ending 2013/14, from 29 per cent in the three-year period ending 2008/09 (approximately 
200,000 children).2 This compares to 31 per cent in England and 24 per cent in Scotland 
for the same period. The only part of the UK that has a higher rate of absolute child 
poverty than Wales is London (41 per cent);3 

•	 Absolute child poverty before housing costs is slightly lower at 25 per cent for the 
three-year period ending in 2013/14. Children in Wales for the three-year period ending 
2013/14 were more likely to be in absolute poverty before housing costs than children 
elsewhere in Great Britain – in England 19 per cent of children lived in absolute poverty, 
and in Scotland 17 per cent;4 

•	 Relative child poverty after housing costs decreased slightly to 31 per cent in the three-year 
period ending 2013/14, from 32 per cent in the three-year period ending 2008/09. However, 
the rate in Wales is higher than that of England (28 per cent) and Scotland (21 per cent);5 

•	 Relative child poverty before housing costs fell from 26 per cent for the three-year period 
ending in 2008/09 to 22 per cent for the three-year period ending in 2013/14. The figure 
for Wales is higher than England at 17 per cent, and Scotland at 16 per cent;6 

•	 Children living in Wales were more likely to live in persistent poverty (21 per cent) than 
England (16 per cent) and Scotland (13 per cent).7 

Trends in one of the key drivers of poverty in Wales – employment – are moving in the right 
direction, but there is still some way to go.

Over the last five years there has been a 4.3 percentage point decrease in the number of 
children living in workless households, although the number remains high (15.1 per cent 
in 2014). The figure is slightly higher than England (12.7 per cent) and 4.2 percentage points 

1 Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS), Child and Working-age Poverty in Northern Ireland over the Next Decade: An Update, IFS  
 Briefing Note BN154, November 2014. This projected that the proportion of children in relative poverty before housing costs  
 in England and Wales would increase from a forecast 19.6 per cent in 2013–14 to 20.6 per cent in 2020–21, and the  
 proportion of children in absolute poverty before housing costs would increase from a forecast 22.8 per cent in 2013–14 to  
 24.1 per cent in 2020–21 
2 Due to small sample size, a three-year average is used
3 Department for Work and Pensions, Households Below Average Income, 2013/14, 2015
4 Ibid.
5 Ibid.
6 Ibid.
7 Institute of Education, University of London, Child Poverty and Deprivation, Initial Findings from the Millennium Cohort Study, 2014




Chapter 8: Social mobility and child poverty in Wales


187


higher than in Scotland (10.9 per cent).8 Beneath the national figure, there are wide variations in 
worklessness by local authority. For example, one in five (22.2 per cent) children in Newport 
lived in workless households in 2014, compared to less than one in 10 in Powys (7.5 per cent).

It is also striking that in the past year, employment figures for the majority of female age 
groups in Wales has dropped, particularly for younger females. The biggest drop was seen 
for 18–24-year-old women, which saw a 4.2 percentage point drop between June 2014 
and June 2015 (57.3 per cent to 53.1 per cent): this is compared to a 1.4 percentage point 
increase for the same age group and time period for men (54.9 per cent to 56.4 per cent). 
This contrasts strongly with the situation in Scotland, where 63.9 per cent of women aged 
18–24 are in work. Overall, unemployment rates for those aged 16 and over in Wales are 
higher than elsewhere in Great Britain at 6.7 per cent, compared to 5.9 per cent in Scotland 
and 5.6 per cent in England.9 

Like the rest of Great Britain, Wales also faces a significant problem of in-work poverty. In the 
three-year period ending 2013/14, 23 per cent of children living in working families were in 
poverty. This compares with 13 per cent in Scotland for the same period, and 21 per cent in 
England.10 One factor keeping many working families in poverty is low hourly pay, with around 
270,000 Welsh workers (25 per cent of the labour force) being paid below two-thirds of the 
UK median hourly wage.11 

Employability

The Welsh Government sees improving skills as crucial to reduce worklessness and in-work 
poverty, and it is encouraging to see some improvement in this area. The proportion of 
working-age adults (16–64-year-olds) with no qualifications (no GCSEs) decreased from  
15 per cent in 2009 to 10 per cent in 2014 (33 per cent), although this masks the wide variations 
between local authorities. For example, nearly 15 per cent of 16–64-year-olds in Merthyr Tydfil 
had no qualifications (no GCSEs), compared to just under 7 per cent in Cardiff. In England nearly 
9 per cent of working-age adults have no qualifications, compared to 10 per cent in Scotland.12 

The proportion of working-age adults who are qualified to at least Level 2 has increased 
since 2009 by 10 per cent.13 Nonetheless, this still means that nearly one-fifth (18.8 per 
cent) of working adults don’t have the qualifications necessary for finding employment and 
progressing in work. There are wide variations between local authorities, with nearly one-third 
of 16–64-year-olds in Merthyr Tydfil not having at least Level 2 qualifications, compared to 
nearly one in seven in Ceredigion. This compares to 18.4 per cent in England, and 16.4 per 
cent in Scotland who are not qualified to at least Level 2.14 

Education and training

The gap between the achievement of children eligible for free school meals and their peers 
starts young and widens throughout education. At the Foundation Stage the attainment gap 
has reduced slightly over the past three years, but it remained large at 16.3 percentage points in 
2014.15 16 The attainment gap at Key Stage 2 is wide at 17.7 percentage points, with 28.1 per cent 

8 Office for National Statistics, Working and Workless Households, 2015
9 Office for National Statistics, Regional Labour Market Statistics, October 2015
10 Joseph Rowntree Foundation and New Policy Institute analyses of Department for Work and Pensions, Households Below  
 Average Income, 2013/14, 2015
11 Joseph Rowntree Foundation, Monitoring Poverty and Social Exclusion in Wales 2015, 2015; and Office for National Statistics,  
 Annual Survey of Hours and Earning, 2014, 2015
12 Office for National Statistics, Annual Population Survey, 2014
13 Ibid.
14 Ibid.
15 The Foundation Phase Indicator (FPI) represents the percentage of pupils achieving the expected outcome or above in  
 “Language, literacy and communication skills” (in English, LCE; or Welsh, LCW), ‘Personal and social development, well-being  
 and cultural diversity’ (PSD) and ‘Mathematical development’ (MDT) in combination 
16 Ibid.




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


188


of free school meals children not achieving at least Level 4 compared to 10.4 per cent for 
non-free school meals pupils.17 Nearly two-fifths (38.7 per cent) of free school meals pupils 
are not achieving the expected level for English, maths and science at Level 5 for Key Stage 
3, compared to around one-sixth (14.4 per cent) of their peers.18 

The attainment gap at Key Stage 4 is wide at 33.8 percentage points, with just over one-
quarter of free school meals children achieving Level 2 in English and/or Welsh and maths 
compared to 61.6 per cent of their peers.19 20 What this means is that nearly three-fifths (72.2 
per cent) of children eligible for free school meals in Wales in 2014 did not obtain the level 
deemed necessary to undertake good-quality further education (FE) and employment. 

Furthermore, four-fifths of children eligible for free school meals in Blaenau Gwent (79.1 per 
cent) did not achieve Level 2 at Key Stage 4, although the top performing local authority 
wasn’t far behind, with three-quarters of free school meals children not achieving Level 2 at 
Key Stage 4.21 In addition, in no local authority did free school meals children achieve higher 
than the national average for all pupils of 56.2 per cent. Direct comparison is not possible due 
to key differences in the education systems such as the curriculum, but the attainment gap in 
English and maths between free school meals students and their peers in England was 26.4 
percentage points in 2014.22 

Looking more generally at educational achievement, Wales performs significantly worse 
than the rest of the UK in the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), with 
the lowest score and ranking in maths, reading and science of any of the four UK nations. 
In addition in all three domains, Wales’s score is lower than both the UK average and 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) averages (see Table 6.1). 
The scale of progress required by Wales to be a top 20 PISA nation, and therefore ensure 
that its children can compete academically with others, is dramatic. Wales would need to 
increase its score by between 24 and 33 points and increase its ranking by between 16 and 
23 places across the three domains.23 

Table 8.1: PISA 2012 scores and rankings for maths, reading and science

Mathematics Reading Science

Mean 
score

Ranking Mean 
score

Ranking Mean 
score

Ranking

Wales 468 43 480 41 491 36

England 495 26 500 24 516 18

Scotland 498 25 506 21 513 22

Northern Ireland 487 32 498 25 507 24

UK 494 – 499 – 514 –

OECD 494 – 496 – 501 –

Source: Welsh Government, Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) 2012/2013

Poor performance in school can lead to disengagement in education and training later in life, 
with young adults ending up not in education, employment or training (NEET). In Wales since 
2009 the proportion of 16–18-year-olds who are NEET has reduced by 1.5 percentage points 

17 Ibid.
18 Ibid. 
19  Data for 2014/15 for Key Stage 4 has not been used, as new data is not yet available for other key stages or by local 

authority. To note: In 2015, the gap between pupils eligible for free school meals and their peers still remains wide at 32.4 
percentage points, despite moderate increases in performance for both cohorts of students

20 Welsh Government, Academic Achievement and Entitlement to Free School Meals, 2014
21 Ibid.
22 Department for Education, GCSE and Equivalent Attainment by Pupil Characteristics in England, 2013/14, 2015
23 Welsh Government, Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) 2012, 2013 and National Foundation for  
 Educational Research, Achievement of 15-Year-Olds in Wales: PISA 2012 National Report, 2013




Chapter 8: Social mobility and child poverty in Wales


189


(approximately 2,600); yet, more than one in 10 (10.9 per cent) 16–18-year-olds were NEETs 
in 2014. In England the proportion of 16–18-year-olds who were NEET in 2014 was slightly 
lower at 7.3 per cent.24 The proportion of 19–24-year-olds who are NEET has reduced by one 
percentage point (approximately 400) since 2009, and was more than one in five (20.7 per cent) 
in 2014.25 

In addition a greater proportion of young people in Wales live in areas with a low participation in 
HE: 25.2 per cent compared to 9.9 per cent in Scotland and 20.8 per cent in England.

Improving attainment and training will not improve child poverty and life chances in Wales 
unless there are suitable employment opportunities within the region. In 2014 nearly one-third 
(30 per cent) of graduates domiciled in Wales took up employment in England, compared 
to just over one-tenth (12 per cent) of Scottish graduates. Just 2 per cent of graduates 
domiciled in England left to take up employment elsewhere.26 

The Welsh Government has 11 indicators in its Child Poverty Strategy, which it uses to 
assess its performance on reducing child poverty in Wales. For the eight which have data 
available, six improved, one worsened and one stayed the same.27 

8.3 Key policies
The Welsh Government published a revised Child Poverty Strategy in 2015 and reaffirmed its 
ambition to eradicate child poverty by 2020. The strategy set two new strategic objectives: 

•	 Using all available levers to create a strong economy and a labour market which supports 
the tackling poverty agenda;

•	 Doing more to support families through debt and financial advice, and tackling the issue of 
poor households paying more for goods and services. 

It also reiterated the three strategic objectives set out in its 2011 strategy:

•	 Reducing the number of children in workless households;

•	 Increasing the skills of parents and young people in low-income households;

•	 Reducing the inequalities that exist in the education, health and economic outcomes of 
children and families living in poverty.

The Welsh Government’s Tackling Poverty Action Plan is the main mechanism for taking 
forward and delivering these objectives, and it is revised on an annual basis. It covers a range 
of different areas.

Early years

In 2013 the Welsh Government published Building a Brighter Future: The Early Years and 
Childcare Plan:28 a 10-year plan that aims to improve collaboration among early years workers, 
and bring greater coherence across different policies and programmes impacting on and 
influencing the early years. It has extended its Flying Start programme, increasing the number 
of families covered by 18,000. The programme focuses on the most deprived areas and helps 
families with children aged under four to meet important milestones by providing childcare, a 
health visiting service, support for parenting and language development and other services.

24 Office for National Statistics, Young People Not in Education, Employment or Training, 2015
25 Welsh Government, Participation of Young People in Education and the Labour Market and Annual Population Survey, 2015 
26 https://www.hesa.ac.uk/stats-dlhe 
27 More information regarding the detail of these indicators and data can be found at the Welsh Government website:  
 http://gov.wales/topics/people-and-communities/people/children-and-young-people/child-poverty/?lang=en 
28 Welsh Government, Building a Brighter Future: The Early Years and Childcare Plan, 2013

https://www.hesa.ac.uk/stats-dlhe
http://gov.wales/topics/people-and-communities/people/children-and-young-people/child-poverty/?lang=en




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


190


The Welsh Government continues to develop its Families First programme which aims to 
improve outcomes for children, young people and families. Between 2013 and 2014 more 
than 200 projects were accessed by individuals on almost 200,000 occasions. The Welsh 
Government extended the Pupil Deprivation Grant to the early years, providing a grant 
of £300 per eligible child for the next two years for schools and other settings, helping to 
support learning for three- and four-year-olds in poverty. The Welsh Government is also 
supporting local authorities in Wales through its Out of School Childcare Grant, which totals 
£2.3 million this financial year. This grant currently supports local authorities in addressing 
gaps in childcare, by providing wraparound childcare and play during out-of-school hours and 
holiday periods.

Education attainment

In 2014 the Welsh Government published Rewriting the Future: Raising Ambition and 
Attainment in Welsh Schools29 – a programme designed to provide guidance to families 
on how children can do better in schools, and to provide schools with toolkits to help with 
engaging families. Implementation is underway and the outcomes are being monitored. 
Furthermore, new guidance for practitioners on how best to spend the Pupil Deprivation 
Grant has been published,30 and assurance has been given to schools about levels of 
funding for the next two school years. More than £20 million has been allocated for Schools 
Challenge Cymru, which is targeted at 40 schools facing particular challenges. New guidance 
was also developed and published in June 2015 – Families and Community Engagement31 – 
which aims to provide practical support for schools to help them strengthen their approach to 
family and community engagement.

Young people not in employment, education or training

The Welsh Government published its Youth Engagement and Progression Framework in 2013,32 
which aims to reduce the number of young people who are not in employment, education or 
training (NEET), and further supports young people into employment through programmes such 
as Jobs Growth Wales. Jobs Growth Wales aims to give equal opportunities to all young people 
in Wales with the talent and the skills to do well at work, and aims to create 16,000 jobs over 
the next four years. The Welsh Government apprenticeship programmes aim to offer more than 
50,000 apprenticeships to individuals aged 26 and over, and provide valuable experience and 
skills to improve their life chances and job prospects. In addition, traineeships are offered to 
non-employed 16–18-year-olds not otherwise engaged in post-16 education or employment. 
The programme seeks to improve skill levels through delivery of entry-level qualifications up to 
National Vocational Qualification (NVQ) Level 1 in a chosen occupational area.

Job opportunities

The Lift Programme launched in 2014 is the vehicle for delivering the commitment in the 
Welsh Government’s Tackling Poverty Action Plan to provide 5,000 training and employment 
opportunities for people living in workless households by the end of 2017. The programme 
focuses on people who have been out of work for more than six months and face employment 
barriers, such as young single parents, adults with few or no formal qualifications, people with 
poor employment records and disabled people. The programme has provided more than 
2,500 training and employment opportunities, including more than 500 people supported in 
employment, and is now fully operational in nine areas across Wales. 

29 Welsh Government, Rewriting the Future: Raising Ambition and Attainment in Welsh Schools, 2014
30 Welsh Government, Pupil Deprivation Grant: Essential Guidance, 2015
31 Welsh Government, FaCE the Challenge Together: Family and Community Engagement Toolkit for Schools in Wales – Main  
 Guidance, 2015 
32 Welsh Government, Implementation Plan: Youth Engagement and Progression Framework, 2013




Chapter 8: Social mobility and child poverty in Wales


191


8.4 Reflections

Child poverty strategy

The Commission commends the Welsh Government for its commitment to tackling child 
poverty and for the wide range of policies that it has adopted in this area. Given the scale of 
the problem, it is vital that the Welsh Government takes a highly disciplined approach, devises 
realistic plans and moves resources between programmes, depending on their impact and 
changes in the underlying situation. The Commission is concerned that there are too many 
overlapping programmes and that resources are spread too thinly. We would encourage the 
Welsh Government to strengthen its anti-poverty activities by taking a more evidence-based 
approach and, where evidence is not available, take steps to rectify this.

The Commission welcomes the broader approach to tackling child poverty that was set out 
in the revised strategy published earlier this year. The Welsh Government is right to prioritise 
the issue of in-work poverty and to highlight the fact that poorer households often face higher 
costs than those with higher incomes (the poverty premium). In addition, the strategy is better 
aligned with the Tackling Poverty Action Plan than the previous edition. However, further work 
is needed to ensure the two documents work harmoniously together. For example, there needs 
to be consistency between the two documents in the indicators used to measure success.

Welfare reform

The Institute for Fiscal Studies estimates that changes to the tax and welfare system 
implemented by the 2010–2015 UK Government will reduce household incomes in Wales by 
an average of £10.75 a week, or £718 million a year across Wales as a whole, once Universal 
Credit and Personal Independence Payments are rolled out.33 However, in light of the further 
changes to welfare, this figure is likely to rise significantly. The Welsh Government has rightly 
taken action to mitigate the impact of these changes: for example, it is providing advice so 
that individuals can understand the impact of welfare cuts and what help is available.

The Commission recognises the financial constraints that the Welsh Government faces, but 
thinks more could be done to support the families hardest hit by the reduction in benefits. 
Research commissioned by the Welsh Government highlights the characteristics and areas 
that will be most affected by cuts; but, the Welsh Government needs to ensure that services 
and support will be available to all families, including those not located in the most deprived 
areas. Current methods, such as defining the reach of programmes by the most deprived 
Lower Super Output Areas (as defined by the Welsh Index of Multiple Deprivation), means 
that there are many children and families living on low incomes who do not receive services.34 
For example, more than 65,000 children (all ages) whose families received out-of-work 
benefits or Child Tax Credits (estimated to be more than 130,000 in total) were estimated not 
to be in areas where the Communities First programme was based.35 Even children located 
in the top 40 per cent most deprived areas of Wales are not guaranteed access to services: 
more than 25,000 children in families who receive out-of-work benefits or Child Tax Credits live 
in the top 40 per cent most deprived areas within Wales, and were not in areas benefiting from 
Communities First.36 

A large number of families in Wales will be affected by housing benefit changes that reduce support 
for social tenants if they are considered to be under-occupying their property: 20.4 per cent of 

33 Institute for Fiscal Studies, The Distributional Effects of the UK Government’s Tax and Welfare Reforms, Wales: An Update, 2014
34 http://www.ocsi.co.uk/news/wp-content/uploads/OCSI-GettingMeasureRuralDeprivationWales.pdf
35 Communities First has been used within this example as information exists on the location of where the programme is based.  
 Other programmes such as Flying Start are also delivered using a similar model of defining reach by most deprived Lower  
 Super Output Areas, using the Welsh Index of Multiple Deprivation
36 This analysis was produced by the Commission Secretariat using the Welsh Index of Multiple  
 Deprivation, location of Communities First clusters and HM Revenue & Customs (HMRC) data for personal tax credit: children in  
 low-income families local measure to provide estimates. We recognise that this method is not robust and has its limitations 

http://www.ocsi.co.uk/news/wp-content/uploads/OCSI-GettingMeasureRuralDeprivationWales.pdf




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


192


social tenants in Wales will be affected, compared to 19 per cent in Scotland and 15.3 per 
cent in England.37 Despite the Welsh Government taking action to boost the number of one 
and two-bedroom houses, there are still a large number of families who will find it hard to 
downsize and so will face a reduced income. An increasing number of families have been 
falling into arrears with their social housing rent (rent arrears increased by 23.3 per cent 
between April and October 2013). The Commission believes that this is an area where there 
is scope for more analysis and action.38 

Welsh councils have expressed concerns with regard to the lack of information and analysis 
on issues such as overcrowding, tenant debt and the impact on children’s education of 
sharing bedrooms and having to constantly move home. The Welsh Government has a key 
role to play here: it needs to support local authorities to understand best practice methods, 
in order to collect and interpret data to ensure that policy to support children in poverty and 
their families is effective.39 

Employment

Helping people into work is central to the Welsh Government’s strategy to tackle poverty, 
but the division of policies and programmes between devolved administrations and the UK 
Government makes the interaction and co-ordination of policies complicated. For example, 
skills policy is devolved to the Welsh Government, but employment policies – notably, the 
work programmes, provision of out-of-work benefits and the operation of Jobcentre Plus – 
remain the responsibilities of the UK Government. As services for employment and skills are 
increasingly brought together, this will create complex service models. 

The Commission recognises that the Welsh Government is developing a more needs-
assessed approach to help individuals return to work. However, unless consideration is given 
to how devolved and UK-wide polices are co-ordinated and delivered more cohesively, this 
approach will not have the desired impact. The Commission recommends that the Welsh 
Government should work alongside local authorities to create a clear programme of how 
it will deliver its objectives to improve employment within Wales using current policies and 
programmes. This should consider how national and local programmes can be aligned 
without duplication of effort or conflicting targets and outputs.

The Commission welcomes the fact that the Lift Programme is targeted at those furthest from 
employment, but notes that access to the programme, as with others, is a postcode lottery – 
and often does not lead to a job. As at 30 September 2015, the programme had provided 
more than 2,400 training and employment opportunities, but only 440 individuals were 
supported into employment.40 The Welsh Government needs to find ways to increase this 
success rate, since employment should be the ultimate aim of the programme.

The Welsh Government is committed to tackling in-work poverty, but more could be done 
to encourage employers themselves to tackle this issue. In 2014, one in four employee 
jobs in Wales were paid less than the Living Wage (£7.65 per hour).41 Although the Welsh 
Government has encouraged Welsh companies to become Living Wage employers, there will 
be little impact unless there are clear benefits for employers. The Commission recommends 
that the Welsh Government should work more closely with employers on this issue, and 
create incentives for them to sign up. For example, the Scottish Government has encouraged 
firms to sign up to a voluntary accreditation scheme to promote the Living Wage in Scotland. 
In addition, the Welsh Government could look at other ideas, such as lower business rates for 
an employer’s first year as a Living Wage employer.

37 Auditor General for Wales, Managing the Impact of Welfare Reform Changes on Social Housing Tenants in Wales, 2015
38 Ibid.
39 Ibid.
40 Figures provided by the Welsh Government 
41 TUC, In Parts of Britain Half of Jobs Pay Less than the Living Wage, 2015




Chapter 8: Social mobility and child poverty in Wales


193


Early years

The Commission welcomes the Welsh Government’s use of international evidence in 
designing programmes such as Flying Start and the Foundation Phase, but notes that 
effectiveness depends on creating a consistent approach across the whole system. The Welsh 
Government has recognised this challenge and is implementing an Early Years Outcome 
Framework, which aims to provide a joined-up approach to services from conception to age 
seven. This framework should be very useful in measuring the impact of policy initiatives. 

However, it is surprising that this framework does not have any indicators or published data 
(live or being developed) to assess child health (beyond low birthweight) and development 
before the age of two. This is despite these very early years being recognised as paramount 
in the positive development of the child. The Commission recognises the difficulty in 
accurately assessing children at such a young age; however, it is imperative that mechanisms 
are developed to ensure that policy and programmes are working. A joint questionnaire 
between health and education practitioners – such as the Ages and Stages Questionnaire,42 
filled in by parents and used to inform health and development discussions with professionals 
– could be one such method of measuring development.

The Commission notes that as part of this framework, the Welsh Government is taking 
steps to improve the inspection process across early year settings. A clearly articulated and 
implemented framework would allow for diversity in settings, while offering parity of standards 
of provision to all children. Currently, short-term provision which operates for two hours 
or less is not required to register and is not inspected. The framework should be used to 
standardise expectations for all provision, which would reduce the burden of inspection while 
avoiding duplication of inspection and enable a risk-led approach to the frequency and type 
of inspection conducted. For the framework and inspections to make a positive difference, 
it is imperative that early years professionals receive consistent messages and are offered 
similar levels of support – otherwise there will be confusion and mistrust from parents and 
professionals. The Commission recommends that the framework develops guidance based 
on clear evidence of what works, which will support early years professionals in ensuring that 
provision is of the highest quality and meets the standards required for inspection.

The Welsh Government has recognised that flexible, affordable childcare of high quality will 
allow parents to take up or increase hours of work, and will support the healthy development 
of children. The Welsh Government’s Early Years and Childcare Plan highlights how it will 
improve childcare in Wales: for example, through reviewing the duty on local authorities to 
conduct Childcare Sufficiency Assessments, and a review of childcare and early education 
registration, regulation and inspection. 

Wales currently has no uniform qualification requirement for the early years workforce, 
yet there is consistent evidence of the positive impact for children – especially those from 
disadvantaged backgrounds – of high-quality, qualified teachers.43 As of 2013/14, only eight 
non-maintained nursery settings received an excellent rating from Estyn for teacher quality.44 
The Commission recommends that the Welsh Government provide guidance to providers on 
how to improve teacher quality, and encourages allocation of the best teachers to those in 
greatest need: for example, through use of the Pupil Deprivation Grant.

Flying Start continues to be one of the Welsh Government’s top priorities, and is one of its main 
policies to improve the lives of deprived children within the early years through programmes 
such as parenting advice and childcare provision. The Commission is pleased to see that 

42 The Ages and Stages Questionnaire is a parent filled-in questionnaire that is altered depending on the age of the child, and  
 helps determine if the child is meeting health and education milestones. It can support professionals in early diagnosis of  
 barriers to learning and health, and provide support and/or treatment
43 Sylva, K., Melhuish, E., Sammons, P., Saraj-Blatchford, I. and Taggart, B., The Effective Provision of Pre-school Education  
 (EPPE) Project: Findings from Pre-school to the End of Key Stage 1, 2004; Institute for Public Policy Research, Early  
 Developments: Bridging the Gap between Evidence and Policy in Early-Years Education, 2013
44 Estyn, Inspection Outcomes Data, 2010–2015, provided by Estyn 2015




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


194


the expansion target of the programme, which was originally set at 36,000 families, has been 
achieved. The expansion is an important achievement against the backdrop of budget cuts in 
real terms experienced by the Welsh Government. However, it is disappointing that since 2012/13 
there has been little improvement in the proportion of children in receipt of the programme that 
reach or exceed their milestones, with the figure remaining at around 55 per cent.45 

Despite the early years being recognised as a key area for focus, too many children are being 
failed before they even reach school. A report by Save the Children, Ready to Read, found 
that Wales’s poorest children start primary school already struggling with language skills, 
and that one in four children growing up in poverty leaves primary school unable to read.46 
Analysis from the Millennium Cohort Study indicates that poorer children in Wales are twice 
as likely as their more advantaged peers to score below average in vocabulary at age five. In 
addition, children living in poverty who had poor language skills at the age of five are more 
likely to be still behind at age 11.47 Children who read well by age 11 do better at school, get 
better exam results and do better at work.48 

The Welsh Government has a range of policies to tackle the issue of literacy, including the 
Literacy and Numeracy Framework and annual reading tests, but these policies do not seem 
to be having sufficient impact. The Commission recommends that in schools with the biggest 
literacy gaps, staff and parents should have access to a language expert for the early years, 
with the expectation that this is rolled out to all staff and parents by 2020.

A key area yet to be sufficiently addressed in Wales (or indeed in the rest of the UK) is the 
quality of the home learning environment and parenting. Effective parenting has a bigger 
influence on a child’s life than wealth, class or education. What parents do is more important 
than who they are.49 Children’s language development at the age of two is very strongly 
associated with performance across all subject areas at primary school.50 A rich, good-quality 
home learning environment is the foundation for children’s success in schools.

Public policy can promote parenting in two main ways: it can reduce the risk factors 
associated with poor parenting and insecure attachment; and it can intervene early on to 
address parenting and attachment issues. The Welsh Government’s main policy to improve 
parenting and the home learning environment is Flying Start. The programme provides 
parents within Flying Start centres with the opportunity to learn skills to positively develop 
their children, and to provide a positive home learning environment. However, even once the 
programme is fully rolled out in 2016, only one in four children in Wales will benefit from it.51 

Ideally, a universal approach to improving parenting is needed, as this reduces the stigma 
attached to parenting programmes. At a time of austerity this approach is not realistic, so 
the Commission advises the Welsh Government to focus its efforts on those in greatest 
need. The Early Years Outcomes Framework should explicitly address the issue of parenting 
and ensure that there is a holistic, co-ordinated approach to parenting programmes.52 The 
Framework also should indicate how the Welsh Government will identify the families who will 
benefit the most from additional parenting support, and what support they will receive.

45 Welsh Government, An Annual Report and Termly Updates which Present a Statistical Summary of the Service (Flying Start), 2015
46 Save the Children, Ready to Read, 2015
47 Centre for Longitudinal analysis, Millennium Cohort Study, 2014
48 http://www.wiserd.ac.uk/news/latest-news/wales-poorest-children-already-falling-behind-language-time-they-start- 
 school/#sthash.hKcZYzDd.dpbs
49 Department for Education, The Impact of Parental Involvement on Children’s Education and EPPE, Finding from Pre-school  
 to End of Key Stage 1, 2008
50 Department for Education, Investigating the Role of Language in Children’s Early Education Outcomes, 2011
51 Provided by the Welsh Government
52 Eurochild, Compendium of Inspiring Practices, Early Intervention and Prevention: ‘Family and Parenting Support’, 2012

http://www.wiserd.ac.uk/news/latest-news/wales-poorest-children-already-falling-behind-language-time-they-start-school/#sthash.hKcZYzDd.dpbs




Chapter 8: Social mobility and child poverty in Wales


195


Education

Increasing the performance of Welsh schools is crucial to improving social mobility and 
reducing poverty in the long term. Performance against a number of the education indicators 
in Wales, such as attendance, showed some improvement between 2013 and 2014. 
Nonetheless, significant challenges remain. Inequality in Welsh schools starts young and 
continues throughout education, with many children, especially those eligible for free school 
meals, not meeting the required level across key stages of education.

Despite attainment in Wales increasing year-on-year for all key stages, the proportion of 
children eligible for free school meals not achieving the required standard at each stage 
remains unacceptably high. For example:

•	 Nearly three in 10 pupils (27.6 per cent) eligible for free school meals do not achieve at 
least the expected outcome at the end of the Foundation Phase, hence they start school 
without the basics needed to flourish;53 

•	 By Key Stage 2 the proportion of pupils eligible for free school meals who do not achieve 
the expected grade increases to 28.1 per cent, and increases further at Key Stage 3 to 
nearly two in five (38.7 per cent);54 

•	 The proportion of pupils eligible for free school meals who do not achieve Level 2 at Key 
Stage 4 is very high at nearly three in four pupils (72.2 per cent). This hides wide variation 
in the performance at Key Stage 4 (see Figure 8.1). For example, Monmouthshire, which 
achieved the best attainment rate of all local authorities in Wales at 66.2 per cent for all 
children, is the worst-performing local authority in terms of the gap between children 
eligible for free school meals and their peers – three in four (75 per cent) children eligible 
for free school meals do not achieve Level 2 at Key Stage 4.55 

53 Welsh Government, Academic Achievement and Entitlement to Free School Meals, 2014
54 Ibid.
55 Ibid.




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


196


Figure 8.1: Attainment gap at GCSE

Powys

Gwynedd

Ceredigion

Conwy

CarmarthenshirePembrokeshire

Denbighshire

Monmouthshire

Flintshire

Wrexham

Isle of Anglesey

Swansea
Newport

CardiffBri


dgend

Caerphilly

Neath
Port Talbot

Rhondda

Cynon Taff

Torfaen

The Vale of
Glamorgan

Merthyr Tydfil

BlaenauGwent

Gap in attainment
(percentage points)

15.8 to <29

29 to <33

33 to <37

37 to 46

Source: Produced by Department for Education on request using data received from Estyn, Inspection Outcomes Data, 2010–15 

The Commission recognises that the Welsh Government has a programme to improve 
educational attainment – including incorporating recommendations from the Donaldson 
Review56 – but we remain concerned at the number of children being failed today. In addition 
to longer-term reform, we would encourage the Welsh Government to take immediate 
targeted action to improve the performance of the worst schools. We do not think the current 
light touch approach of ‘challenging schools’ and providing ‘some support’ to rectify the 
situation is a sufficient response to the urgency of the situation.57 

56 Welsh Government, Successful Futures: Independent Review of Curriculum and Assessment in Wales by Professor  
 G. Donaldson, 2015
57 Welsh Government, Building Resilient Communities – Taking Forward the Tackling Poverty Action Plan Annual Report 2015, 2015




Chapter 8: Social mobility and child poverty in Wales


197


The Welsh Government and Estyn have recognised the importance of numeracy, and 
increased efforts to resolve the gap in attainment through the Literacy and Numeracy 
Framework. Pupils who fail to achieve the basics at primary school are unlikely to meet 
educational milestones, can become disengaged from school and require expensive late 
intervention as well as not achieving their potential.

A key barrier to attainment within schools is teacher quality.58 High-quality teachers have been 
shown to be a key mechanism to ensure that children from all backgrounds reach their 
academic potential. But, the practical skills of newly-trained teachers in Wales have been 
criticised for being below par.59 In addition, Estyn inspections between 2010 and 2014 
highlighted that no secondary school achieved the highest rating (excellent) for teaching quality, 
and only 3 per cent of primaries did so. It is difficult to see how the inequalities experienced 
by pupils will be significantly reduced unless teacher quality is seriously addressed, and the 
pupils who are most disadvantaged have access to excellent teachers.

A report on initial teacher training in Wales by Professor John Furlong – Teaching Tomorrow’s 
Teachers – concluded that it was not as strong as it should be, and was falling short of 
international best practice.60 The Welsh Government has set up a task-and-finish group 
to review the recommendations in the Furlong Report. It plans to introduce a four-year 
education degree rather than the current three, with two years spent learning within schools. 
It also plans to make entry requirements more difficult. The Commission supports the aim 
of improving teacher quality, but unless more talented people can be encouraged into the 
teaching profession within Wales – including individuals from a wider range of backgrounds – 
it is difficult to see how real change will be achieved.

The Commission would urge the Welsh Government to focus on how to improve the quality 
of existing teachers as an immediate priority. The Commission recommends that as part of 
Estyn inspections, schools should have to provide an action plan that identifies the training 
needs of each of their staff and indicates how this training gap will be addressed. This action 
plan should highlight how the school is working with others to provide training at lower costs 
and to share best practice.

The Commission welcomes the fact that the Welsh Government has recognised the 
importance of parental engagement in improving a child’s educational attainment.61 However, 
a detailed plan in this area is needed to explain exactly what schools are expected to do, and 
how the Government will help them engage with hard-to-reach families.

To tackle the issue of poor educational performance in Wales, the Welsh Government has 
continuously amended policy or introduced new policy and programmes. This has created 
a confused policy landscape and some simplification would be beneficial. For example, 
Challenge Cymru aims to tap into the expertise of high-performing leaders in schools in a 
similar way to two other challenge programmes: the Central South Wales Challenge and the 
Lead and Emerging Practitioner Schools.

Not in education, employment or training

The number of young people in Wales who are NEET remains stubbornly high,62 although 
there has been a marginal fall in the proportion of young people who are NEET. The decrease 
for 16–18-year-olds between 2010 and 2014 was 0.7 of a percentage point, and for 
19–24-year-olds for the same period was 2.2 percentage points.

58 Estyn, The Annual Report of Her Majesty’s Chief Inspector of Education and Training in Wales 2013–2014, 2015
59 Ibid.
60 Furlong, J., Teaching Tomorrow’s Teachers: Options for the Future of Initial Teacher Education in Wales, 2015
61 Welsh Government, Building a Brighter Future: The Early Years and Childcare Plan, 2013
62 http://www.audit.wales/system/files/publications/NEETs_Report_National_version_2014_English.pdf

http://www.audit.wales/system/files/publications/NEETs_Report_National_version_2014_English.pdf




State of the Nation 2015: Social Mobility and Child Poverty in Great Britain


198


The Commission welcomes the fact that the Welsh Government’s Youth Engagement and 
Progression Framework is based on sound evidence and serious engagement with councils. 
However, some councils have expressed concern about their capacity to implement the 
framework because of financial pressures.63 The Commission recommends that the Welsh 
Government should regularly assess performance against the framework and work with 
councils to ensure that issues are resolved.

The Commission was pleased to see that the Welsh Government engaged with councils and 
other stakeholders in the development of its framework. However, young people themselves 
should have been engaged in the development of the framework, especially those furthest 
away from employment, education or training.

The new framework should bring clear benefits including improved planning, co-ordination 
and provision of services – but the Commission agrees with two concerns that Audit Wales 
has raised in relation to it. First, the framework (and targets) does not differentiate sufficiently 
between young people who have been NEET for a long time, and those who have just 
become NEET. There is a danger that the current targets for reducing young people who are 
NEET could be met by focusing on those that need less support. Second, the framework 
focuses mainly on young people up to the age of 18, with the assumption that policy and 
lessons can be applied to those older than 18. It is neither clear that this assumption is valid, 
nor how the Welsh Government plans to test it. Furthermore, until the Welsh Government 
and councils make a thorough assessment of the resource required to reduce the number of 
young people who are NEET, it is difficult to assess whether the targets are realistic.64 

8.5 Conclusions and Recommendations
The Commission welcomes the Welsh Government’s continued ambition to eradicate child 
poverty, but notes that independent forecasters suggest that due to welfare changes and 
other factors, the number of children in poverty in Wales may increase by nearly one-third by 
2020.65 The Commission would encourage the Welsh Government to devise a realistic and 
transparent plan that makes clear what it thinks is achievable in Wales by 2020, and exactly 
how Welsh Government programmes and policies will contribute to this outcome.

While there is much to praise in the Welsh Government’s commitment, the Commission 
believes that there is scope to take a more disciplined, evidence-driven approach. The Welsh 
Government is sensitive to the multi-dimensional nature of child poverty, but the Commission 
is concerned that resources are spread too thinly and that the speed of change means that 
policies are not given time to mature.

The Welsh Government is inclusive in its approach to reducing child poverty, but more should 
be done to engage employers in child poverty and social mobility issues. Employers have a 
key role to play in relation to both the skills and the low pay agenda; they are also central in 
making recruitment open and fair to everyone. Tackling barriers to employment that are linked 
to social background can improve the competitive advantage of businesses by giving them 
access to a wider talent pool.66 The Commission recommends that the Welsh Government 
takes an active role to promote fair access to jobs within Wales. For example, it could recruit 
a set of companies to become champions for this agenda across Wales.

The Commission sets out below three recommendations which it believes would contribute 
significantly to the goal of reducing child poverty and improving social mobility in Wales.

63 http://www.audit.wales/system/files/publications/NEETs_Report_National_version_2014_English.pdf
64 Ibid.
65 http://www.assembly.wales/laid%20documents/cr-ld10252/cr-ld10252-e.pdf
66 https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/246696/Business_Social_Mobility_Manifesto.pdf

http://www.audit.wales/system/files/publications/NEETs_Report_National_version_2014_English.pdf
http://www.assembly.wales/laid%20documents/cr-ld10252/cr-ld10252-e.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/246696/Business_Social_Mobility_Manifesto.pdf




Chapter 8: Social mobility and child poverty in Wales


199


Recommendation 1: Take a more rigorous, evidence-based approach  
to poverty reduction.

If the Welsh Government is to achieve the greatest impact from its policies and programmes, 
it needs to undertake a review to ensure that:

•	 There is clarity about what problem the policies are trying to address, what they will 
achieve, and how they will achieve it;

•	 Duplication is avoided and, in particular, that policies and programmes do not cover the 
same grounds as successful programmes led by non-government bodies;

•	 There is an overall holistic approach that links policies together to contribute to shared 
overall objectives;

•	 Policies are cost-effective and appropriately targeted to maximise impact.

In addition, the Welsh Government should pilot new policies and programmes to assess 
impact and value for money before they are implemented across the country.

Recommendation 2: Improve the quality of the workforce in schools.

Ensuring that children have access to high-quality teachers in all subjects is fundamental to 
improving their life chances and preventing poverty from being handed down from generation 
to generation. The first step to achieving this is to make teaching in Wales more attractive 
to good-quality teachers, and to encourage students to want to become teachers in Wales. 
There also needs to be better mechanisms to encourage new students to undertake teacher 
training in Wales and newly-qualified teachers to work in Wales. Improving careers advice 
within Wales and communication with universities in other regions of the UK could be one 
way to entice potential teachers to Wales. Improving teacher training in Wales would also 
help, as would better identification, provision and assessment of teachers’ continuous 
development. Training costs could be lowered by school governors across schools working 
more closely together to identify training needs and jointly organising training.

Recommendation 3: Involve business in its drive to reduce child poverty 
and increase social mobility.

The Welsh Government should increase its efforts to work with companies (including 
significant employers in Wales who do most of their business outside Wales itself) to 
create a Business Compact that would promote fairer access to high-quality employment. 
Engagement with employers can help to focus attention on better training, improved career 
ladders and greater adoption of the Living Wage. Businesses could be encouraged to:

•	 Engage strategically with young people and schools;

•	 Adhere to best practice on internships and apprenticeships;

•	 Reform the selection process to eliminate unconscious bias;

•	 Open up well-structured, non-graduate routes to high-quality careers;

•	 Monitor and evaluate performance on improving access;

•	 Sign up to the Living Wage.




Annex: Key social mobility and child poverty indicators in England, Scotland and Wales


201


Annex: Key social mobility and child 
poverty indicators in England, Scotland  
and Wales
Area Outcome Indicator England Scotland Wales

Child poverty 

Relative poverty

% children in households with less 
than 60% median income (before 
housing costs), three years ending 
in 2013/14

17 16 22

% children in households with less 
than 60% median income (after 
housing costs), three years ending 
in 2013/14

28 21 31

Absolute poverty

% children in households with less 
than 60% 2010/11 median income 
(before housing costs), three years 
ending in 2013/14

19 17 25

% children in households with less 
than 60% 2010/11 median income 
(after housing costs), three years 
ending in 2013–14

31 24 34

Education

Age 16 attainment
% children registered for free 
school meals achieving exam 
standard at 16, 2013/14

33.7 32.5 27.8

Adults with no 
qualifications

% of working-age adults without 
any qualifications, 2014

8.6 9.4 10

Adults with no 
qualifications at  
Level 2 or above

% of working-age adults without 
any Level 2 qualifications 
(equivalent to 5 or more GCSEs 
A*–C or Standard Grades at SCQF 
Level 5), 2014

26.8 25.2 27.5

Living wage
Employee jobs paid 
the Living Wage

% of employee jobs paid less than 
the living wage, 2014

22.6 19.3 24.9

Youth 
unemployment

Young people 
unemployed

% of 18–24-year-olds who are 
unemployed, 2014

13.9 13.6 17.8

Higher education 
participation

Young people living 
in areas with lowest 
entry to higher 
education (POLAR 3, 
Quintile 1)

% of young people living in areas 
with lowest level of entry to higher 
education, 2005–09

20.8 9.9 25.2

Notes:  

•	 	Attainment	at	16	cannot	be	directly	compared	between	England,	Scotland	and	Wales	due	to	differences	in	curricula	and	
exams. These results give an indication of the proportion of disadvantaged pupils who obtain key qualifications that measure 
similar levels of skills. We have used ‘5 A*–Cs including English and maths’ as this threshold in England and Wales and ‘5 or 
more Standard Grades at SCQF Level 5 or any qualifications at Higher or Advanced Higher level’ for Scotland.

•	 	Within	Scotland,	school	attainment	data	is	only	available	for	all	school	leavers,	so	will	include	some	young	people	who	only	
achieved this qualification level after the age of 16.

References:

Child poverty: Department for Work and Pensions, Households Below Average Income 2013/14, 2015

Education: Age 16 attainment – Department for Education, GCSE and Equivalent Attainment by Pupil Characteristics in England, 
2013/14, SFR 06/2015, Welsh Government, Academic Achievement and Entitlement to Free School Meals, 2014 and data for 
Scotland provided by the Scottish Government 2014; Adults qualifications – Office for National Statistics, Annual Population 
Survey, 2014

Living Wage: Office for National Statistics, Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings, 2015

Youth unemployment: Office for National Statistics, Regional Labour Market Statistics, October 2015

Higher education participation: Higher Education Funding Council for England, Young, UK-domiciled Entrants Registered at 
Publicly-funded UK Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) plus University of Buckingham, 2005–2009, 2015




	Foreword
	Social mobility overview
	How socially mobile is Britain – and are things getting better
	What explains these trends?
	Conclusion
	Chapter 1: Building the right foundations
	1.1 Introduction
	1.2 Does today’s reality meet the One Nation vision?
	1.3 How are these problems being addressed?
	1.4 How can more progress be made?
	1.5 Conclusion and Recommendations
	Chapter 2: Schools – the engine of social mobility
	2.1 Introduction
	2.2 Does today’s reality meet the One Nation vision?
	2.3 How are these problems being addressed?
	2.4 Assessment: what further action is needed?
	2.5 Conclusion and Recommendations
	Chapter 3: Improving life chances for non-graduates
	3.1 Introduction
	3.2 Does today’s reality meet the One Nation vision?
	3.3 How are these problems being addressed?
	3.4 How can more progress be made?
	3.5 Conclusion and Recommendations
	Chapter 4: Fair access to university and the professions
	4.1 Introduction
	4.2 To what extent does today’s reality match up to the OneNation vision?
	4.3 How are these problems being addressed?
	4.4 How can we go further?
	4.5 Conclusion and Recommendations
	Child poverty overview
	How much child poverty is there in Britain – and are thingsgetting better or worse?
	What explains these trends?
	Conclusion
	Chapter 5: Tackling low pay and in-work poverty
	5.1 Introduction
	5.2 Does today’s reality meet the One Nation vision?
	5.3 How are these problems being addressed?
	5.4 How can more progress be made?
	5.5 Conclusion and Recommendations
	Chapter 6: Reducing persistent poverty
	6.1 Introduction
	6.2 Does today’s reality meet the One Nation vision?
	6.3 How are these problems being addressed?
	6.4 How can more progress be made?
	6.5 Conclusions and Recommendations
	Chapter 7: Social mobility and child poverty in Scotland
	7.1 Introduction
	7.2 Current position
	7.3 Key policies
	7.4 Reflections
	7.5 Conclusions and Recommendations
	Chapter 8: Social mobility and child poverty in Wales
	8.1 Introduction
	8.2 Current position
	8.3 Key policies
	8.4 Reflections
	8.5 Conclusions and Recommendations
	Annex: Key social mobility and child poverty indicators in England, Scotland 
and Wales




