




Digital 
economy  

strategy

2015-2018


02

Executive 
summary

The internet in 1984 consisted of 1,000 computers hardwired together. Sir Tim Berners-Lee 
first coined www five years later, and a new industrial revolution began to take hold. By 
2020, 30 billion devices will be wirelessly connected, supporting a global digital services 
market worth as much as the entire UK economy. And we are only at the beginning.

This is also a human revolution. Around 80% of smartphone users 
check their phone within 15 minutes of waking. For 80% of them, 
it’s the very first thing that they do. And they do it 150 times a day.

However, the internet, mobile connectivity and computing 
capabilities are developing more quickly than businesses can 
adapt. Roughly 90% of the data in the world was created in the 
last two years: the digital world is perennially new.

Being at the forefront of this wave of digital innovation is essential 
for business and key to the UK’s competitiveness. 

Our digital economy programme will commit £15m a year to 
support innovative business projects and a further £15m a year 
as core funding to support the Digital Catapult centre, the Open 
Data Institute and Tech City UK, each of which has a role in 
delivering the objectives of our strategy.

“Around 80% of 
smartphone users  

check their phone within 
15 minutes of waking.”




03Digital economy strategy | 2015-2018

Our Strategy
This is a strategy to help UK businesses to innovate by using 
digital technology. 

Innovate UK will work with companies to understand how this 
technology can help them to innovate to serve current and future 
customers better, and how they can develop and build their 
confidence in new digitally-enabled ways of doing business.

We have supported, facilitated and co-funded innovation in the 
digital economy since 2007, and with a specific digital programme 
since 2009.

We have five objectives:

Encouraging digital innovators
We will help digital innovators in early-stage companies to 
articulate and develop their ideas, establish their businesses and 
make connections to potential partners and lead customers 
in industry and government. We will also help innovators in 
established companies across the economy to adopt digital 
solutions, and to learn from other sectors.

Focus on the user
We will champion digital innovation approaches that centre on 
users’ needs, to ensure that solutions are well fitted to the markets 
they address. These needs centre on trust, access and convenience 
of use, so we will help businesses to inject this thinking throughout 
their design processes.

Equipping the digital innovator 
We will equip individual innovators with technical and business 
expertise and resources, and help them to develop new capability 
if necessary. Of particular importance are the technical toolkits to 
manage transactions and move data safely and smoothly, and to 
link the physical and virtual worlds.

Growing infrastructure, platforms and 
ecosystems 
We will work across industries to develop and consolidate 
structural foundations for the digital economy, to encourage 
investment and guide innovators as they enter the market. We will 
support interoperable infrastructure and software platforms, build 
digital ecosystems and help them to scale. 

Ensuring sustainability
We must ensure that innovations in technology are used well and 
can succeed sustainably. We need to understand social impact 
and the commercial, legal and regulatory context of innovation. 
This requires far more than innovation support, so we will partner 
with other organisations to link technical capabilities with skills, 
trade, infrastructure and investment, all within the context of the 
government’s Information Economy Strategy[1].

Fibre to  
the home

Autonomous cars

Mobile 
banking

Data.gov.uk

Smart meters

e-book

News paywalls

Last.fm, Skype, 
Facebook, 
Youtube, Twitter, 
Spotify, iPlayer

dotcom 
bubble

THIS STRATEGY

Camera 
phone

Quantified self

Cloud 
computing

MOOCs

3G mobile 


data


4G mobile data

Android 
phones, 
iPhone,  
Kindle

Android, iPad 
tablets


Y2K


20001990 2010 2020

Sonic the 
Hedgehog

Intel  
Pentium

https://

Amazon, Ebay, 
Google, mp3.
com, PayPal, 
salesforce.com

http://www.

WYSIWYG

‘Digital 
economy’

Deep Blue

GSM mobile 
voice

Browsers, 


ISPs GPS


PDAs, Smart 
phones


5G

100mbs in 
50%of EU

30bn devices: 
$2tn IoT 
services

UK £69bn 
e-commerce 
(40% export)


04

Why is  
digital economy  
a priority for us?

The internet, computing and mobile communications have a transformative effect on 
how all businesses succeed. The impact of digital platforms, products and services will 
go far beyond the information and communications technology (ICT) sector.

By innovating in the UK, and establishing new ways to use this 
technology in all business sectors, we have the opportunity to 
position UK companies to grow and to succeed on a global stage. 

We can already see the physical world being overlaid with 
intelligence – with machines sharing information about their 
status and surroundings, and automatically adjusting to improve 
our human experience and services. We can see an explosion of 
data: about our surroundings, services and products on offer; 
about the knowledge of others; and about ourselves. We can see 

new capabilities to connect and exploit this data to derive new 
knowledge and to make better decisions. We are also experiencing 
a growing clamour for our attention, as information, social 
contacts, media, advertising and services press in on our privacy 
and our personal time.

The change is happening so quickly that we cannot see more than 
a few years into the future. We can anticipate, however, that most 
of us will soon be connected to the internet everywhere we go, all 
of the time. 

“We will soon be 
connected to the 

internet everywhere  
we go, all of the time.”




05Digital Economy Strategy | 2015-2018

The UK advantage 
Software, IT and telecoms services together generated 4.2% of UK 
gross value added (£59bn) in 2011 and provided 885,000 jobs. We 
have 107,000 software businesses, and are the world’s number 
two exporter of telecoms services (£5.4bn) and number three in 
computer services (£7.1bn) and information services (£2bn)[1]. 

The UK has world-class strengths in communications, especially 
wireless technologies; software development, computing and data 
analysis; cyber security; and user experience and service design.

The world imports the UK’s expertise – services dominate our 
trade balance – and the world imports our culture. We are 
number two in the global export trade in film, television, music, 
books, news and education. Our total creative industries exports 
(£17.3bn) are the highest per head in the world. And even 
though 7.8m UK adults have never used the internet (half of 
them for reasons of disability), the UK population is the world’s 
most advanced adopter of online retail and the digital economy. 
Together, these capabilities give the UK an early lead in the digital 
economy. This is an opportunity for us to take a commanding 
position in shaping the 21st century.


06

What are the  
challenges for the  
digital economy?

New digital businesses with great ideas and products are appearing all the time. But 
ideas are not enough. Small businesses need concentrated support if they are to scale, 
and we need a long-term strategy and unprecedented cross-industry collaboration to 
establish new supply chains and business methods. 

Establishing digital businesses 
Low set-up costs and continual technical advances drive a very 
short product cycle and a vibrant culture of start-up digital 
businesses. But there are challenges with commercialising and 
scaling up businesses from this fragmented base. 

Low working capital

Young companies have low working capital, affecting their 
resilience and ability to build the relationships they need in order 
to break into a complex and competitive market. 

Skills shortages

The forces that create a dynamic and fast-moving innovation 
culture also create skills shortages, particularly as innovation 
gains pace. 

Hearing new ideas

With more than 200 smart-home demonstrators in the UK and 
more than 3,000 e-health applications on the European market[2], 
how can the new ideas of a small, unknown company be heard?

“New digital  
businesses with  

great ideas and products  
are appearing all the time.”




07Digital economy strategy | 2015-2018

Intellectual property

The cost and sluggishness of protecting intellectual property 
contrast with the speed of technology change, leading small 
companies to look for competitive advantage through agility and 
know-how instead of through long-term strategies such as patent 
registrations or diversification.

Tribal boundaries

Successful digital businesses fuse technical expertise with creative 
flair and an understanding of their customers. However, this 
fusion means erasing the tribal boundaries between ‘geeks’ and 
‘luvvies’. These cultural divisions within the digital community can 
be as hard to overcome as the gaps in understanding between 
technologists and their clients.

Funding support

Support from government, investors and clients can be less agile 
than the companies themselves, and is often designed around 
traditional innovation models and linear product development 
processes. The drag of this support on companies’ time and 
resources can even outweigh the value on offer.

Scaling up
Go big or go home

Digital platforms often succeed based on the size of their user 
base. This pressure to ‘go big or go home’ tempts businesses 
to scale up customer numbers rapidly, often before business 
structures are properly in place. 

Investor confidence

With a short product cycle, rapidly evolving technology and 
markets, and high churn of companies, the digital industry lacks a 
coherent strategic roadmap, challenging confidence in long-term 
investment in digital capability.

Long-term strategy and the 
need for cooperation 
The platforms, systems and supply chains that underpin the digital 
market require a longer term investment and innovation strategy, 
and a broad-based cross-industry collaborative approach. 

Confidence to adapt

A move to digital methods can be deeply disruptive of existing 
business methods and commercial models and lead to a 
reluctance to innovate, even though this can lead to being 
overtaken by those who are less cautious and are willing to move 
more quickly. 

Connected networks

It is difficult to change only one part of a connected business 
network, so commercialising digital technologies increasingly 
requires collaboration across traditional sector boundaries.

Investing in infrastructure

Digital infrastructure investment requires long-term planning  
and confidence in future revenues from a very unclear commercial 
market, so the supply of digital connectivity tends to lag  
behind demand.

Digital inclusion

This tension in infrastructure investment leads to unequal internet 
access between affluent, urban populations and areas where the 
investment case is weaker. This is compounded by social divisions 
to create an excluded population of the digitally disadvantaged. 
This is a significant emerging social challenge.


08

What are the 
opportunities for 
UK business?

Digital technology can offer businesses huge reductions in costs; massive trading 
volumes with low transaction costs; instant global market reach and contact 
throughout their customers’ daily routine; and insight into customer needs and a direct 
and personal relationship with them. 

The rapidity of change makes it difficult to predict what might 
become available more than a few years ahead. Nevertheless, our 
dialogue with UK businesses identifies the current trends creating 
opportunities for those with the appetite to innovate.

Mobility
We are in contact with the internet continually during our daily lives 
through our smartphones and computing devices. These are growing 
in their capabilities, both in data handling and in the functionality 
with which they link us to our surroundings, and we are using them 
to manage our lives. This creates opportunities for businesses to 
connect to us in ways that have never before been possible.

‘Internet of things’ 
The ‘internet of things’ describes the trend for physical objects 
to be more and more connected and linked electronically. 
The physical world will increasingly be managed digitally. We 
are creating smarter environments and smarter objects that 
are becoming responsive to their context and our needs. New 
business models, applications and services are emerging in energy 
management, e-health delivery, traffic management and more, 
and the added value of ‘internet of things’ services could reach as 
much as $2tr a year, with 30 billion objects connected by 2020[3]. 
This drives demand for components, devices, wireless connectivity, 
middleware and decision support tools.

“There are  
opportunities for  

businesses to connect  
to us in ways that  

have never been possible.”




09Digital economy strategy | 2015-2018

Enterprise services 
The long-term trend for businesses to outsource and sub-contract 
non-core activities has been given new impetus by internet 
business services, now offered through the cloud. As caution 
around data risks and the ceding of control is overcome, and 
the benefits of cost and service availability are demonstrated, 
traditional enterprise structures with office staff are giving way 
to a distributed workforce and systems of delivery contracts. 
Business-to-business online service providers are flourishing.

Data 
We, and every business that serves us, have access to more  
data than ever before. We are just beginning to explore the 
possibilities to mine and interlink these data streams to create 
new knowledge and insight. The opportunities for businesses 
to benefit are particularly striking. Data is predicted to create 
more than $300bn of value in the next decade[4], and European 
countries could witness annual productivity gains of €255bn in 
the public sector alone. 

Different industry sectors ride each of these waves at different 
times, depending on the nature of their businesses and the needs 
of their customers. The creative industries led the way in the 
emergence of the digital economy, and online commerce has since 
grown to rival them in importance. Ahead, we see opportunities 
for more industries: data in health, connectivity in transport, 
control systems in energy, online public services, and the list goes 
on. The evolution of the digital economy is in full swing.

Case study

Cheshire Bespoke

Cheshire Bespoke Ltd is developing smoother 
ways for businesses and customers to carry out 
transactions online in the clothing and fashion 
industry, with support from Innovate UK.

The bespoke tailoring and manufacturing business 
worked with a number of partners on a successful 
‘Fashioning metadata production tools’ project and 
is now continuing that collaborative work with a new 
project ‘Fashioning digital production tools’, after winning 
funding in our ‘Frictionless commerce – transaction in a 
digital landscape’ collaborative R&D competition. 

Cheshire Bespoke is working with Tailor Made, a 
business with extensive knowledge in body scanning 
and made-to-measure clothing, and they hope 
to demonstrate the potential of digital tools in 
producing flexible and diverse clothing.

The work could ease the cost and production 
constraints holding back clothing manufacturing in 
the UK and lead to new digital tools that will benefit 
manufacturers, retailers and consumers.


10

Our digital 
economy strategy

Innovate UK has supported, facilitated and co-funded innovation in the digital 
economy since 2007 and with a specific digital programme since 2009. We support 
businesses where there is a clear market for them, and we target barriers and issues 
that companies find difficult to solve on their own. 

Our 2015-2018 innovation strategy has five objectives.

Encouraging digital innovators

We will aim to understand and support digital innovators 
whatever the business circumstances that surround them, helping 
them to develop confidence and connect to their customers.

Focus on the user

We will champion approaches to digital innovation that centre on 
the needs of users, to ensure that solutions are well fitted to the 
markets they address.

Equipping the digital innovator

We will equip individual innovators with the technical and business 
expertise that they need, and drive the development of new 
capability where it is needed.

Growing infrastructure, platforms and ecosystems

We will work across industries to develop and consolidate the 
foundations of the digital economy, so that innovators can enter 
the market with confidence.

Ensuring sustainability

Digital is not just technology. We will work across boundaries to 
link technical capabilities with an understanding of social impact 
and the commercial, legal and regulatory context of innovation.

“We will work  
across industries to  

develop and consolidate  
the foundations of the  

digital economy, so that  
innovators can enter the  
market with confidence.”




11Digital economy strategy | 2015-2018

Encouraging digital innovators
Innovate UK’s support strategy begins with our customers. 

The potential power of the digital economy should tempt us 
to revisit every service, every supply chain, every channel to 
customers. But not all businesses have the knowledge and 
confidence to innovate with this technology. We see two main 
constituencies of digital innovators: the technical expert providing 
technology and digital solutions, and the digital champion driving 
change through an established business. These groups differ 
in company scale and in agility of action; this is a major theme 
underlying our strategy.

We will:

• ensure that business support, encouragement and investment 
is available to those developing digital ideas

• help early-stage digital businesses to connect to established 
businesses and potential lead customers in industry and 
government

• help established companies find the innovators who can help 
them develop digital solutions, including bringing digital 
expertise to bear on Innovate UK’s activity in health and care, 
transport, energy, built environment and creative industries 

• help these digital innovators to drive change, whilst managing 
risk to existing business flows

• encourage innovators in different sectors to share knowledge, 
develop common approaches and translate and reuse 
experience from other industries.

Case study

IC tomorrow: Second Sync

Our IC tomorrow programme combines project 
funding and business support to help digital 
innovators in early-stage companies to develop 
ideas in collaboration with established companies 
that want their input as they digitise.

Television production company Fremantle Media set 
an IC tomorrow ‘innovation in TV and film’ challenge 
for businesses to come up with a second-screen app 
to work in tandem with some of its live event shows, 
such as X Factor.

Winning company Second Sync proposed a Twitter 
analytics dashboard to provide live reports on the 
sort of chatter taking place on the social media site 
during a specific show.

Fremantle was so impressed with the prototype that 
it contracted Second Sync to integrate the analytics 
platform into the X Factor app. 

Second Sync further developed its platform with 
the help of Innovate UK funding in 2013 and quickly 
became the ‘go-to’ provider of analytics for the 
television industry, including for BBC, ITV and Channel 
4. The company was recently acquired by Twitter.

Visit http://ictomorrow.innovateuk.org 

https://ictomorrow.innovateuk.org/


12


Our digital 
economy strategy 
continued...

Focus on the user
Good business strategies begin not with the product, or the 
commercial model, but with the user.

Understanding users and their needs is of paramount importance 
to all business – from digital start-ups to existing businesses that 
are digitising. Once they understand this, they can design elegant 
solutions that provide an excellent user experience. 

This is more evident when designing direct customer-facing 
products, but remains true further upstream for those offering 
services to other businesses. Somewhere, there is always a human.

We will:

• encourage digital businesses to think about their users’ needs 
and the user experience at every step of product development

• ensure that digital products are trusted, by helping businesses 
to design their systems for resilience, privacy and consent, 
identity management and data security

• help businesses to develop products that are available when 
needed, and that relate and adapt to the place and context 
within which they are used

• invite businesses to consider inclusive or adaptable designs, so 
that they can create a compelling experience for the broadest 
possible market.

“Understanding  
users and their  

needs is of paramount 
importance to all businesses.”




13Digital economy strategy | 2015-2018

Equipping the digital innovator 
Digital innovation requires the deployment of technology into 
business systems. To create a user experience requires products 
and services, and to create these requires engineering and 
business design.

We will:

• support tools and systems that streamline transaction flows; 
that allow data, content, metadata, value and permissions to be 
moved seamlessly without manual intervention; that are trusted 
by businesses; and that protect the value of digital assets

• help businesses to develop technology and services that bring 
the benefits of the digital world into the user context of the 
physical world

• work with data and content owners on tools and systems to 
improve the quality of existing and future data sources and 
their suitability for secondary use, and with web and mobile 
service designers on tools for software design that take 
advantage of these resources

• help businesses to build confidence in the commercial and user 
value of their products.

Creative industries

Our digital economy strategy will draw inspiration from 
the creative industries[5] for the foreseeable future, and 
our strategies in the two areas are very closely linked. 
In the creative industries, and in adjacent sectors such 
as education, many business flows now centre on the 
movement of digitised creative goods and ‘content’. 

The creative industries have led innovation in many 
aspects of the digital economy and, from a digital 
innovation point of view, the issues surrounding digital 
content mirror those surrounding data. The data-using 
communities have much to learn from those who have 
gone before.

We will continue to deliver Innovate UK’s creative 
industries strategy in close liaison with this digital 
economy strategy.


14

Our digital 
economy strategy 
continued...

Growing infrastructure,  
platforms and ecosystems
The digital economy is connected. Communications networks 
move data and deliver services; the traffic is handled by software 
and data management platforms; devices provide the final 
bridge to the real world and the user. This intricate system is 
joined together by tools and interfaces that connect businesses 
into digital supply chains, facilitating data transfer, transactions, 
payments and hand-offs of metadata and security information. 

Each of these elements has the potential to create a marketplace 
for users and suppliers. Interoperability, open standards and 
architectures, and interfacing standards such as APIs (application 
programming interfaces) and metadata standards all contribute 
to market defragmentation, as do regulations to promote open 
competition and free trade.

We will:

• support businesses developing interoperable infrastructure and 
software platforms and enablers that can be used by multiple 
client businesses, and encourage industry-wide common 
practice to broaden the market for their suppliers and their users

• support new entrants to build up digital ecosystems around 
these platforms, and help them with tools and connections, 
until the activity reaches a critical mass that enables them to 
scale. This encompasses interoperable open systems ranging 
from open data to ‘internet of things’

• help communications and device businesses, and software and 
data systems businesses, to work together with service and 
applications businesses to support one another’s investment 
cases and to design complete user solutions

• work across Europe and worldwide to help establish common 
practice and fluid trading systems that will support UK digital 
innovators as they export.

“We will  
encourage 

 industry-wide common  
practice to broaden the  

market for suppliers and users”




15Digital economy strategy | 2015-2018

Ensuring sustainability 
Digital innovation draws on information and communication 
technologies and component hardware. We support the 
development of this capability through our enabling technologies 
strategy[6]. But digitisation is not just about technology. It 
streamlines and reroutes business processes and workflows, it 
disrupts the way we manage transactions and how we think about 
value, and it redesigns human experiences and changes the way 
we interact with one another. 

In our digital strategy, therefore, we must also draw upon social 
and economic science, understand the role of law and regulation, 
draw on design expertise and consider the psychology of the 
marketplace. This requires multidisciplinary effort and often raises 
questions for policy makers or exposes unanswered questions for 
research. Innovate UK, in collaboration with Forum for the Future 
and Aviva Investors, has developed the Horizons framework 
(http://horizons.innovateuk.org) to guide thinking in these areas.

We will:

• work closely with the UK research councils to encourage cross-
disciplinary academic collaboration and help connect it to 
real-world business needs

• work with government and regulators to ensure that legal, 
regulatory and policy frameworks are supportive of digital 
innovation and business growth, and collaborate in delivering 
those policy initiatives that invite business innovation

• work with skills agencies and universities so that appropriate 
skills are available to both product designers and individual and 
commercial product users, to ensure confident deployment 
and adoption

• use, and encourage others to use, the Horizons framework 
when developing strategies and plans

• work alongside other support bodies and the third sector, so 
that our support for commercial progress can be balanced with 
support for social progress.

Delivering our programme

We will use whatever tools are suitable and available to us to 
deliver our programme. This includes the funding of R&D, but 
just as important will be knowledge transfer activities and the 
targeting and coordination of specific projects and campaigns. 
We will work in close partnership with the Knowledge Transfer 
Network and Tech City UK, and will achieve many of our 
objectives through the work of the Digital Catapult and the 
Open Data Institute.

For specific details of our competitions for project funding, 
networking opportunities, events and other work please 
see our Delivery Plan, published annually, at  
www.innovateuk.gov.uk

http://horizons.innovateuk.org/
https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/innovate-uk




Innovate UK is the new name for the Technology Strategy Board – the UK’s innovation agency.

We know that taking a new idea to market is a challenge. We fund, support and connect innovative businesses  

through a unique mix of people and programmes to accelerate sustainable economic growth.

The Technology Strategy Board is an executive non-departmental public body sponsored by the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, and is incorporated by Royal Charter in 

England and Wales with company number RC000818. Registered office: North Star House, North Star Avenue, Swindon SN2 1UE.

© Technology Strategy Board February 2015 T15/004    

Printed on 100% recycled paper.

Innovate UK
North Star House 

North Star Avenue 
Swindon 
SN2 1UE 

Telephone: 01793 442 700 

www.innovateuk.gov.uk 
support@innovateuk.gov.uk

Follow us on  

References and sources
[1] Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, Information 
Economy Strategy,  
www.gov.uk/government/publications/information-economy-
strategy

[2] Neelie Kroes (May 2012)

[3] Gartner, Forecast: The Internet of Things, Worldwide, 2013,  
www.gartner.com

[4] McKinsey, Big data: The next frontier for innovation, 
competition and productivity (May 2011), www.mckinsey.com

[5] Innovate UK (2013), Creative Industries Strategy 2013-16,  
www.gov.uk/government/publications

[6] Innovate UK (2013), Enabling Technologies Strategy  
2012-2015,  
www.gov.uk/government/publications

Image credits
Front cover - Jenny Griffiths, founder and CEO of Snap Fashion,  
a digital search business supported by Innovate UK

https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/innovate-uk
mailto:support%40innovateuk.gov.uk%0D?subject=
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/information-economy-strategy
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/information-economy-strategy
http://www.gartner.com/technology/home.jsp
http://www.mckinsey.com/
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications
https://www.linkedin.com/company/innovateuk
https://twitter.com/innovate_uk
https://connect.innovateuk.org/
https://www.facebook.com/innovateuk
https://www.youtube.com/user/Innovateuk

