

                   1  


Immigration Act 2014 


 

Marriage and civil partnership referral 
and investigation scheme: statutory 
guidance for Home Office staff 


  

March 2015 


   

March 2015 


 2  


Contents 


 

Contents ..................................................................................................................... 2 

Section 1.0 – Introduction ........................................................................................... 3 

1.1 Purpose of this guidance ............................................................................. 4 

Section 2.0 – The investigation decision .................................................................... 5 

2.1 Condition A .................................................................................................. 5 

2.2 Condition B .................................................................................................. 7 

2.3 Making the investigation decision ................................................................ 9 

2.4 Giving notice of the investigation decision ................................................. 10 

2.5 A decision to investigate ............................................................................ 10 

2.6 Calculating the 28-day or 70-day notice period .......................................... 12 

Section 3.0 – Conduct of investigations ................................................................... 13 

3.1 Purpose of investigation ............................................................................. 14 

3.2 Means of investigation ............................................................................... 14 

3.3 Providing information, evidence or photographs ........................................ 15 

3.4 Interviews: general ..................................................................................... 16 

3.5 Arranging an interview ............................................................................... 18 

3.6 Rearranging an interview ........................................................................... 19 

3.7 Interviews at a relevant party’s home ......................................................... 20 

3.8 Interviews at Home Office premises in the UK ........................................... 20 

3.9 Interviews at Home Office premises outside the UK .................................. 20 

3.10 Interviews by telephone, by video-telecommunications link or over the 
internet where the relevant party is not at Home Office premises ........................ 21 

3.11 Interviews while detained ........................................................................... 21 

3.12 Notifying a relevant party that they have failed to comply with a requirement 
  ................................................................................................................... 22 

Section 4.0 – Compliance with an investigation ....................................................... 23 

4.1 Deciding the compliance question ............................................................. 23 

4.2 Reasonable excuse for non-compliance .................................................... 24 

4.3 The compliance decision............................................................................ 24 


  

March 2015 


 3  


Section 1.0 – Introduction  


 

Part 4 of the Immigration Act 2014 (the 2014 Act) reforms the process for giving 
notice of marriage or civil partnership to give the Home Office a much stronger 
platform for effective, systematic action to disrupt and deter sham marriages and civil 
partnerships and prevent participants from gaining an immigration advantage.


1  

From 2 March 2015, the 2014 Act extended the marriage and civil partnership notice 
period from 15 days to 28 days for all couples in England and Wales marrying 
following civil preliminaries or forming a civil partnership, and required all couples 
involving a non-European Economic Area (non-EEA) national who wish to marry in 
the Anglican Church in England and Wales to complete civil preliminaries and give 
notice at a register office and be subject to the 28-day notice period.  


 

From 2 March 2015, the marriage and civil partnership notice period in Scotland and 
in Northern Ireland was extended to 28 days for all couples, under changes 
implemented by the Scottish Government and the Northern Ireland Executive to 
marriage and civil partnership laws in Scotland and Northern Ireland.   


 

From 2 March 2015, the 2014 Act, together with secondary legislation for Scotland


2  

and Northern Ireland


3

, also introduced a referral and investigation scheme for 

proposed marriages and civil partnerships across the UK involving a non-EEA 
national who could benefit in immigration terms. All proposed marriages and civil 
partnerships in the UK involving a non-EEA national with limited or no immigration 
status in the UK, or who does not provide specified evidence that they are exempt 
from the scheme


4

, are to be referred to the Secretary of State by the registration 

official.


5   

The Secretary of State will assess all referrals against intelligence- and evidence-
based risk profiles and other information to identify suspect proposed marriages and 
civil partnerships, and then consider in these cases whether there are reasonable 
grounds to suspect a sham marriage or civil partnership. Where the Secretary of 
State has reasonable grounds to suspect a sham and at least one of the parties is 
not exempt from the scheme, she may decide to investigate whether the marriage or 
civil partnership is a sham. Notification of that decision to the relevant registration 
official will have the effect of extending the notice period from 28 days to 70 days, 
which will allow the Home Office to investigate and take appropriate enforcement or 

                                            


1

 Further information about the Immigration Act 2014 can be found at 

https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/immigration-bill 


2

 The Referral and Investigation of Proposed Marriages and Civil Partnerships (Scotland) Order 2015 (S.I. 

2015/396): http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/396 


3

 The Referral and Investigation of Proposed Marriages and Civil Partnerships (Northern Ireland and 

Miscellaneous Provisions) Order 2015 (S.I. 2015/395): http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/395 


4

 To be exempt from referral the person must be a British citizen; an EEA or Swiss national; or a non-EEA 

national who has provided the registration official with the specified evidence of an EU right of permanent 

residence in the UK, of exemption from immigration control or settled status in the UK, or of a valid marriage 

or civil partnership visitor visa or a valid fiancé(e) or proposed civil partner visa.    


5

 Further information about these changes is available at 

https://www.gov.uk/marriages-civil-partnerships/giving-notice-at-your-local-register-office  


 

https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/immigration-bill
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/396
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/395
https://www.gov.uk/marriages-civil-partnerships/giving-notice-at-your-local-register-office




March 2015 


 4  


casework action where a sham is established. A couple will be unable to get married 
or enter into a civil partnership on the basis of that notice if they do not comply with 
an investigation under the scheme. 


 

1.1 Purpose of this guidance 


 

This guidance has been published by the Secretary of State to assist Home Office 
staff (including “decision makers” and “investigation officers”) responsible for the 
operation of the referral and investigation scheme under the 2014 Act. They must 
have regard to this guidance under: 


 

 Section 48(6) – in deciding whether to investigate a proposed marriage or civil 
partnership referred to the Secretary of State under the scheme (“the 
investigation decision”).  


 

 Section 50(2) – in conducting an investigation under the scheme.  


 

 Section 50(6) – in deciding whether or not each of the parties to a proposed 
marriage or civil partnership subject to an investigation under the scheme has 
complied with that investigation (“the compliance decision”).  


 


March 2015 


 5  


Section 2.0 – The investigation decision 


 

Where a registration official refers a proposed marriage or civil partnership to the 
Secretary of State under the scheme, she must decide under section 48(2) of the 
2014 Act whether to investigate whether the proposed marriage or civil partnership is 
a sham.  


 

Under sections 24 and 24A of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, as amended by 
section 55 of the 2014 Act, a sham marriage or civil partnership is one in which:  


 

 one or both of the parties is not a British citizen or an EEA or Swiss national;  


 

 there is no genuine relationship between the parties; and  


 

 either or both of the parties enter into the marriage or civil partnership for the 
purpose of circumventing UK immigration controls, including under the 
Immigration Rules or the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  


 

Under section 48(3) of the 2014 Act, the Secretary of State may not decide to 
investigate whether a proposed marriage or civil partnership referred under the 
scheme is a sham unless conditions A and B are met.  


 

Condition A is met if the Secretary of State is satisfied that only one or neither of the 
parties to the proposed marriage or civil partnership is an exempt person.  


 

Condition B is met if the Secretary of State has reasonable grounds for suspecting 
that the proposed marriage or civil partnership is a sham.  


 

Section 48 does not require conditions A and B to be considered in any particular 
order, nor does it require a condition to be considered if the other condition is not 
met. Home Office staff may therefore conduct the checks necessary to establish 
whether the parties to a proposed marriage or civil partnership referred under the 
scheme are exempt persons before or after commencing or completing their 
consideration of whether there are reasonable grounds to suspect that the proposed 
marriage or civil partnership is a sham.  


 

2.1 Condition A 


 

Condition A is met if the Secretary of State is satisfied that only one or neither of the 
parties to the proposed marriage or civil partnership is an exempt person.  


 

Under section 49(1) of the 2014 Act, an exempt person: 


 

 Is a relevant national, i.e. under section 62(1) is a British citizen or an EEA or 
Swiss national.  


 

 Has the appropriate immigration status, i.e. under section 49(2): 


 

- has an EU right of permanent residence in the UK.  




March 2015 


 6   

- is exempt from immigration control, as defined in paragraph 3 of the 
Proposed Marriages and Civil Partnerships (Meaning of Exempt Persons and 
Notice) Regulations 2015 (S.I. 2015/122), e.g. has the right of abode in the 
UK under section 2(1)(b) of the Immigration Act 1971, is a member of a 
diplomatic mission or their family member, or is a member of HM forces or of 
Commonwealth forces undergoing training or visiting forces.


6   

- is settled in the UK within the meaning of section 33(2A) of the Immigration 
Act 1971, i.e. has Indefinite Leave to Enter or Indefinite Leave to Remain.  


 

 Holds a relevant visa in respect of the proposed marriage or civil partnership, 
as defined in paragraph 4 of the Proposed Marriages and Civil Partnerships 
(Meaning of Exempt Persons and Notice) Regulations 2015 (S.I. 2015/122), 
i.e. 


 

-  a marriage or civil partnership visitor visa granted under the Immigration 
Rules.  


 

- a fiancé(e) or proposed civil partner visa or leave granted under or outside 
the Immigration Rules.  


 

A couple in which both parties are exempt persons may be referred to the Secretary 
of State by the registration official where, for example, one or both of those persons 
does not provide the registration official with specified evidence that they are an 
exempt person. Such evidence is specified:  


 

 For persons giving notice in England and Wales, by paragraphs 5 and 6 of the 
Referral of Proposed Marriages and Civil Partnerships Regulations 2015 (S.I. 
2015/123)


7

; and  


 

 For persons giving notice in Scotland or Northern Ireland, by paragraphs 8 
and 9 of the Sham Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland and Northern 
Ireland) (Administrative) Regulations 2015 (S.I. 2015/404).


8    

The decision maker must satisfy themselves, based on checks of Home Office 
records, that only one or neither of the parties is an exempt person before 
deciding to investigate a proposed marriage or civil partnership referred to the 
Secretary of State under the scheme.  


     


                                            


6

 http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/122 


7

 http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/123 


8

 http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/404 

http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/122
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/123
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/404




March 2015 


 7  


2.2 Condition B 


 

Condition B is met if the Secretary of State has reasonable grounds for suspecting 
that the proposed marriage or civil partnership is a sham.  


 

Proposed marriages and civil partnerships referred by registration officials to the 
Secretary of State under the scheme will be assessed against immigration records 
and against intelligence- and evidence-based risk profiles. Account will also be taken 
of reports from registration officials to the Secretary of State, under sections 24 and 
24A of the 1999 Act, of suspected sham marriages and civil partnerships.  


 

This process, which will be mainly automated, will be used to identify proposed 
marriages and civil partnerships in which additional scrutiny, by a manual 
assessment undertaken by the decision maker, is warranted in order to consider 
whether there are reasonable grounds to suspect that the proposed marriage or civil 
partnership is a sham.  


 

This process will also enable the Home Office to identify quickly cases considered to 
be of low or no risk of being a sham so that the couple and the relevant registration 
official can be informed that, if the latter is satisfied that there is no legal reason to 
prevent it, the proposed marriage or civil partnership can proceed after the expiry of 
the 28-day notice period.   


 

The intelligence- and evidence-based risk profiles will be drawn from recent section 
24/24A reports of suspected shams submitted by registration officials, recent sham-
based enforcement and prosecution cases and recent applications refused on the 
basis that the relationship is not genuine. The risk profiles will be kept under review 
and may change over time, but from 2 March 2015 the factors they will reflect will 
include whether either party to the proposed marriage or civil partnership:  


 

 Is an immigration overstayer or absconder or otherwise in breach of the 
conditions of their leave.   


 

 Entered the UK illegally, or has been removed from the UK and should not be 
here.  


 

 Has been convicted of a criminal offence or there is other evidence of links to 
criminality.  


 

 Is recorded as deceased.  


 

 Is currently or has previously been the subject of a section 24/24A report.  


 

 Has previously obtained leave, or sought to do so, on the basis of deception 
or of false or forged documents.  


 

 Has an outstanding immigration application based on their relationship with 
another spouse/partner, or has previously sponsored, or been sponsored by, 
another spouse/partner to come to or remain in the UK. This factor may also 




March 2015 


 8  


be linked to a previous marriage or civil partnership which, if not dissolved, 
would be a legal barrier to the proposed marriage or civil partnership of which 
the relevant registration official should be informed by the Home Office.     


 

 Has a factor(s) in their immigration history which, based on a current analysis 
of immigration intelligence, casework and enforcement operations drawn up 
and quality assured according to Director General-approved procedures, 
otherwise gives rise to a reasonable ground to suspect that the proposed 
marriage or civil partnership may be a sham.  


 

The presence of one or more of these factors will not mean that the proposed 
marriage or civil partnership will automatically be investigated under the scheme. It 
may mean that additional scrutiny is warranted in order to consider whether there are 
reasonable grounds to suspect that the proposed marriage or civil partnership is a 
sham.  


 

That additional scrutiny will involve a manual assessment, undertaken by a decision 
maker trained to undertake this function, of whether there are reasonable grounds to 
suspect that the proposed marriage or civil partnership is a sham. In undertaking this 
assessment the decision maker must take into account all the information available 
to them about both parties and the proposed marriage or civil partnership. The 
assessment should be informed, but not solely determined, by the presence of one 
or more of the factors mentioned above. The decision maker must consider the 
available information as a whole on a case-by-case basis in determining whether 
there are reasonable grounds to suspect that the proposed marriage or civil 
partnership is a sham.  


 

The risk profiles used to inform consideration of whether there are reasonable 
grounds to suspect that the proposed marriage or civil partnership is a sham will not 
take account of the nationality of either party. Should the regular review of the risk 
profiling indicate that it would be strengthened by the inclusion of nationality, 
consideration will be given, in light of the detail of the process to be put in place, as 
to whether a Ministerial authorisation is necessary under Schedule 3, Part 4, 
paragraph 17(4)(a) of the Equality Act 2010.  


 

The decision maker must be satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for 
suspecting that it is a sham before deciding to investigate a proposed 
marriage or civil partnership referred to the Secretary of State under the 
scheme.  


 

Where the Home Office identifies that a proposed marriage or civil partnership 
involves an immigration offender, it may take appropriate enforcement action against 
that person, whether or not there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that the 
proposed marriage or civil partnership is a sham and whether or not it decides to 
investigate the proposed marriage or civil partnership under the scheme.  


   

March 2015 


 9  


2.3 Making the investigation decision 


 

In respect of every proposed marriage or civil partnership referred by a registration 
official to the Secretary of State under the scheme, she must decide whether to 
investigate whether the proposed marriage or civil partnership is a sham.  


 

Where the decision maker is satisfied that:  


 

 Only one or neither of the parties to the proposed marriage or civil partnership 
is an exempt person, i.e. that condition A is met; and 


 

 There are reasonable grounds for suspecting that the proposed marriage or 
civil partnership is a sham, i.e. that condition B is met,  


 

the decision maker may decide that the Home Office will investigate whether the 
proposed marriage or civil partnership is a sham. Notification of that decision to the 
relevant registration official will have the effect of extending the notice period from 28 
days to 70 days. A decision to investigate whether a proposed marriage or civil 
partnership is a sham will be made by an Executive Officer (or equivalent) or more 
senior grade.    


 

Under section 48 of the 2014 Act the Secretary of State is not required to decide to 
investigate a proposed marriage or civil partnership where conditions A and B are 
met. In deciding whether to do so, the decision maker may take into account matters 
of operational prioritisation and workflow management within the resources available 
at the time the decision is made.  


 

Under section 48, where conditions A and B are met, the Secretary of State is not 
required to decide to investigate those proposed marriages or civil partnerships in 
which condition B is met by the greatest margin (amongst those referred under the 
scheme on a particular day or within a particular timeframe). In deciding whether to 
investigate a proposed marriage or civil partnership in which conditions A and B are 
met, the decision maker may take into account an operational assessment of the 
cases meeting those conditions where investigation may have the optimum impact in 
terms of countering sham marriages and civil partnerships and related immigration 
abuse. That operational assessment must be based on a current analysis of 
immigration intelligence, casework and enforcement operations drawn up and quality 
assured according to Director General-approved procedures.  


 

Under section 48 the decision maker must make the decision whether or not to 
investigate and give notice of that decision to both parties to the proposed marriage 
or civil partnership, and to the relevant registration official, within the 28-day notice 
period.  


      


March 2015 


 10  

2.4 Giving notice of the investigation decision 


 

How notice of the investigation decision may be given and when such notice is 
presumed to have been received (unless the contrary is proved) is specified:  


 

 For persons giving notice in England and Wales, by paragraphs 5 to 7 of the 
Proposed Marriages and Civil Partnerships (Meaning of Exempt Persons and 
Notice) Regulations 2015 (S.I. 2015/122)


9

; and  


 

 For persons giving notice in Scotland or Northern Ireland, by paragraphs 4 to 
6 of the Sham Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland and Northern Ireland) 
(Administrative) Regulations 2015 (S.I. 2015/404).


10    

2.5 A decision to investigate 


 

Under section 51(1) of the 2014 Act, where the Secretary of State decides to 
investigate whether a proposed marriage or civil partnership referred under the 
scheme is a sham, the notice of this decision given to both parties under section 48 
will set out the requirements with which they must comply as part of the investigation 
and the consequences of not doing so.   


 

In particular, that section 48 notice will set out: 


 

 Requirements with which the party must comply as part of the investigation, 
and it may specify how they must comply with them. The requirements which 
may be imposed are those specified in the Proposed Marriages and Civil 
Partnerships (Conduct of Investigations, etc) Regulations 2015 (S.I. 
2015/397).


11

 They include for example a requirement to:  


 

- Make contact with a particular team in a particular way within a particular 
time period, e.g. to arrange for an interview to take place by a particular date.  


 

- Be interviewed at home, at Home Office premises or by telephone.  


 

- Provide information, evidence or photographs.    


 

 That the party must comply with such a requirement, and in any manner 
specified, if subsequently notified of it by the Secretary of State, orally or in 
writing.  


 

 That the proposed marriage or civil partnership is now subject to a notice 
period of 70 days (not 28 days) and the date on which that period will end.  


   

                                            


9

 http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/122 


10

 http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/404 


11

 http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/397 

http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/122
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/404
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/397




March 2015 


 11  

 That, within that 70-day period, the Secretary of State must decide whether or 
not each of the parties has complied with the investigation (the “compliance 
question”) and give notice of that decision to the parties and to the relevant 
registration official. 


 

 Prescribed information about the investigation, as prescribed in paragraph 18 
of the Proposed Marriages and Civil Partnerships (Conduct of Investigations, 
etc) Regulations 2015, which is to the effect that:  


 

- The Secretary of State may decide that a relevant party who has failed, 
without reasonable excuse, to comply with a relevant requirement, as set out 
in the section 48 notice or in any subsequent notification, has failed to comply 
with the investigation.   


 

- Where the Secretary of State decides that a relevant party has (or that both 
have) failed to comply with the investigation and gives both parties and the 
relevant registration official notice of that decision within the 70-day period, 
the parties will not be able to marry or enter into a civil partnership on the 
basis of the notice given. They must give notice again if they still wished to do 


so.  

- Where the Secretary of State determines, whether before or after it takes 
place, that the marriage or civil partnership is a sham, the Secretary of State 
or an immigration officer may take immigration enforcement action where 
appropriate against either relevant party (or both).  


 

- Where the Secretary of State determines, whether before or after it takes 
place, that the marriage or civil partnership is a sham, the Secretary of State 
may refuse an application made by either relevant party under the 
Immigration Rules or the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 
2006 to stay in the UK on the basis of their relationship with the other relevant 
party. A refusal of an application on these grounds will be without prejudice to 
the refusal of the application on any other basis.   


 

In addition, where the Secretary of State decides to investigate whether a proposed 
marriage or civil partnership referred under the scheme is a sham, the section 48 
notice of this decision given to both parties will inform them of the requirement to 
notify the Secretary of State of any change during the period of the investigation in 
the usual address of either party and to provide specified evidence of this. These 
requirements arise under paragraphs 8 and 9 of the Referral of Proposed Marriages 
and Civil Partnerships Regulations 2015 (for persons giving notice in England and 
Wales) and under paragraphs 11 and 12 of the Sham Marriage and Civil Partnership 
(Scotland and Northern Ireland) (Administrative) Regulations 2015 (for persons 
giving notice in Scotland or Northern Ireland).   


 

For persons giving notice in England and Wales, that section 48 notice will also 
inform both parties of the requirement to notify the Secretary of State of any change 
in the UK contact address of either party if they have provided one, and to notify the 
Secretary of State of a UK contact address if the usual address of either party 
changes to an address outside the UK.  




March 2015 


 12   

Where the Secretary of State decides under section 48 of the 2014 Act not to 
investigate whether a proposed marriage or civil partnership referred under the 
scheme is a sham, the section 48 notice given to both parties and the relevant 
registration official will enable the marriage or civil partnership to take place after the 
28 day notice period, provided that the registration official is satisfied that there is no 
legal reason why they cannot issue or complete the required certificate or schedule.  


 

A decision by the Secretary of State not to investigate a proposed marriage or civil 
partnership does not constitute a determination as to the genuineness of the 
relationship on which it is based. If the marriage or civil partnership takes place, any 
decision taken on an application under the Immigration Rules or the Immigration 
(European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 to stay in the UK which is made on the 
basis of the marriage or civil partnership will continue to involve an assessment by 
the Home Office of the genuineness of the couple’s relationship.   


 

2.6 Calculating the 28-day or 70-day notice period 

The date on which the 28-day or 70-day notice period commences will vary 
according to the part of the UK in which notice was given:  


 

 Marriage Civil Partnership 

England and Wales 


 

Day after notice entered in 
marriage notice book 


 

Day after notice is 
recorded in register 

Scotland Day after receipt of the 
notice 

Day after notice publicised 
(which will be “on receipt”) 


 

Northern Ireland 


 

Day notice is entered in 
the marriage notice book 
(which will be on receipt of 
both notices) 


 

Day notice is recorded in 
the civil partnership notice 
book (which will be on 
receipt of both notices) 


 

In Scotland, where the parties to a proposed marriage or civil partnership referred 
under the scheme have given notice separately, a different 28-day or 70-day notice 
period may apply to each party. To comply with sections 48(9) and 50(7) of the 2014 
Act, decision makers should ensure that they notify the parties and the relevant 
registration official of the investigation decision within the 28-day notice period of the 
party whose notice was first received and, where relevant, of the compliance 
decision within the 70-day notice period of the party whose notice was first received. 




March 2015 


 13  

Section 3.0 – Conduct of investigations 


 

Where the Secretary of State decides to investigate whether a proposed marriage or 
civil partnership referred under the scheme is a sham, the investigation must be 
conducted in accordance with the Proposed Marriages and Civil Partnerships 
(Conduct of Investigations, etc) Regulations 2015 (S.I. 2015/397).


12  

When carrying out such an investigation on behalf of the Secretary of State, the 
investigation officer may make such enquiries as they think fit for the purpose of 
determining whether the proposed marriage or civil partnership is a sham.  


 

As part of the investigation each party may be required to provide information or 
evidence about in particular: 


 

 Themselves and about the other party. 


 

 Their relationship with the other party.  


 

 Their living arrangements and those of the other party.  


 

 Their future plans and those of the other party.  


 

This guidance sets out how an investigation into a proposed marriage or civil 
partnership should be conducted by the investigation officer for the purpose of 
establishing whether it is a sham, including: 


 

 The methods of investigation that can be used.  


 

 The time periods relevant to the conduct of the investigation.  


 

 The procedures and safeguards applicable to each investigation method.  


 

The investigation will focus on the genuineness of the relevant parties’ relationship 
and on determining whether the proposed marriage or civil partnership is a sham. It 
will often involve the relevant parties being required to make an initial contact with 
the Home Office, to arrange an interview and/or provide further information or 
evidence. The requirements with which the relevant parties will be asked to comply 
will be geared by the investigation officer so as to:  


 

 Enable them to conduct the investigation, and enable a decision whether the 
relevant parties have complied with it, in good time for the Home Office to give 
the relevant parties and the relevant registration official notice of that decision 
before the end of the 70-day period.   


 

 Prevent a relevant party or parties from frustrating the investigation process 
by withholding compliance until near the end of the 70-day notice period, 
thereby making it difficult for the Home Office to properly decide the 

                                            


12

 http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/397 

http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/397




March 2015 


 14  

compliance question and give notice of the decision to the relevant parties 
and the relevant registration official before the end of the 70-day period. 


 

3.1 Purpose of investigation 


 

The purpose of the investigation is to determine whether, on the balance of 
probabilities, the proposed marriage or civil partnership is a sham.  


 

The investigation officer should undertake a focused investigation to obtain 
information and evidence relevant to assessing the genuineness of the couple’s 
relationship and determining whether the proposed marriage or civil partnership is a 
sham.  


 

Where the investigation determines that the proposed marriage or civil partnership is 
a sham, the Home Office may where appropriate:  


 

 Take an enforcement decision (e.g. curtailment, removal) against the non-
EEA or EEA national(s) involved.  


 

 Refuse any application under the Immigration (European Economic Area) 
Regulations 2006 or the Immigration Rules which is based on the relationship 
in terms which will withstand any appeal.   


 

 Seek the prosecution of those involved in a criminal offence, e.g. perjury or 
facilitation of illegal immigration, by consultation with or reference to the 
relevant prosecuting authority.  


 

Whether or not the investigation determines that the proposed marriage or civil 
partnership is a sham, the Home Office may take appropriate removal action against 
immigration overstayers or illegal entrants identified under the referral and 
investigation scheme.   


 

3.2 Means of investigation 


 

An investigation into a proposed marriage or civil partnership may involve imposing 
one or more of the following requirement(s) on one or both of the relevant parties: 


 

 To provide information, evidence or photographs. 


 

 To be interviewed in person at home. 


 

 To be interviewed in person at Home Office premises in or outside the UK or 
while detained in the UK.  


 

 To be interviewed by telephone, video-link or over the internet.  


 

The most appropriate means of investigation will be considered by the investigation 
officer on a case-by-case basis, taking account of all the relevant information and 




March 2015 


 15  

evidence already available to them about the relevant parties and their proposed 
marriage or civil partnership.   


 

3.3 Providing information, evidence or photographs   


 

One or both parties to the proposed marriage or civil partnership may be required by 
the investigation officer to provide them with information, evidence or photographs 
relevant to determining whether the parties’ relationship is genuine and whether the 
proposed marriage or civil partnership is a sham.  


 

A relevant party may be required to provide information, evidence or photographs 
before, during or after an interview. A requirement to provide information, evidence 
or photographs may also be imposed whether or not an interview is to take place or 
has taken place.  


 

Unless it is made at an interview, a requirement to provide information must be made 
in writing. A requirement to provide evidence or photographs must be imposed, or 
where it is made at an interview, must be followed up, in writing. The investigation 
officer may discuss the information, evidence or photographs to be provided with the 
relevant party or parties before requiring them to provide it.  


 

Where a requirement to provide information, evidence or photographs is imposed or 
followed up in writing, the investigation officer must: 


 

 Include a description of the information, evidence or photographs that must be 
provided.  


 

 Set out how the information, evidence or photographs must be provided, 
whether by sending the information, evidence or photographs to the 
investigation officer (e.g. by post or email to a particular address) by a 
particular date, or by providing the information, evidence or photographs at an 
interview.  


 

 Where the information, evidence or photographs is or are to be sent to the 
investigation officer, include the address to which the information, evidence or 
photographs must be sent and the date by which the information, evidence or 
photographs must be received.  


 

 Where the evidence is in the form of a document, set out the circumstances in 
which a certified translation must also be provided and in which a certified 
copy may be provided.  


 

A “certified translation” means a translation of the document provided which is 
certified as a true and accurate translation by the person who translated it; is signed 
and dated by that person; and states his or her name and contact details.  


 

A “certified copy” means a copy of the original document which is certified as a true 
copy of the original; is signed and dated by the person who certifies it; and states 
that person’s name, contact details and position or occupation. A document may not 




March 2015 


 16  

be certified by either party to the proposed marriage or civil partnership, or by a 
person who is a family member of or who lives with either party.  


 

Either party to the proposed marriage or civil partnership may be required to provide 
evidence in the form of an electronic document by showing it, during an interview, to 
the investigation officer, who may make a note of its contents in the interview record; 
photograph it; request a “screenshot” of the document; or where it is an email (or 
included in an email), by forwarding it to a Home Office or FCO email account.  


 

3.4 Interviews: general 


 

As part of an investigation the investigation officer may require a relevant party to be 
interviewed, on their own, together with the other relevant party, or both. 

Where a relevant party is in the UK, the investigation officer may require an interview 
with them to take place: 


 

 In person at the relevant party’s home.  


 

 In person at the other relevant party’s home (if different).  


 

 In person at Home Office premises.   


 

 By telephone, by video-telecommunications link or over the internet (where 
the relevant party must be present at Home Office premises).  


 

 By telephone, by video-telecommunications link or over the internet (where 
the relevant party is not present at Home Office premises).  


 

 In person or by telephone where the relevant party is detained under 
immigration powers or in prison.  


 

Where a relevant party is outside the UK, the investigation officer may require an 
interview with them to take place: 


 

 In person at Home Office premises.  


 

 By telephone, by video-telecommunications link or over the internet (where 
the relevant party must be present at Home Office premises).  


 

 By telephone, by video-telecommunications link or over the internet (where 
the relevant party is not present at Home Office premises). 


 

A relevant party may be required to attend more than one interview. 


 

An interview must take place during normal office hours, unless: 

 A relevant party (or, as the case may be, both relevant parties) agrees that an 
interview may take place outside normal office hours. 


 


March 2015 


 17  

 An interview is commenced and has been substantially completed during 
normal office hours: it may then continue and be completed outside normal 
office hours. 


 

“Normal office hours” are: 


 

 In the UK, between 9.00 am and 6.00 pm, Monday to Friday, excluding Good 
Friday, Christmas Day or a bank holiday in the part of the UK in which the 
relevant party resides.  


 

 Outside the UK, what are normally regarded as normal office hours on a day 
which is normally regarded as a working day in the country or territory in 
which the relevant party resides. 


 

A relevant party:  


 

 May be accompanied at an interview by an appropriate legal representative, 
i.e. a qualified person within the meaning of section 82 of the Immigration and 
Asylum Act 1999 – see the website of the Office of the Immigration Services 
Commissioner for more information at http://home.oisc.gov.uk  


 

 May be accompanied at an interview by an interpreter (appointed by the 
relevant party if they wish or provided by the Home Office where necessary). 
If the relevant party is to be accompanied by an interpreter, the relevant party 
should inform the Home Office of this before the interview.  


 

 May not be accompanied at an interview by any other person without the 
consent of the investigation officer. 


 

Interviews must be conducted in a properly probing, but balanced way, with the 
questions directed to establishing whether the relevant parties are in a genuine 
relationship and whether their proposed marriage or civil partnership is a sham. For 
example, the relevant party or parties might be asked about: 


 

 The background to, history of and subsistence of the parties’ relationship.  

 The general background and the immigration history of the parties.  

 The living arrangements of the parties.  

 The arrangements for the proposed marriage or civil partnership.  

 The parties’ future plans.  

A failure to respond to any question asked during an interview, or a refusal to answer 
any further questions thereby bringing the interview to an end, may be regarded as a 
failure to comply with the requirement to be interviewed. 


 

The person conducting the interview will make a written record of it and will provide 
the party or parties interviewed with a copy of this record if they request it. This record: 


 

http://home.oisc.gov.uk/




March 2015 


 18  

 Must be completed during the interview.  


 

 Must constitute a verbatim account of what is said or an account of the 
interview which adequately summarises it.  


 

 Must be signed and dated by the person who made it. 


 

3.5 Arranging an interview 


 

A relevant party may be required to contact the Home Office to arrange an interview.  


 

A relevant party may be required to contact the Home Office by: 


 

 Telephoning the telephone number;  

 Sending a text message to the telephone number; 

 Sending an email to the Home Office or FCO email address; or 

 Writing to the address, 

specified in the section 48 notice or in any subsequent notification, and quoting the 
Home Office reference number given in the notice or notification.  

A relevant party may be required to contact the Home Office by a specified date, 
which must be at least three working days after the day on which the notice or the 
notification is given.  


 

The “day on which the notice or the notification is given” means the day on which the 
relevant party is presumed to have received it (unless the contrary is proved), under 
paragraph 7 of the Proposed Marriages and Civil Partnerships (Meaning of Exempt 
Persons and Notice) Regulations 2015 (S.I. 2015/122)


13

 or paragraph 6 of the Sham 

Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland and Northern Ireland) (Administrative) 
Regulations 2015 (S.I. 2015/404).


14

 For example, this is: 


 

 The second working day after the day on which it was posted, where the 
notice or notification is sent by first class post.  


 

 The day on which it is sent, where the notice or notification is given by email.  


 

 The day on which it is given, where the notice or notification is given orally.  


 

 A relevant party who contacts the Home Office in accordance with such a 
requirement:  


 

                                            


13

 http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/122 


14

 http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/404 

http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/122
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/404




March 2015 


 19  

 Must make themselves reasonably available so that a date and time, being a 
date no later than the date specified in the section 48 notice or in the 
notification, can be agreed for an interview to take place. 


 

 May be required to agree the date and time for the interview, so far as 
practicable, on behalf of the other relevant party, where an interview is to take 
place with both relevant parties.  


 

Every reasonable effort must be made to accommodate the preferred availability for 
interview of the party or parties. However, a party or parties subject to a requirement 
to be interviewed are required to make themselves reasonably available for 
interview. If it is not possible to accommodate the preferred availability for interview 
of the party or parties, the investigation officer may set an alternative date, place and 
time for the interview and inform the party or parties that, if they fail to attend, the 
Home Office may decide that they have failed to comply with the requirement to be 
interviewed. If the party or parties inform the Home Office of their inability or 
unwillingness to attend an interview at any of the dates, places and times proposed 
to them, the investigation officer may inform them that the Home Office may decide 
that they have failed to comply with the requirement to be interviewed. 


 

The relevant party or parties must be given at least 3 working days’ written notice by 
the Home Office of the date, place and time of the interview, unless the relevant 
party or parties agree to the interview taking place with less than 3 working days’ 
notice. If they do, notice of the date, place and time of the interview can be given 
orally, e.g. by telephone.  


 

3.6 Rearranging an interview 

Where a relevant party is required to attend an interview and the date or time for that 
interview is not, or is no longer, convenient for the relevant party or, where relevant, 
the other relevant party, the Home Office may agree to rearrange the interview. 

The investigation officer must accommodate, where possible, what they consider to 
be a reasonable request to rearrange an interview. However, a party or parties 
subject to a requirement to be interviewed are required to make themselves 
reasonably available for interview. If it is not possible to accommodate the preferred 
availability for interview of the party or parties, the investigation officer may set an 
alternative date and time for the rearranged interview and inform the party or parties 
that, if they fail to attend, the Home Office may decide that they have failed to comply 
with the requirement to be interviewed. 

Where the Home Office agrees to rearrange an interview, the relevant party or 
parties may be given less than 3 working days’ written notice of the rearranged 
interview, but not less than 24 hours’ notice unless the relevant party or parties 
agree to a rearranged interview taking place with less than 24 hours’ notice. 

The Home Office will not normally agree to rearrange an interview more than once.  


   


March 2015 


 20  

3.7 Interviews at a relevant party’s home 


 

For an interview to be conducted at a relevant party’s home, two members of Home 
Office staff must be present.   


 

During the interview they may make observations about, and ask the relevant party or 
parties about, the living arrangements of either or both of them, and they may ask to 
see evidence that the parties live together if they claim to do so.  


 

The Home Office staff conducting the interview must make a written record (signed 
and dated by the person who made it) of those observations, of any response to them 
given by relevant party or parties, and of any evidence provided that the parties live 
together. The relevant party or parties must be provided with a copy of this record if 
they request it.  


 

This written record is in addition to that which must be made of the interview itself, a 
copy of which must be provided to the relevant party or parties if they request it (see 
section 3.4).  


 

3.8 Interviews at Home Office premises in the UK 


 

Where a relevant party is required to attend an interview at Home Office premises in 
the UK, the notice of the interview (see section 3.5) must make clear how the 
interview is to be conducted – whether in person, by telephone, by video-
telecommunications link or over the internet, and whether it is to involve the other 
relevant party. 


 

3.9 Interviews at Home Office premises outside the UK 


 

A relevant party may be required to attend an interview at Home Office premises 
outside the UK where they are resident outside the UK and those Home Office 
premises are located within a reasonable travelling distance of their place of 
residence (whether or not they are in the same country or territory). 


 

Where a relevant party is required to attend an interview at Home Office premises 
outside the UK, the notice of the interview (see section 3.5) must make clear how the 
interview is to be conducted – whether in person, by telephone, by video-
telecommunications link or over the internet, and whether it is to involve the other 
relevant party. 


   


March 2015 


 21  

3.10 Interviews by telephone, by video-telecommunications 
link or over the internet where the relevant party is not at 
Home Office premises 


 

Where a relevant party (whether in or outside the UK) is required to attend an 
interview to be conducted by telephone, by video-telecommunications link or over 
the internet but is not required to be present at Home Office premises, the notice of 
the interview (see section 3.5) must make clear how the interview is to be conducted 
– whether by telephone, by video-telecommunications link or over the internet, and 
whether it is to involve the other relevant party. 


 

To start an interview to be conducted by telephone, the investigation officer 
conducting the interview:  


 

 Must telephone the relevant party on the number notified to that party which 
they have provided to the Home Office.  


 

 May telephone the relevant party at any time within a period of 30 minutes 
beginning with the time notified to them. The relevant party must, as far as 
practicable, keep the relevant telephone line free during this period and then 
during the period of the interview. A failure to do so may be regarded as a 
failure to comply with the requirement to be interviewed.  


 

At the start of a telephone interview: 


 

 The investigation officer conducting the interview must identify themselves 
(and anyone accompanying them) by reference to their name, position and 
place of work.  


 

 The relevant party or parties must confirm their identity by reference to their 
name, date of birth and nationality and to the Home Office reference number 
notified to them. If they do not do so, the investigation officer conducting the 
interview may decide to continue with the interview if they are otherwise 
satisfied that it is the relevant party or parties; to rearrange the interview; or 
that the relevant party or parties have failed to comply with the requirement to 
be interviewed.   


 

3.11 Interviews while detained 


 

A relevant party in the UK may be required to attend an interview conducted in 
person or by telephone while they are detained under immigration powers or in 
prison. The investigation officer should make the arrangements for such an interview 
with the immigration removal centre or prison via the relevant local Immigration 
Enforcement office. Conducting such an interview should not be a reason to delay 
the relevant party’s planned removal from the UK.  


 

March 2015 


 22  

The notice of the interview (see section 3.5) must make clear how the interview is to 
be conducted – whether in person or by telephone. An interview with a relevant party 
who is detained cannot also involve the other relevant party.  


 

At the start of a telephone interview with a relevant party who is detained: 


 

 The investigation officer conducting the interview must identify themselves 
(and anyone accompanying them) by reference to their name, position and 
place of work.  


 

 The relevant party must confirm their identity by reference to their name, date 
of birth and nationality and to the Home Office reference number notified to 
them. If they do not do so, the investigation officer conducting the interview 
may decide to continue with the interview if they are otherwise satisfied that it 
is the relevant party; to rearrange the interview; or that the relevant party has 
failed to comply with the requirement to be interviewed.   


 

3.12 Notifying a relevant party that they have failed to 
comply with a requirement 

Under regulation 15 of the Proposed Marriages and Civil Partnerships (Conduct of 
Investigations, etc) Regulations 2015 (S.I. 2015/397),


15

 where the Secretary of State 

believes that a relevant party has failed to comply with a requirement of the 
investigation, the Secretary of State may give notice in writing to the relevant party: 


 

 Stating that the Secretary of State believes that the relevant party has failed to 
comply with a requirement and giving the reasons for that belief.   


 

 Requiring the relevant party to contact the Home Office within the period 
stated (which may not be less than a period of three working days beginning 
with the day on which the notice is given) with a view to complying with that 
(and any other) requirement.  


 

 Including relevant Home Office contact details. The notice may require the 
relevant party to make contact by telephone.  


 

The Secretary of State is not required to give such a “regulation 15 notice” to a 
relevant party who they believe has failed to comply with a requirement of the 
investigation, and it is not necessary for a relevant party to have been given such a 
notice before the decision maker can decide whether they have complied with the 
investigation. The onus is on the relevant party to comply with the requirements set 
out in the section 48 notice or any subsequent notification to them.  


 

It is a matter for the investigation officer to determine whether it is appropriate to 
issue a relevant party with a regulation 15 notice to assist the investigation officer’s 
conduct of the investigation and to inform the decision whether the relevant party has 
complied with the investigation.  

                                            


15

 http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/397 

http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/397




March 2015 


 23  

Section 4.0 – Compliance with an investigation 


 

Where a proposed marriage or civil partnership is subject to an investigation, under 
section 50(4) and (7) of the 2014 Act the Secretary of State must, within the 70-day 
notice period, decide whether or not each of the relevant parties has complied with 
the investigation (the “compliance question”) and give notice of that decision to both 
parties and to the registration official to whom the section 48 notice was given of the 
decision to investigate. 


 

For the proposed marriage or civil partnership to take place after the 70-day notice 
period, the Secretary of State must decide that both relevant parties have complied 
with the investigation. If the decision maker decides that either or both of the relevant 
parties have failed without reasonable excuse to comply with a requirement(s) 
notified to them, the decision maker may decide that either or both of the relevant 
parties have failed to comply with the investigation. If the decision maker so decides, 
the relevant parties will not be able to marry or enter into a civil partnership on the 
basis of the notice they have given. They would need to give notice again if they still 
wished to do so. 


 

In determining whether both relevant parties have complied with the investigation, 
the decision maker must take account of all the relevant information and evidence 
available to them, including the written record of any interview; any written notice 
requiring the parties to attend an interview (or arrange to do so) or to provide 
information, evidence or photographs and their response; and any report of the 
investigation by the investigation officer (if they are not the decision maker).  


 

4.1 Deciding the compliance question 


 

The decision maker may decide that a relevant party who fails, without reasonable 
excuse, to comply with a relevant requirement has not complied with the 
investigation. 


 

Under section 50(11) of the 2014 Act, a “relevant requirement” includes:  


 

 A requirement specified in the Proposed Marriages and Civil Partnerships 
(Conduct of Investigations, etc) Regulations 2015 (S.I. 2015/397).


16

 That 

means a requirement to arrange an interview; to attend an interview and be 
interviewed; to provide confirmation of identity at the start of a telephone 
interview; and to provide information, evidence or photographs. 


 

 The requirement to notify the Home Office of any change in the usual address 
of either party and to provide specified evidence of this.  


 

 For persons giving notice in England and Wales, the requirement to notify the 
Home Office of any change in the UK contact address of either party if they 
have provided one, and to notify the Home Office of a UK contact address if 
the usual address of either party changes to an address outside the UK.  

                                            


16

 http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/397 

http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/397




March 2015 


 24   

The decision maker may also decide that a relevant party who fails, without 
reasonable excuse, to contact the Home Office following receipt of a notice given 
under regulation 15 of the Proposed Marriages and Civil Partnerships (Conduct of 
Investigations, etc) Regulations 2015 has not complied with the investigation (see 
section 3.12). 


 

Where a relevant party is removed or deported from the UK, or leaves the UK by 
voluntary departure or under a relevant international project, after they have been 
given a section 48 notice but before the compliance question has been decided, the 
decision maker may decide that the relevant party (and the other relevant party) has 
complied with the investigation.  


 

4.2 Reasonable excuse for non-compliance 


 

The decision maker must decide, in the light of all the circumstances of the case and 
all the relevant information and guidance available to them, whether any reason or 
excuse given by either or both of the relevant parties for the failure by either or both 
of them to comply with a requirement notified to them constitutes a “reasonable 
excuse” for that non-compliance.  


 

Such a reasonable excuse may exist for example where: 


 

 There are compelling, compassionate reasons for failing to comply with the 
requirement. 


 

 There are reasons beyond the control of the relevant parties which prevented 
them from complying with the requirement.  


 

 There has been administrative failure by the Home Office.   


 

4.3 The compliance decision 


 

Where the decision maker decides that both relevant parties have complied with the 
investigation, the decision maker must give notice of that decision to both relevant 
parties and the relevant registration official before the end of the 70-day notice 
period. If there is no legal reason why they may not do so, the registration official will 
be able, after the end of this period, to issue the relevant parties with the certificates 
or schedule that will enable them to marry or form a civil partnership.  


 

Where the decision maker decides that one or both of the relevant parties have not 
complied with the investigation, they must give notice of that decision to both 
relevant parties and the relevant registration official before the end of the 70-day 
notice period. That notice must include a statement of the decision maker’s reasons 
for reaching that decision. A decision that one or both of the relevant parties have 
not complied with the investigation will be made by a Higher Executive Officer (or 
equivalent) or more senior grade.    


   

March 2015 


 25  

How notice of the compliance decision may be given and when such notice is 
presumed to have been received (unless the contrary is proved) is specified:  


 

 For persons giving notice in England and Wales, by paragraphs 5 to 7 of the 
Proposed Marriages and Civil Partnerships (Meaning of Exempt Persons and 
Notice) Regulations 2015 (S.I. 2015/122)


17

; and  


 

 For persons giving notice in Scotland or Northern Ireland, by paragraphs 4 to 
6 of the Sham Marriage and Civil Partnership (Scotland and Northern Ireland) 
(Administrative) Regulations 2015 (S.I. 2015/404).


18                                      END 


                                            


17

 http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/122 


18

 http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/404 

http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/122
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/uksi/2015/404

