



Supporting Young People from Care to Independence


    

Keep On Caring 
Supporting Young People from Care to 
Independence 

July 2016 




Contents 
Ministerial Foreword 4 

SUMMARY 6 

1 INTRODUCTION 9 

A Brief History of Leaving Care Support 9 

Our Vision 10 

Developing new ways of supporting care leavers 11 

Making corporate parenting everyone’s responsibility 11 

Driving system improvement 12 

What are we trying to achieve? 12 

How well is the system working at present? 13 

A changing cohort 14 

Care leavers’ outcomes 14 

Ofsted judgements on the quality of leaving care services 16 

Feedback from care leavers 17 

Developing the Strategy 19 

2. INNOVATION AND SYSTEM REFORM 20 

Providing More Practical and Emotional Support 21 

Delivering Services Differently 23 

Providing a stronger offer for those leaving residential care 24 

Empowering Care Leavers to Provide and Design Services for Themselves 25 

Preparing care leavers for the challenges of living independently 26 

Supporting care leavers who are young parents 26 

3. EMBEDDING A CULTURE OF CORPORATE PARENTING 27 

Outcome 1: Better prepared and supported to live independently 27 

Corporate Parenting Principles 28 

Care Leaver Covenant 28 

Care Leaver Local Offer 29 

Extending support from a Personal Adviser to all care leavers to age 25 30 

Outcome 2: Improved access to education, training and employment 30 

Work-based Learning 31 


2  

Further Education 32 

Higher Education 34 

Employment 34 

Outcome 3: Experiencing stability and feeling safe and secure 36 

A safe and stable place to live 36 

Staying Put 37 

Staying Close 38 

Preventing homelessness 38 

Keeping care leavers safe from harm 39 

Supporting care leavers in the criminal justice system 41 

Supporting refugee and other foreign national care leavers 42 

Outcome 4: Improved Access to Health Support 43 

Mental Health 43 

Wider health issues 45 

Outcome 5: Achieving Financial Stability 46 

Financial Support 47 

Housing Costs 47 

Advice and guidance 48 

4. DRIVING SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT 50 

Promoting and Sharing Best Practice 50 

Supporting and Challenging Local Authorities 50 

Intervening in failure 51 

5. HOW WE WILL MEASURE PROGRESS 52 

Outcome Data 52 

Ofsted Judgements 52 

The Voice of the Care Leaver 52 

Reviewing Progress 53 


 3  

Ministerial Foreword 
A good corporate parent should have the same aspirations for a child in care or care 
leaver as a good parent would have for their own child.  It means providing them with the 
stability and support they need to make progress; and helping them to access new 
opportunities and experiences that inspire them to set ambitious goals for themselves.  It 
means celebrating their successes, but also recognising that they will sometimes make 
mistakes and need help to get back on track.  It also means supporting them to gain the 
skills and confidence to live independent lives, while letting them know that they have 
someone to call on for help if the going gets tough.  

Earlier this week, the Secretary of State and I published our strategy for supporting all of 
our most vulnerable children and young people – ‘Putting Children First’. This strategy 
sets out specifically and in more depth what it means to put care leavers first. 

I know, from my own family, that care leavers will have faced many challenges in their 
lives and are likely to need much more support than other young people as they make 
the transition to adulthood.  Yet, in most cases, care leavers are not only making that 
transition at a much younger age than their peers, but they also typically get far less 
support from their corporate parent than other young people get from their birth parents.  
That is why I am determined to ensure that the state and wider society play a much 
stronger and more active role in improving care leavers’ life chances.  For me, it’s the 
hallmark of a compassionate society, something our country has in bucket-loads. 

This strategy calls for a revolution in the way that we think about supporting young 
people coming out of care.  It asks local and central government to up their game as 
corporate parents, using the level of support that we expect a reasonable parent to 
provide for their child as the benchmark for how they should approach their role.  And it 
provides a call to arms for wider society to better support care leavers, through 
engagement with the ‘care leaver covenant’ that we plan to launch later this year. 

It identifies three key ways in which we will drive improvements in leaving care services:   

Firstly, it sets out how we will use the Innovation Programme to rethink how services are 
delivered and what support is provided, with a strong focus on finding new and better 
ways of helping care leavers develop the social networks that will sustain them not just in 
the years immediately after leaving care, but throughout their lives.  We will also support 
new ways of delivering services, for example through Trusts, which have a clear and 
specific focus on improving care leavers’ life chances. 

Secondly, it sets out how we will strengthen the culture of corporate parenting, both 
locally – through our planned legislative measures – and through changes to central 
government policies, so that they better respond to care leavers’ unique status and 
circumstances.  


4  

And finally, it sets out how we will support and challenge local areas, so that all deliver to 
the standards of the best. 

By delivering the commitments outlined in this document, and applying the same reform 
principles and methods to care leavers that we are for the rest of children’s social care, 
we can begin to drive the necessary improvements to the quality of support received by 
young people leaving care.  But this does not mark the end of our ambition.  We will 
continue to work across government during the remainder of this Parliament to make the 
life chances of care leavers something to celebrate, not denounce.  If we keep on caring 
we can, together, give them the optimism and the future they deserve. 


   

Edward Timpson 
Minister of State for Children & Families 


  5  

SUMMARY 
The government is passionate about improving the lives and life chances of care leavers.  
Young people leaving care constitute one of the most vulnerable groups in our society, 
and both government and wider society have a moral obligation to give them the support 
they need as they make the transition to adulthood and independent living. 

There has been much good work done over the past few years to improve that support, 
including the actions set out in the first cross-government care leaver strategy published 
in 20131, and the introduction of the Staying Put duty in 2014, which is already helping 
many care leavers to continue living with their former foster carers beyond age 18. 

However, outcomes for care leavers remain much worse than for their counterparts in the 
general population and the quality of leaving care services provided by local authorities 
remains variable. The care leaver cohort is also changing, as more children enter care at 
age 16 and over, and with more unaccompanied asylum seeking children (UASC) 
entering the care system.  These changes present new challenges for service providers.   

This document sets out a vision for the further reform of support for care leavers based 
on innovation, system reform, and the embedding of corporate parenting responsibility 
across society. 

The strategy makes a commitment that the government will use the Children’s Social 
Care Innovation Programme to rethink transitions to adulthood for young people in the 
children’s social care system, with a focus on developing new ways to provide care 
leavers with the personal support networks they need to thrive; piloting ‘Staying Close’ – 
a variant of Staying Put for those leaving residential care; and testing out alternative 
models of delivery for leaving care services through the use of Trusts, Mutuals and other 
arrangements.  It gives a clear commitment to test payment-by-results approaches, and 
commits the government to create the first care leaver-specific Social Impact Bond.  And 
it also provides a commitment to support and test approaches that empower care leavers 
to have a greater say in the design and delivery of services. 

The document goes on to identify and describe how the State, as corporate parents, will 
support care leavers to achieve 5 key outcomes. 


   


1 Care Leaver Strategy, A cross-departmental strategy for children leaving care, 2013 


6  

                                            


 

https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/266484/Care_Leaver_Strategy.pdf




The first of these is that all young people leaving care should be better prepared and 
supported to live independently.  The actions that we will undertake in order to achieve 
this include: 

• setting out in law for the first time what it means for a local authority to be a good 
corporate parent; 

• creating a new care leaver covenant; 
• introducing a new legal duty on local authorities to consult on, and publish 

information about, services for care leavers; and 
• extending existing entitlements so that all care leavers will be able to access 

support from a local authority Personal Adviser to age 25. 

The second key outcome is improved access to education, employment and training.  In 
order to achieve this the government will: 

• promote the take up of supported internships, including through the provision of 
targeted information to Personal Advisers; 

• meet the training costs for care leavers undertaking apprenticeships up to age 25; 
• support care leavers’ access to, and achievement in, further and higher education, 

employment and apprenticeships; 
• guarantee a place on the National Citizen Service to every child in care or care 

leaver aged 16 or 17; and 
• consider how best to improve access for care leavers to employment opportunities 

in government departments and their agencies. 

The third key outcome is that care leavers should experience stability in their lives, and 
feel safe and secure.  We will help to achieve this by: 

• committing to introduce ‘Staying Close’ provision for young people leaving 
residential care; 

• continuing to fund local authorities to support Staying Put arrangements; 
• providing support for the implementation of the Supported Accommdation 

Framework; 
• raising awareness of care leavers’ unique status and their entitlements among 

prison and probation staff through the provision of additional training; and 
• increasing the funding local authorities will receive for supporting former 

unaccompanied asylum seeking children.  


   7  

The fourth key outcome is improved access to health support.  In order to achieve this we 
will: 

• through a new Expert Group, produce care pathways, quality standards and 
models of care for looked after children and care leavers with mental health 
problems; 

• use the new Mental Health Services Data Set to inform the future delivery of 
services to care leavers; and 

• improve accountability regarding the local provision of health services, for example 
through Care Quality Commission and Joint Targeted Area inspections.  

The fifth and final key outcome that we wish to promote through this strategy is that care 
leavers should achieve financial stability.  We will help them to do this by: 

• exempting care leavers from changes to eligibility for housing support for 18-21 
year-olds in Universal Credit; 

• reviewing the case to extend the exemption to the Shared Accommodation Rate of 
housing support within Universal Credit, for care leavers to age 25; and 

• ensuring, through our review of the Personal Adviser role, that care leavers are 
able to access advice and support to help them manage their money. 

In addition to identifying and implementing specific measures to improve outcomes for 
care leavers, this strategy makes it clear that the government has a significant role to 
play in driving reform and improvement.  Partly, this will involve promoting and sharing 
best practice, through the creation of the new Children’s Social Care What Works Centre, 
and our work with the ‘Partners in Practice’ group of local authorities.  We will also 
continue to support and challenge local authorities and, where failure is found and 
services are found to be inadequate, we will intervene.  

Finally, it is important that we should have effective means of measuring the impact of 
actions that we will be undertaking through this strategy.  The Department for Education 
(DfE) will continue to publish care leaver outcome data annually and, for the year ending 
March 2016, will also publish data for 17 and 18 year-old care leavers for the first time.  
Work will also be undertaken to explore how data can be shared more effectively 
between relevant government departments.  To ensure that care leavers’ voices are 
heard more powerfully in the formulation of government policy, a new national care 
leaver advisory group will be created and facilitated by the DfE.  And to ensure that the 
implementation of this strategy is managed effectively, a senior group of Whitehall 
officials will meet twice yearly to review progress and goals. 


  8  

1 INTRODUCTION 

A Brief History of Leaving Care Support 
1.1 Before the Leaving Care Act (2000) 2, there was no statutory framework in place 

for care leavers, with each local authority determining what level of support it 
provided.  With no nationally-set expectation about what was an adequate level of 
support, many care leavers received only minimal assistance.  The 2000 Act 
introduced, for the first time, requirements on local authorities to: assess the 
needs of the young person once they left care; appoint a Personal Adviser for 
them; and develop a pathway plan.  This support was available to care leavers up 
to age 18, or to age 21 if the young person was in education. 

1.2 In 2008, the Children and Young Persons Act3 introduced provisions that required 
local authorities to provide assistance to care leavers in education (including a 
£2,000 bursary for those in higher education); and extended support from a 
Personal Adviser to age 21 for all care leavers; and to 25 if they remained in 
education. 

1.3. During the last Parliament, there were three further key developments to improve 
the quality of support that care leavers receive: 

• The first cross-government care leaver strategy was published in 20134.  It 
recognised the need to work coherently across government to address care 
leavers’ needs in the round; and introduced a number of changes to policies and 
practices so that care leavers were better supported.  These included measures to 
better identify care leavers so that they could receive tailored support.  For 
example, Jobcentre Plus introduced a ‘marker’ so that care leavers could be 
identified and offered additional help, such as access to the Work Programme 
from day one of unemployment; 


 

• The 2014 Children & Families Act5 introduced the ‘Staying Put’ duty.  This requires 

local authorities to support young people to remain with their former foster carers 
to age 21 where both the young person and carer want the arrangement to 
continue – allowing those young people to enjoy continuity in their care 
arrangements and a more gradual transition to adulthood; and 


 

2 Children (Leaving Care) Act, 2000 
3 Children and Young Persons Act, 2008 
4 Care Leaver Strategy – A cross-departmental strategy for children leaving care, 2013 
5 Children and Families Act, 2014 


9  

                                            


 

http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2000/35/section/2
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2008/23/contents
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/266484/Care_Leaver_Strategy.pdf
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2014/6/contents/enacted




• The introduction of a new inspection framework for children’s social care in 20146, 
which for the first time had a specific judgement on the quality of leaving care 
support. 


 

Our Vision 

1.4 We are determined to bring about the widest reaching reforms to children’s social 
care in a generation.  We want a system staffed and led by the best trained 
professionals; dynamic and free to innovate in the interests of children; with less 
bureaucracy; new checks and balances designed to hold the system to account in 
the right ways; and new ways to intervene where services consistently fail some of 
the most vulnerable in our society.  Our strategy – Putting Children First – 
published on 4 July 2016, sets out how we will achieve this. 


 

1.5 The best children’s social care services in England deliver truly excellent help and 

support to children and young people.  These services do not just improve their 
circumstances; they transform them completely. But whilst there is much excellent 
practice out there, evidence from Ofsted inspections points to continued variability 
in the quality of work with children and young people.  


 

1.6 We do not underestimate the pressures that children’s social care faces: 

increased fiscal constraint; higher demand for services; and new threats to our 
children and young people as they become targets for radicalisation, child sexual 
exploitation or gang culture.  But we know that these challenges are far from 
insurmountable. Ofsted’s analysis shows that the pattern of inspection outcomes 
is not about how deprived an area is, or even the amount of money being spent on 
children’s social care – some of the lowest performers are in fact the highest 
spenders.  Ofsted’s inspections this year show that, regardless of context, 
providing outstanding services is possible, and ‘good’ is a standard that any local 
authority can achieve and maintain7.  


 

1.7 To support this innovation and drive for excellence, by 2020 we want to see a 

more diverse range of children’s social care organisations, operating over new 
geographical areas, supported by meaningful data and an inspection regime that 
supports high-quality evidence-based front line practice.  And crucially, the 
performance of these new organisations must be driven by challenging, sharp and 
practice-focused accountability.  Our most vulnerable children and young people 
deserve nothing less. 

6 Inspecting local authority children’s services: framework, 2014, Ofsted 
7 Ofsted Social Care Annual Report, 2016, Ofsted 


10  

                                            


 

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/inspecting-local-authority-childrens-services-framework
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/534008/Ofsted_social_care_annual_report_2016.pdf




1.8     This vision applies just as much to the services and support that we provide to 
young people leaving care as it does to other parts of the social care system.  The 
measures we introduced during the last Parliament have been important in driving 
up the quality of support that care leavers receive, but they have not resulted in 
the fundamental shift in care leavers’ life chances that we want to see.  To achieve 
that change, we believe that we need to focus on three key areas: 

• Developing new ways of supporting care leavers; 


 

• Making corporate parenting everyone’s responsibility; and  


 

• Driving system improvement. 

Developing new ways of supporting care leavers 

1.9 We do not believe that we can achieve the ‘step-change’ that is needed simply by 
providing more of the same.  That is why we want to stimulate new thinking about 
how we help care leavers to make successful transitions to adulthood – both in 
terms of how services are delivered, and what support is provided. 

1.10 We want to explore whether there are different models of delivery that can achieve 
better outcomes for care leavers.  We can see the potential benefits of, for 
example, local services for care leavers being delivered via a Care Leaver Trust – 
a new organisation with a culture and objectives entirely focused on care leavers.  
A Trust model could provide an environment where there is greater scope to 
innovate; and greater flexibility and responsiveness to the needs of their care 
leaver cohort.  Trusts could also operate across a bigger geographical area, 
providing a more consistent offer across neighbouring local authorities and result 
in more effective commissioning of services. 

1.11 We also want to explore different ways of helping care leavers to develop the 
social networks that will sustain them during their transition to adulthood and 
beyond.  Personal Advisers play an important role in helping care leavers to 
achieve their goals, but cannot always provide all the support that care leavers 
need.  In the next section of this document we set out a range of alternative 
models that provide new ways of meeting the practical and emotional needs of 
care leavers that we believe will provide greater continuity of support. 

Making corporate parenting everyone’s responsibility 

1.12 We know that there are many individuals and teams working in local authority 
leaving care services that are committed to supporting children in care and care 
leavers in a way that any other parent would.  In some local authorities, like 
Trafford, that commitment starts at the top of the organisation and permeates 
through all of its services.  But, in many other areas, there are examples of one 


11  

part of the council helping care leavers while another part of the organisation is 
acting in a way that undermines that work.  We will introduce a set of corporate 
parenting principles that will require all departments within a local authority to 
recognise their role as corporate parents, encouraging them to look at the services 
and support that they provide through the lens of what a reasonable parent would 
do to support their own children. 

1.13 We also want that corporate parenting responsibility to extend beyond what is 
provided by local authorities, so that government departments and their agencies, 
charities and private sector organisations play their part.  Later sections of this 
document set out examples of how policies of individual government departments 
have been adapted to recognise the challenges faced by care leavers.  And we 
will introduce a ‘care leaver covenant’ that will enable organisations to make 
commitments to care leavers in a way that is most appropriate for them. 

Driving system improvement 

1.14 As the spread of Ofsted judgements about leaving care services illustrates, there 
is significant variation in the quality of support that care leavers receive.  It is 
important that government takes an active role in highlighting best practice and 
sharing what works, as well as providing strong challenge where services are not 
good enough.  The final section of this document sets out how we will do this. 

What are we trying to achieve? 
1.15 To achieve our ambitions for care leavers, we need to use the three drivers of 

improvement listed above to make progress against five key issues that care 
leavers raised during our consultation events: 

• Not being adequately prepared or supported to deal with the challenges of living 
independently; 


 

• Barriers accessing education, employment and training; 


 

• Lack of stability, safety and security; 


 

• Difficulties in accessing the health support they need, in particular help to maintain 
their emotional health and well-being; and 


 

• Problems achieving financial stability8. 

8 Source: Between January and March 2016 DfE officials led a series of consultation events with care 
leavers.  See also page 17. 


12  

                                            


 


1.16 Many of these issues are inter-related.  Problems with money are often 
exacerbated by the fact that many care leavers are not in education, employment 
or training (NEET).  And the lack of a stable, safe place to live can impact 
negatively on a young person’s emotional health and put them at greater danger 
of a number of safeguarding risks, such as sexual exploitation or involvement with 
gangs.  This reinforces the need for a cross-government approach.  The measures 
that local authorities and government departments have agreed to take forward 
are set out below under the five key outcomes that we are seeking to achieve. 

1.17 As the following paragraphs illustrate, achieving those outcomes depends not just 
on what happens when young people leave care.  The quality of care they receive 
earlier in their lives is also crucial.  That is why, alongside this care leaver strategy, 
DfE has also published recently a wider children’s social care policy paper, setting 
out what we will do to transform the children’s social care sector9; as well as the 
report of Sir Martin Narey’s review of residential care10. 

How well is the system working at present? 
1.18 Making an overall assessment of the quality of support that care leavers receive is 

not straightforward.  In particular, it is challenging because of the significant 
variation in the quality of support provided at a local level – which is reflected in 
both the outcomes that care leavers achieve and in the spread of Ofsted 
judgements about leaving care services.   

1.19 Our consultations with care leavers also illustrated a wide range of personal 
experiences. For example, some care leavers reported that their Personal Adviser 
had been the key person who had helped them to successfully navigate the 
challenges of living independently, while for others, support from their Personal 
Adviser had been limited and ineffective11.  It is also challenging because the 
nature of the cohort is constantly changing, making the drawing of comparisons 
with care leavers’ outcomes in previous years less reliable. 

1.20 This next section provides an overview of the current position, drawing on: the 
information we have on the cohort (and how it is changing); the national outcome 
data that DfE publishes annually; Ofsted reports and judgements about the quality 

9 Putting children first – Delivering our vision for excellent children’s social care, Department for Education, 
2016 
10 Residential care in England, Report of Sir Martin Narey’s independent review of children’s residential 
care, Sir Martin Narey, 2016 
11 Source: Between January and March 2016 DfE officials led a series of consultation events with care 
leavers.  See also page 17. 


 13  

                                            


 

https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/534863/Children_s_Social_Care_Reform.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/534560/Residential-Care-in-England-Sir-Martin-Narey-July-2016.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/534560/Residential-Care-in-England-Sir-Martin-Narey-July-2016.pdf




of local delivery; and feedback from the care leavers we consulted on the strategy 
while it was being developed. 

A changing cohort 

1.21 Around 10,800 young people left care aged 16 or over in the year ending March 
2015, an increase of over 40% in the last decade.  There are an increasing 
number of young people who enter care aged 16 or over, accounting for 16% of all 
those who entered care in the year ending March 2015, compared to 12% in the 
year ending March 2011.  Changes to the law which require young people on 
remand to become looked after, along with the impact of the Southwark 
Judgement – which means that 16 and 17 year-olds who present as homeless 
also become looked after children – have both changed the nature of the cohort of 
care leavers that local authorities must support.  And local authorities are looking 
after increasing numbers of Unaccompanied Asylum Seeking Children (UASC) 
and supporting more care leavers who are former UASC12. 

Care leavers’ outcomes 

1.22 Care leavers’ outcomes are not determined solely by the quality of leaving care 
support that they receive – although this is clearly an important factor.  But Care 
leavers’ experiences before and during care are also important determinants of 
their outcomes, which means that comparisons between the outcomes of care 
leavers and other young people in the general population are of only limited value 
when making judgements about the quality and impact of the support that is 
provided when young people leave care. 

1.23 The lasting impact of the events and circumstances that led to a child being taken 
into care; the high incidence of Special Educational Needs (SEN) among care 
leavers (around 60% of children in care for 12 months have SEN, compared to 
15% of children in the general population)13 and emotional health problems 
(around half of children in care have a Strengths & Difficulties Questionnaire 
(SDQ) score that is borderline or cause for concern)14; the impact of placement 
moves while in care (including the resultant change in school that often occurs) – 
all contribute to low attainment, with only 14% of children in care achieving 5 good 

12 Statistics about the care leaver cohort taken from  the Department for Education’s Statistical First 
Release for children looked-after in England (including adoption) 2014-15 
13 Statistics about care leaver cohort taken from the Department of Education’s Statistical First Release 
Outcomes for children looked after by local authorities in England, 31 March 2015 
14 Statistics about care leaver cohort taken from the Department of Education’s Statistical First Release 
Outcomes for children looked after by local authorities in England, 31 March 2014 


14  

                                            


 

https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/children-looked-after-in-england-including-adoption-2014-to-2015
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/children-looked-after-in-england-including-adoption-2014-to-2015
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/509965/SFR11_2016_SFRText.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/509965/SFR11_2016_SFRText.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/384781/Outcomes_SFR49_2014_Text.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/384781/Outcomes_SFR49_2014_Text.pdf




GCSEs in 2015, compared to 53% of non-looked after children15.  Leaving school 
with few qualifications adversely affects care leavers’ progress into further or 
higher education, apprenticeships or skilled jobs. 

1.24 As well as these historical factors, care leavers also face the added challenge of 
having to cope with the demands of living on their own at a young age: having to 
manage finances, maintain a home and manage their lives independently, often 
without the support from families that most of us take for granted.  That is why it is 
incumbent on the state as the corporate parent to do as much as it can to give 
care leavers the support and opportunities they need to succeed.  While we 
cannot mitigate the impact of all of the disadvantages that care leavers have 
experienced, we can ensure that as a society we do as much as we can to help 
care leavers overcome them. 

1.25 Notwithstanding these points, the fact remains that the data on care leavers’ 
outcomes is stark and there has been limited improvement over time.  In the year 
ending March 2015, local authorities were ‘in touch’ with, and provided data to DfE 
on, 88% of care leavers.  This is an increase from 84% in the year ending March 
201416.  In many of the cases where no information was provided, this was 
because the care leaver had either refused contact, or had told the local authority 
that they no longer required support.  Nevertheless, the wide variation in local 
authority performance on keeping in touch indicates that more needs to be done to 
maintain contact with care leavers in some areas. 

1.26 In the year ending March 2015, 39% of 19-21 year-old care leavers were Not in 
Education, Employment or Training (NEET) – an increase of 1 percentage point 
compared to the previous year.  Of these, over a third were NEET due to either a 
disability, or because they were a young parent.  Six percent of 19-21 year-old 
care leavers were in Higher Education; and a further 18% were in other types of 
education.  Twenty-three per cent were in employment or training, an increase of 3 
percentage points on the previous year17. 

1.27 There is no national data that reports on care leavers’ longer term outcomes, but 
research consistently shows that care leavers are over-represented in studies on 
people in custody, homelessness and other negative outcomes18, although those 

15 Statistics about care leaver cohort taken from the Department of Education’s Statistical First Release 
Outcomes for children looked after by local authorities in England, 31 March 2015 
16 Statistics about the care leaver cohort taken from the Department for Education’s Statistical First 
Release for children looked-after in England (including adoption) 2014-15 
17 Statistics about the care leaver cohort taken from the Department for Education’s Statistical First 
Release for children looked-after in England (including adoption) 2014-15 
18 Department of Education, National Audit Office Care leavers’ transition to adulthood, July 2015 


15  

                                            


 

https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/509965/SFR11_2016_SFRText.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/509965/SFR11_2016_SFRText.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/children-looked-after-in-england-including-adoption-2014-to-2015
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/children-looked-after-in-england-including-adoption-2014-to-2015
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/children-looked-after-in-england-including-adoption-2014-to-2015
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/children-looked-after-in-england-including-adoption-2014-to-2015




studies normally include people of all ages and so are not focused on the current 
cohort of care leavers.   

Ofsted judgements on the quality of leaving care services 

         


      

1.28 The two tables above19 show the spread of Ofsted judgements for both the ‘care 
leaver sub-judgement’ and ‘overall effectiveness’ judgement from inspections 
Ofsted has conducted under its Single Inspection Framework.  They show that 
two-thirds of leaving care services, and three-quarters of overall effectiveness 
judgements were judged to either ‘require improvement’ or to be ‘inadequate’.  
Although more care leaving services (36%) were judged ‘good’ or ‘outstanding’ 
than social care services overall (25%), the picture as a whole shows that the 
quality of care leaving support that local authorities provide needs to improve 
significantly. 

1.29 The key messages from Ofsted inspection reports are that: 


 

• The quality of pathway planning for care leavers is not good enough in around 
two-thirds of local authorities inspected, with a lack of clear, specific actions to 
drive care leavers’ progress; 


 

• Not enough is done to raise awareness among care leavers of their entitlements; 


 

• In around half of local authorities inspected, not enough support was being 
provided to help care leavers to find and sustain education, training or 
employment; 


  

19 Data provided by Ofsted 


2%34%51%13%

care leavers' judgements 

Outstanding Good

Requires improvement Inadequate


2%23%50%25%

overall effectiveness 
judgements

Outstanding Good

Requires improvement Inadequate


16  

                                            


 


• In around a third of local authorities, care leavers did not have access to a suitable 
range of accommodation options; and 


 

• In too many local authorities, senior corporate parents did not consistently 
prioritise the needs of care leavers or have sufficiently high aspirations for them. 


 

1.30 There were also a number of positive themes reported by Ofsted and many cases 

of good practice in individual authorities, or on particular aspects of leaving care 
support.  In most local authorities care leavers themselves spoke positively about 
the support provided by Personal Advisers.  In the best performing authorities, 
effective partnerships with Housing Services were providing care leavers with a 
range of independent and semi-independent accommodation options to reflect 
their different levels of readiness for independent living.  And in the majority of 
recent inspections, Ofsted was identifying effective work being undertaken to 
improve local authorities’ performance on keeping in touch with their care leavers. 

1.31 Trafford and Kensington and Chelsea have shown that it is possible to provide 
outstanding support to care leavers.  Their work is characterised by tenacious 
planning for young people’s futures at all levels and across all key agencies. 
Young people particularly valued the caring and enduring relationships with 
Personal Advisers and from others that were responsible for their care and 
support.  Significantly, in these local authorities, there is a strong track record of 
effective and ambitious corporate parenting of looked after children and care 
leavers. 

Feedback from care leavers 

1.32 During our many conversations with care leavers, a number of consistent themes 
emerged: 

• Where they had developed a good relationship with an adult – a former foster 
carer, a member of staff at a residential home, an independent visitor or social 
worker – they wanted support to maintain those relationships once they left care, 
on an informal basis; 


 

• They wanted the professionals who support them to have high aspirations for 
them; and to encourage and support them to achieve their goals; 


 

• They reported that leaving care still felt like a ‘cliff-edge’, where they were 
suddenly responsible for managing budgets, running a home; and maintaining 
their participation in education or work on their own – with insufficient preparation 
for these challenges.  The introduction of Staying Put was seen by care leavers as 
a positive way of smoothing out the process of transition to adulthood and 
provided for continuity of relationships and care arrangements; 


17   

• As well as not having been given the necessary life skills before leaving care, they 

also felt that the process of leaving care itself was often rushed and that planning 
for leaving care should start earlier.  A number of care leavers wanted greater 
flexibility around the age of leaving care, to avoid their 18th birthday feeling like a 
‘point of no return’; 


 

• Care leavers said that they wanted more choice about where they lived and who 
supported them; and more information about the support that was available to 
them locally; and what they were entitled to from universal services such as 
Jobcentre Plus; 


 

• They said that there were times when their emotional health and well-being was 
not positive, but when that was the case they found it difficult to access the 
support they needed.  In particular, they found it difficult to access adult mental 
health services once they turned 18; 


 

• A minority of care leavers reported that they felt scared – in particular when they 
did not feel that the place they were accommodated in was safe, either because of 
its location or because of the other people who lived there – or that they were 
vulnerable to a range of safeguarding risks, such as involvement in gangs, crime, 
or sexual exploitation; 


 

• They said that they wanted to be empowered to do things for themselves and 
have opportunities to get on in life – but that there needed to be greater 
understanding among service providers about the different challenges they faced 
compared to young people their age in the general population – in particular that 
they often did not have the safety-net of a supportive family network; 


 

• But overwhelmingly, the biggest issue raised by care leavers was one of isolation 
and loneliness; and the difficulty of navigating their way through their late teens 
and early twenties without a strong and stable social network to support them.   


  18  

Developing the Strategy  
1.33 In developing this strategy, we have taken account of the views of a broad range 

of individuals and organisations.  Firstly, we have listened to what care leavers 
have told us.  At eight separate consultation events we asked care leavers to think 
about their experience of leaving care and tell us:  


 

• What were the most difficult challenges they had faced; 


 

• In which areas they would have welcomed additional support; and 


 

• In which areas did they felt well-supported and how this helped their transition to 

adulthood. 

1.34 A summary of the key points that emerged from those discussions with care 
leavers is set out above.  We also held discussions with the organisations that 
support care leavers, both individually and in a roundtable event that brought 
together all of the key voluntary sector bodies that work with these young people. 

1.35 We were also keen to ensure that we properly understood the delivery challenges 
involved in providing services to care leavers and so have held detailed 
discussions with Ofsted (a summary of Ofsted’s key findings in relation to leaving 
care support are set out above), as well as engaging with local authority 
colleagues who deliver leaving care services – through consultation with members 
of the National Leaving Care Benchmarking Forum (an association with members 
from over 80 local authority leaving care teams) and through working with Mark 
Riddell (Manager of the outstanding Children in Care and Leaving Care team in 
Trafford) who has worked with DfE as a ‘critical friend’, throughout the 
development of the strategy. 


 19  

2. INNOVATION AND SYSTEM REFORM 
2.1 Care leavers have told us that we need a system that puts the development of 

meaningful, long-term relationships and social networks at its heart.  The 
Children’s Social Care Innovation Programme is central to achieving this.  The 
programme is already supporting local authorities and other organisations to 
develop new approaches to children’s social care, through an investment of over 
£100 million, encompassing 53 projects. So far the Innovation Programme has 
focused on three areas: 


 

• Rethinking children’s social work:  These projects have started to show evidence 

that giving social workers and other frontline workers freedom and support to 
design services that they know children and families need can have a dramatic 
impact;  


 

• Rethinking support for adolescents in or on the edge of care: providing integrated 
models of support; and 


 

• Other innovative solutions outside these two priority areas: – providing the 
opportunity for the sector to drive reform where it is most needed or come to us 
with innovative ideas falling outside of the two priority areas. 

2.2 In April this year, we announced a further £200 million investment to extend the 
programme20.  We will use the next phase of the Innovation Programme to make 
progress on two fronts:  


 

• Deepening our understanding of the conditions needed for excellent practice and 

supporting more local authorities to rethink their whole practice system around 
them; and 


 

• Building our evidence base and understanding of how we can best support young 

people making the transition to adulthood.  


 

2.3 This focus on transition to adulthood in the second round of the programme 

provides us with the opportunity to work with local authorities and charities to find 
new ways to deliver services and support to care leavers that result in them 
achieving better outcomes.  There are a number of areas where we are keen to 
test new approaches. 

20 https://www.gov.uk/government/news/200-million-to-transform-life-chances-of-vulnerable-young-people 


20  

                                            


 

https://www.gov.uk/government/news/200-million-to-transform-life-chances-of-vulnerable-young-people




Providing More Practical and Emotional Support 
2.4 While we want all care leavers to benefit from high quality Personal Adviser 

support to age 25, we recognise that the support that care leavers currently 
receive is patchy; and even where it is good, Personal Advisers cannot always 
provide care leavers with as much practical and emotional support as they need.  
Just as social workers need to be supported to develop excellent practice skills, 
and given the freedom to work in innovative ways, so too do Personal Advisers. 

2.5 We are carrying out a review of the Personal Adviser role to better understand 
how they spend their time and identify models of delivery that maximise contact 
time between them and the young people they are supporting, so that they can 
develop the trusting relationships that care leavers value so much.  A second 
stage of the review will consider wider questions about the role, including: what 
skills, knowledge and qualifications are needed to perform the role effectively; how 
we can raise the status of the role; whether the name ‘Personal Adviser’ best 
describes what this important role encompasses; what are the routes into 
Personal Adviser work (including for care leavers); and whether there are enough 
opportunities for development training for those currently carrying out the role.  
Given how important it is that care leavers are able to manage their money 
effectively the review will also consider how Personal Advisers can best support 
them in this regard. 

2.6 We will also encourage employers to come forward to create a Personal 
Adviser Apprenticeship, which would prepare people for the demands of this 
challenging role; and also open a route for care-experienced individuals to join the 
workforce and play a bigger part in the delivery of services to care leavers.  We 
have had positive discussions with the employer that is leading the development 
of new children’s social care apprenticeships as part of the Trailblazer 
apprenticeship programme, and will announce further details in due course.  We 
anticipate that the apprenticeship would be set at Level 3 (equivalent to A level) 
and would take between 12 and 18 months to complete. 

2.7 But we are keen to test out approaches that look beyond the Personal 
Adviser model, drawing on other sources of support so that care leavers have a 
wider network around them.   

“If it wasn’t for my independent visitor, I would not be where I am today – she raised my 
ambition and she has helped me by showing my opportunities, helping with applications. 
Most importantly she has stuck by me; even though the service ran out and still is here to 
this day!” Care Leaver. 


  21  

2.8 Examples of the sort of approaches we want to invest in include: 

• Supporting continuing relationships with former carers and professionals: during 
our consultations with care leavers, a number of participants spoke passionately 
about a key individual who had helped them in their childhood.  For some it was a 
former foster carer, for others it was a member of staff at their former residential 
home; and for others still it was a social worker, or independent visitor.  Staying 
Put allows for a continuing relationship with a former foster carer.  But where 
Staying Put isn’t the right answer, foster carers may still be able to provide 
ongoing emotional and practical support even if the young person does not still 
live with them – in the same way as parents do when their children leave home.  
And there is also the opportunity for continuing relationships between care leavers 
and other professionals they know and trust. We are keen to see projects that 
harness this potential support by helping those relationships to continue once the 
young person leaves care;  


 

• Mentoring:  Many local authorities will already have appointed mentors for care 
leavers, including adults with personal experience of the care system who have a 
unique understanding of the challenges that care leavers face in moving from care 
to independence.  But we don’t know enough about the successful features of the 
best mentoring programmes, which is why we are interested in identifying and 
scaling-up those interventions that have the most robust evidence of success. 


 

• Family-Finding Approaches:  Based on an approach first used in the United 
States, family-finding uses family group conferences to identify a range of adults, 
including family members and professionals who have known the young person 
during their childhood, who are prepared to make a life-long commitment to the 
young person.  Each individual’s contribution will differ, but in sum represents a 
robust package of support that the young person can draw on. 


 

• Local Area Co-ordinators:  We are keen to test an approach that has been used 
successfully in adult social care which involves area co-ordinators working with 
vulnerable adults to help them access community resources and support which, 
over time, reduces their reliance on statutory services and helps them to develop a 
supportive, community-based network of activities and personal contacts. This 
could be particularly beneficial to care leavers with a disability, who may need 
ongoing adult social care support to help them achieve positive outcomes. 


  22  

Delivering Services Differently 
2.9 We also want to free-up local authorities to deliver services in new ways and 

in partnership with the voluntary sector.  New models can: 


  

• refresh leadership and attract strong and ambitious people to organisations where 
new ways of doing things are needed; 


  

• provide a sharper focus on children’s social care as a whole or on aspects of the 
system; 


  

• enable existing strong organisations to innovate more easily and to create a 
distinctive culture of excellence; and 


 

• bring together different areas and organisations in robust structures which go 
beyond collaboration and into integration.  


 

2.10 City Deals in particular provide an opportunity to test out new approaches and we 

are working closely with Greater Manchester to explore the possibility of delivering 
a single care leaving service across the 10 Greater Manchester authorities, using 
Trafford’s leading-edge service to drive an improved offer to all care leavers. This 
sort of innovation opens up new opportunities to commission services in a way 
that: provides greater value for money; creates greater flexibility in placing young 
people in accommodation in neighbouring boroughs; and has the potential to 
create a more consistent offer that reflects best practice across all participating 
authorities. 

2.11 Care Leaver Trusts, which give those working closer to the frontline the 
freedoms and flexibilities to operate more innovatively and creatively, 
represent an approach that we are keen to support through the Innovation 
Programme.  Trusts could provide the opportunity for new bodies focussed 
entirely on improving care leavers’ life chances, harnessing the power of the 
voluntary sector to provide the networks and relationships that we know are key to 
a successful transition. 

2.12 We are also keen that local authorities, and the staff that work in them, should 
consider what scope there is to establish public service mutuals to deliver 
services to care leavers differently.  One example of a mutual model which is 
already transforming the delivery of children’s services is Achieving for Children – 
a social enterprise working across the London Boroughs of Kingston and 
Richmond.   

2.13 Social impact bonds (SIBs) are designed to help reform public service delivery 
by allowing social sector organisations to participate in ‘payment by results’ 
contracts. SIBs improve the social outcomes of publicly-funded services by making 


23  

funding conditional on achieving results. Investors pay for the project at the start, 
and then receive payments based on the results achieved by the project.  Rather 
than focusing on inputs or outputs, SIBs are based on achieving social ‘outcomes’.  
The outcomes are predefined and measurable. 

2.14 Working with local commissioners, voluntary and community sector organisations 
and social investors, we believe that there is significant potential for SIBs to 
improve the way that care leavers are supported as they make a transition to 
independent living, and particularly to support their sustained participation in 
employment and training.  We will, therefore, make funding available from the 
Innovation Programme to support the development and commissioning of 
care leaver SIBs over the rest of this Parliament to test new approaches to 
support care leavers.  In order to enable bidders to submit expressions of 
interest, we will be running an additional bidding round into the Innovation 
Programme in the autumn in which organisations interested in running a care 
leaver SIB will be able to apply for funding to help to pay for its set up and to 
provide outcomes payments. 

Providing a stronger offer for those leaving residential care 
2.15 Care leavers have told us that having a safe, secure and stable place to live is 

essential if they are to sustain education, training or employment; experience 
positive emotional health and well-being; and avoid safeguarding risks.  The 
Staying Put duty, introduced in 2014, requires local authorities to provide support 
so that care leavers can continue to live with their former foster carers.  However, 
there has been no equivalent provision in place for young people leaving 
residential care.   

2.16 Sir Martin Narey considered this issue in his recent report on children’s residential 
care21.  As he noted, young people leaving children’s homes require as much 
support, if not more, than their counterparts who have been looked after in foster 
care.  He was clear that the need for nurturing, consistent relationships does not 
stop when young people leave care; and that more needs to be done to avoid a 
cliff edge for those leaving residential care.   

2.17 His report recommended that the government should introduce ‘Staying Close’ – 
an alternative to Staying Put –  designed specifically for young people leaving 
residential care.  This would allow young people to live independently, but in a 
location very close to the children’s home they lived in previously. They would 

21 Residential care in England, Report of Sir Martin Narey’s independent review of children’s residential 
care, Sir Martin Narey, 2016 


24  

                                            


 

https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/534560/Residential-Care-in-England-Sir-Martin-Narey-July-2016.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/534560/Residential-Care-in-England-Sir-Martin-Narey-July-2016.pdf




continue to have the support of the same team and same key worker, and would 
be able to visit the home frequently, to experience the continuity and more gradual 
transition to independence that those leaving foster care enjoy when they move 
into a Staying Put arrangement. 

2.18 In response to Sir Martin’s specific recommendation, we are making a 
commitment to introduce Staying Close for young people leaving residential 
care. As Sir Martin also recommends, we are first going to pilot variations of the 
scheme, through opening a specific stream of the Innovation Programme, in order 
to understand the costings, practicalities and impact of this measure.  


 

2.19 Later sections of this document say more about the work we have been doing with 

the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) and the Department for 
Communities and Local Government (DCLG) more widely to ensure that 
accommodation for care leavers is both suitable and affordable. 

Empowering Care Leavers to Provide and Design Services for 
Themselves 

Being empowered was a strong theme in our consultations with 
care leavers.  It is also judged to be a key component of many of 
the most interesting innovations that are currently being taken 
forward in the sector. 

The ‘HOUSE Project’ in Stoke has involved setting up a housing co-operative led by 
young care leavers using homes owned by the council. 


  

 Care leavers lead the co-operative and have access to a purpose-designed skills 

and training programme to help them do this (and to build skills related to the co-
operative), building their capacity, social skills and employability in the process.  
Young people are able to retain their tenancy as long as they want to.  As they 
move out of the co-operative, but want to keep their home, new local-authority 
owned houses are released to the co-operative to maintain the stock of 10 
tenancies for care leavers. 


  

As well as helping care leavers with their accommodation needs, the project gives 
them the opportunity to experience the control, ownership and pride in doing things 
for themselves that have been missing from their lives. 


 

2.20 The New Belongings programme is another example of care leavers themselves 
being empowered to drive change in the services they receive.  A national group 


25  

of care leavers was paid as consultants to work with care leavers in the local area 
they were supporting, to audit what care leavers thought about the services they 
received and to work with the senior managers in the council to develop a stronger 
local offer.  This DfE-funded programme worked with 29 local authorities over two 
years and many of the participating authorities continue to work together in 
clusters to share practice and what works.  Subject to the outcome of the 
independent evaluation of New Belongings, we are keen to expand this 
approach – which puts care leavers in the ‘driving seat’ – to an increasing 
number of local authorities. 

Preparing care leavers for the challenges of living 
independently 
“When leaving care I was not ready or prepared for what lay ahead for me. Living in my 
own flat at the age of 18, I felt alone and unsupported. I always came across as older for 
my age so I think it was assumed I would be ok. However I was far from ok.” Care leaver. 

2.21 Care leavers consistently tell us that they were not sufficiently prepared for the 
realities of living independently.  In particular, they report experiencing difficulties 
in relation to budgeting, household maintenance and how to access universal 
services.  Many local authorities already provide support of this kind and we are 
interested in how we might use the Innovation Programme to scale-up 
approaches that have been successful. 

Supporting care leavers who are young parents 
2.22 Section 3 of this document sets out the universal and targeted services that are in 

place to support care leavers who are parents to give their children the best start 
in life.  However, for a minority of care leavers with complex problems, getting 
pregnant and subsequently having their children taken into care can become a 
pattern that requires a different response.  Programmes such as PAUSE, which 
originated in Hackney and has been extended to six other local authority areas 
supported by funding from the DfE Innovation Programme, work intensively with 
young women in this situation to prevent repeat pregnancies and subsequent 
removal of their children into care.  We want to extend approaches like PAUSE 
into new areas to break this inter-generational cycle of care.    


    26  

3. EMBEDDING A CULTURE OF CORPORATE 
PARENTING 
3.1 Everyone in society has a responsibility to help those who have been in care to 

overcome the difficulties that they experienced in their childhoods, so that they can 
lead successful lives – it is not something that government alone can achieve. 

3.2 As this section will show, government departments and their agencies can play a 
vital role by shaping their policies so that they give care leavers a helping hand.  
The voluntary sector plays a unique role, providing opportunities for care leavers 
to develop skills, confidence and resilience through their programmes for 
vulnerable young people.  Private businesses can offer care leavers opportunities 
to gain work experience or to take up apprenticeships; and individual volunteers, 
including those who have a care experience themselves, can act as mentors or 
champions for care leavers. 

3.3 But more than anything else, the local help and support that care leavers receive 
from their local authority leaving care team is critical to whether care leavers make 
the transition from care to independence successfully.   

3.4 This section sets out the action we will take to help care leavers to overcome the 
problems identified in Section 1: 

Outcome 1: Better prepared and supported to live 
independently 
“Over the past year the best thing for me has been my support worker with all the support 
she has given me I feel like you have built up a good relationship with her and I feel like if 
I have any queries I can always go to her about them so it has been nice to build up a 
good relationship with someone who I can trust.” Care Leaver 

3.5 We want the legislative framework that applies to leaving care services to ensure 
that care leavers are given the high quality support they need to succeed.  
Building on the Staying Put duty that was introduced in 2014, we are introducing 
three new legislative provisions in the Children and Social Work Bill22 to add to the 
entitlements that care leavers already benefit from. 

22 http://services.parliament.uk/bills/2016-17/childrenandsocialwork.html 


27  

                                            


 

http://services.parliament.uk/bills/2016-17/childrenandsocialwork.html




Corporate Parenting Principles 

3.6 For the first time, we will set out in law what it means for a local authority to be a 
good corporate parent, through a set of corporate parenting principles that guide 
how local authorities should act when providing services and support to the young 
people leaving their care.  The principles will apply to all of the services that the 
local authority provides – not just the Children’s Services department – so that, for 
example, Housing Services (including those delivered by district councils) and 
Leisure Services also deliver their services to care leavers in a way that: promotes 
their best interests; responds to their wishes and feelings; helps them to make the 
best use of local authority services; promotes high aspirations and the best 
possible outcomes for them; provides them with stability; and supports their 
transition to adulthood.  These principles will apply to both children in care and 
care leavers. 

3.7 The principles will embed in every local authority what we, and Ofsted, have 
already seen in the best performing local authorities like Trafford, where from the 
Chief Executive down there is a commitment within the council to giving care 
leavers the best possible chance to succeed, including ring-fencing apprenticeship 
opportunities for care leavers and giving them free access to the borough’s leisure 
centres. 

3.8 Other authorities are thinking hard about what it truly means to be a corporate 
parent, looking at it through the lens of what any reasonable parent does to give 
their child the best start in life.  For many of our young people that means 
providing some financial support when they first live independently and are in a job 
at the bottom of their career ladder.  So, for example, North Somerset has taken 
the decision that its care leavers should not have to pay Council Tax until they 
reach age 22.  We would encourage all local authorities to consider how they 
can support their care leavers like this, using the flexibilities at their 
disposal.  Further examples are provided later in this Section.  

Care Leaver Covenant 

3.9 The corporate parenting principles will apply to local authorities.  But we want 
other public, private and charitable bodies to be able to set out how, as members 
of civil society, they too will make a commitment to support care leavers.  So we 
will introduce a new voluntary care leaver covenant that organisations can 
sign up to in a way that makes sense to them.  We plan to launch the 
covenant during ‘care leavers’ week’ in October 2016.   

3.10 The covenant will provide an opportunity for central government departments to 
set out the services and support that they offer care leavers.  The Cabinet Office, 
for example, has already made a commitment that every child in care or care 


28  

leaver aged 16 or 17 has a guaranteed place on the National Citizen Service 
programme.   

3.11 The voluntary and charitable sectors already play a key role in both supporting 
individual care leavers to develop skills and confidence, as well as providing 
support materials that allow frontline practitioners to develop ways of working with 
care leavers that take account of their unique experiences.  We want to harness 
all this energy and enthusiasm, working in partnership with voluntary sector and 
charities to promote the covenant and to encourage others to get behind it. 

3.12 We will also use the covenant to build on successful work with employers who 
have provided opportunities to care leavers, such as those provided by the 
Marriott Hotel chain through the ‘From Care2Work’ programme, funded by DfE.  
But the role of businesses could potentially go beyond offering work opportunities 
and we will be exploring how the private sector could help to make the transition to 
adulthood and independence easier for care leavers. 

Care Leaver Local Offer 

3.13 One of the most common concerns raised by care leavers is that they are not 
aware of either their legal entitlements, or the wider support that is available to 
them locally.  Our second legislative change, therefore, will be to place a 
requirement on local authorities to consult on, and then publish a local offer 
for care leavers.  This will complement the local offer already in place covering 
the education, health and social care services available for children and young 
people who have Special Educational Needs or are disabled. 

3.14 Many local authorities already have forums that allow care leavers to feed back 
views on their leaving care support; and to find out more about what support is 
available to them.  And many authorities also consult their care leavers about what 
additional support they would find helpful.  Our legislation will formalise that 
process where it currently happens and extend it to every local authority, so that 
every care leaver in the country is aware of the support that they can expect. 

3.15 As well as setting out care leavers’ legal entitlements, including its policy on 
Staying Put, the local offer will describe the other non-statutory services that the 
local authority leaving care team provides specifically for care leavers, such as 
health drop-in sessions.  It will also set out how relevant universal services could 
support care leavers’ transitions to adulthood, such as careers advice services for 
all young people.  The requirement to publish the local offer will bring greater 
transparency and allow local authorities to learn about services that are being 
provided in other local areas. 


29  

Extending support from a Personal Adviser to all care leavers to age 25 

3.16 At present, all care leavers receive support from a local authority Personal Adviser 
to age 21.  The Personal Adviser helps the care leaver to make the transition to 
independence, using a ‘pathway plan’ to identify the steps the young person 
needs to take to achieve their goals; and how the local authority will support them 
to do so. 

3.17 If a care leaver remains in or returns to education, support from their Personal 
Adviser continues up to age 25.  But other care leavers, including those who are 
(NEET), are not currently entitled to continuing support.  In recognition of the 
extra vulnerability of those who are NEET and the fact that many young 
people in the wider population continue to get support from their parents 
until their mid-twenties, we are extending support for all care leavers to age 
25.  We will provide additional funding for local authorities to implement this new 
duty.   

Outcome 2: Improved access to education, training and 
employment 
“Instead of saying that all care leavers should be in education, employment or training, 
they should say, step-by-step, let’s look at ways of doing it…..if we don’t do that stuff 
(education and training) then we just continue the stereotype.  We need to be 
encouraged to challenge the stereotype!” Care Leaver 


 

3.18 For the period ending March 2016, we are collecting data on 17 and 18 year-old 

care leavers for the first time (to be published in October 2016).  Combining this 
with the data that we already collect on 19, 20 and 21 year-olds will give us a 
much clearer picture of care leavers’ career progression as they leave care and 
move towards independence. 

3.19 What we do know about the activity of 19 to 21 year-old care leavers in the year 
ending March 2015 is that, at this stage in their journey: 6% are in HE; 18% are in 
other types of education; 23% are in training or employment; and 39% are NEET, 
of which around a third are NEET due to disability or young parenthood23.  

3.20 We want to help all care leavers to reach their full potential, whether that is going 
to college or university, taking up an apprenticeship or getting a skilled job.  That 
will require a range of approaches: supporting those with high potential to achieve, 

23 Statistics about the care leaver cohort taken from the Department for Education’s Statistical First 
Release for children looked-after in England (including adoption) 2014-15 


30  

                                            


 

https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/children-looked-after-in-england-including-adoption-2014-to-2015
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/children-looked-after-in-england-including-adoption-2014-to-2015




as well as removing barriers for those who have either fallen behind or need extra 
support to remain in education or training.   

3.21 While we have introduced a number of recent reforms to improve the educational 
attainment of children in care – including making it a statutory requirement that 
local authorities appoint a Virtual School Head to raise attainment of looked after 
children; and providing £1,900 a year extra to schools to support the progress of 
every Looked After Child on their register, through the Pupil Premium Plus – it is 
still the case that only 14% of children in care achieved 5 good GCSEs in 2015, 
compared to 53% of non-looked after children24. 

3.22 This limits the options open to care leavers when they leave school and requires 
us to think creatively about how we provide the opportunities for care leavers to 
catch up on education that they have missed out on; and to develop the essential 
knowledge and skills that will enable them to make progress.  This provision must 
be flexible enough to respond to the needs of individual care leavers (for example 
through allowing the length of courses to be extended so that additional support 
can be provided). 

Work-based Learning 

3.23 The government has asked Lord Sainsbury to review technical education, 
including the needs of young people who are not ready to access a technical 
qualification at age 16 (or older if their education has been delayed).  The 
government’s response to this challenge will be set out in ‘The Skills Plan’, which 
will be published shortly. 

3.24 Care leavers with Education, Health and Care Plans or statements of SEN who 
need more help to make the transition from education into employment can 
access supported internship study programmes.  Based primarily at an employer, 
they are tailored to the individual needs of a young person to equip them with the 
skills they need for the workplace.  The young person and the employer will 
receive support from an expert job coach throughout.  We will provide Personal 
Advisers with more information on supported internships so that they can 
be promoted to care leavers who would benefit from this sort of intensive 
support. 

3.25 The government is committed to reaching 3 million apprenticeship starts in 
England by 2020.  Under apprenticeship frameworks, funding for the costs of 
training is covered for all 16-18 year-olds.  The same level of funding is in place for 

24 Statistics about care leaver cohort taken from the Department of Education’s Statistical First Release 
Outcomes for children looked after by local authorities in England, 31 March 2015 


31  

                                            


 

https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/509965/SFR11_2016_SFRText.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/509965/SFR11_2016_SFRText.pdf




apprentices aged 19-23 who are care leavers.  As an incentive to employers to 
recruit more care leavers, and in line with wider government policy, we will now 
extend this further to all care leavers up to age 25.  This provision will also be 
in place for apprenticeships delivered under standards (the new employer-
designed, higher quality apprenticeships). The introduction of the apprenticeship 
levy in April 2017 will mean that the way apprenticeships are funded will be 
changing.  We will publish more information about the new funding arrangements 
shortly. 

3.26 We have been asked throughout the development of this strategy document 
whether we can require companies bidding for public procurement contracts to 
offer apprenticeships for care leavers.  Under the Public Contracts Regulations 
201525, account can already be taken on a case by case basis of wider social 
benefits, including workforce composition, within the tendering process where 
these link sufficiently to the subject matter of the contract in question.  We have 
recently been successful in including apprenticeships and skills 
development considerations as a whole in government procurements with a 
value of £10 million and above. 

3.27 We are also aware that the Children’s Commissioner’s office will shortly be 
publishing a report on widening access to apprenticeships for children in care and 
care leavers.  We welcome this and will give careful consideration to its 
recommendations so as to try to find new ways of increasing opportunities for 
children in or leaving care to take up apprenticeships. 

Further Education 

3.28 For many care leavers, their progression route from school will be to a further 
education (FE) college.  All 19-23 year-olds are entitled to free education and 
training to achieve their first full Level 2 or 3 qualification, and all adults are entitled 
to free English and maths up to Level 2.  Care leavers are a priority group for 
financial support through the 16-19 Bursary Fund administered by FE colleges, to 
help with the costs of studying and to help support care leavers’ retention in 
learning.  Following our recent reforms to the Special Educational Needs (SEN) 
system, those care leavers with SEN and Disabilities who need longer to complete 
and consolidate their education, are now able to maintain their Education, Health 
and Care Plans until the age of 25 where needed, so that they get the support that 
they need to achieve their education and training outcomes. 

25 Public Contracts Regulations, 2015 


32  

                                            


 

http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2015/102/contents/made




3.29 The Department for Business, Innovation & Skills (BIS) is funding the Learning & 
Work Institute (LWI) to deliver a programme of work to support care leavers’ 
access to, and achievement in FE, employment and apprenticeships.  This 
will include: 

• The development of an existing BIS guide for care leavers into an interactive 
resource which provides care leavers and their Personal Advisers with essential 
information about: what courses are available and their progression routes; 
sources of advice and support (including financial support); and case studies, all of 
which would support pathway planning for care leavers; 


 

• Working with employers and others to identify effective approaches to enable care 
leavers to gain experience of the workplace and progress towards 
employment/apprenticeships, possibly through traineeship opportunities.  The 
outputs will include case studies and a resource for employers; 


 

• Promoting and sharing examples of best practice in engaging and supporting care 
leavers to succeed in FE. 

3.30 We know that many care leavers’ lives begin to become more settled when they 
reach their late teens and early twenties and it is only at this point that they feel 
ready to return to education. To support care leavers up to age 21 who wish to 
catch up on the education they may have missed out on when they were younger, 
Income Support/Universal Credit is available to care leavers who take up full time 
study in non-advanced education (i.e. secondary level education). Because 
Universal Credit work related requirements are tailored based on individual 
characteristics, care leavers who take up full time study will not have requirements 
applied.   

“It's really important to give Care Leavers a chance to go to university when they are a bit 
older. When we first leave Care, just sorting out our life is the first priority - finding a 
home, a job, learning to function independently, finding friends, building a community, 
perhaps marriage and/or having kids-- all those things tend to come first when you don't 
have 'roots'. For many of us it's important to get these essentials sorted first, and then we 
can think about furthering our education.” Care Leaver 

3.31 The data we collect does not currently tell us how many care leavers have taken 
advantage of this opportunity; or allow us to evaluate the impact of this provision, 
but we are committed to continuing to work with DWP to provide this evidence.  
DWP is willing to explore what more can be done in the benefits system to support 
those wishing to return to education beyond age 21 and up to age 25. 


33  

Higher Education 

3.32 The government is committed to widening access to higher education (HE) for 
students from disadvantaged backgrounds, including care leavers.  A key driver 
for widening participation is through ‘access agreements’ that are agreed by the 
independent Director for Fair Access (DfA).  The DfA has agreed 183 access 
agreements for 2016/17, which include plans for universities to spend more 
than £745 million on measures to improve access for students from 
disadvantaged backgrounds.  Support for care leavers in access agreements 
has grown considerably over the years, with around 80% of access agreements 
including specific action on supporting care leavers. 

3.33 The Higher Education Statistics Agency (HESA) has included a Care Leaver 
identifier as part of the HESA student record, which will support better 
analysis, research and evaluation for care leavers.  This will also enable more 
robust monitoring of sector performance in supporting care leavers, including 
through access agreements.  The government has also funded a National 
Network for the Education of Care Leavers, which provides HE activities and 
resources for care leavers, children in care and the people who support them, 
which can be accessed at: http://nnecl.org/about/background. 

Employment 

3.34 Care Leavers will often need extra help to find work.  Jobcentre Plus has 
introduced a ‘marker’ that allows care leavers to be identified on their system and 
receive additional help.  We want to ensure that as many care leavers as possible 
benefit from the support that is available, and we will continue to work with 
DWP to explore the potential for better sharing of data, both between DfE 
and DWP analysts to support better tracking of care leavers’ long-term 
outcomes; and between local authorities and local Jobcentre Plus offices, to 
support better joint working. 

3.35 The benefits of that improved joint working at a local level is evident in the 
arrangements in Barnet, known as ‘The Barnet Hub Model’, where, funded by the 
Jobcentre Plus Flexible Support Fund, a Jobcentre Plus Work Coach is co-located 
in the local authority leaving care team, along with a care leaver charity called 
Drive Forward, who deliver an intensive, 1-2-1 employability programme. This 
model, which began in late 2014, has already helped over 70 care leavers into 
work.   DWP has run a number of events to raise awareness of this model across 
the Jobcentre Plus network.  


34  

http://nnecl.org/about/background




Barnet Care Leaver Hub Case Study 


 

Kemi was placed in care at age 14.  When she left college at age 18, staff at the Barnet 
Care Leaver Hub supported Kemi in finding full time work.  


 

“Upon graduating from college at age 18, I met Patricia, my Jobcentre Plus work coach at 
the Barnet Care Leaver Hub.  Patricia was a breath of fresh air, nice, calm and 
welcoming to my situation.  I felt I could talk and engage with her and in doing so I saw 
my confidence grow.  Patricia introduced me to Sam from the Drive Forward team and 
together they helped me work on my CV. They became a driving force in making me 
proactive with my job searches and with their help and support I am now working full 
time. 


 

I can only say ‘thank you both’ for making all this possible, your interaction and 
commitment at the Hub not only makes me a success but is commendable.  The support 
Patricia has given me goes far beyond anything I have received before; she’d call to 
check how work is going, advising me on financial matters and reminding me that rent 
has to be paid as always.  Thank you Patricia and Sam.” 


 

3.36 To support all young people aged 18 to 21 who are unemployed, the Youth 
Obligation will be introduced from April 2017.  This will mean that: 

• From ‘Day 1’ of their claim, 18 to 21year-olds will participate in a three-week 
Intensive Activity Period of support, learning job-search and interview techniques; 
and structured work preparation.  They will be encouraged to apply for an 
apprenticeship, or take up work experience opportunities, sector-based work 
academy placements and other work-related training; 


 

• If they are still claiming benefit after six months, and are not in work, on an 
apprenticeship or participating in work-related training, they will be required to go 
on a mandatory work placement to give them the skills they need to get on in 
work; 


 

• Tailored, flexible support will be provided to those in work, but who need to 
increase their earnings. 

3.37 Recognising that there will be some care leavers who need to address complex 
barriers in order to achieve sustainable employment and transform their life 
chances, Universal Credit is complemented by Universal Support.  Universal 
Support is there to help people make and maintain their Universal Credit claim, 
and will assist people with their financial and digital capability throughout the life of 
their claim.  Through Universal Support, DWP is transforming the way job centres 
work as part of their local communities to ensure they more effectively tackle the 


35  

barriers faced by harder to help people and get them into sustainable employment. 
DWP are considering how best to broaden this approach to help claimants with 
multiple, complex barriers into sustainable employment.  

3.38 DWP introduced the Youth Engagement Fund (YEF) in April 2015, to deliver 
support to young people aged 14-17 years for up to three years. Two out of the 
four YEF projects target support on young people who are in care or on the edge 
of care. The aim is to enable young people to succeed in education or training, 
improving their employability and reducing their longer-term dependency on 
benefits as well as their likelihood of offending. 

3.39 The new care leaver covenant will provide a way of expanding employment 
opportunities for young people leaving care.  We know that many local authorities 
already offer opportunities for care leavers when they are recruiting to traineeships 
and apprenticeships.  We would encourage all local authorities to do so.  We also 
acknowledge that government departments and their agencies could play a 
greater role in offering work experience, traineeships, apprenticeships and jobs to 
care leavers and we will consider and discuss with stakeholders how best to 
ensure that this happens in practice. 

Outcome 3: Experiencing stability and feeling safe and secure 
“Because I am worried about moving out and having to live on my own without a choice 
in the matter, people who are not in care get to stay with their parents until they feel 
ready to move out and I feel that I am nowhere near ready to leave but I don’t have a 
choice in the matter.” Young person in care 

A safe and stable place to live 

3.40 Local authority Children’s Services are responsible for accommodating 16 and 17 
year-old care leavers.  Statutory guidance26 states that this accommodation must 
be safe, secure and affordable; and the guidance was updated in 2015 to make 
clear that ‘Bed & Breakfast’ (B&B) accommodation should only be used in 
exceptional circumstances and for no more than two working days.  Ofsted reports 
that the use of B&B is rare in nearly all local authorities that it has inspected. 

3.41 The majority of young people remain in care until 18 and are either in foster care 
or residential care.  However, for some young people in care and all care leavers 
aged 16 or 17 who do not return home to their family, they are normally housed in 

26  The Children Act 1989 guidance and regulations Volume 3: planning transition to adulthood for care 
leavers 


36  

                                            


 

https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/397649/CA1989_Transitions_guidance.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/397649/CA1989_Transitions_guidance.pdf




a range of different types of accommodation settings, including: supported 
lodgings, semi-independent accommodation, foyers, supported housing and 
hostels.  Much of this provision is good quality and provides the sort of stepping-
stone provision, with support, that care leavers need to transition successfully to 
independent living. 

3.42 However, during our consultations with care leavers, we also heard examples of 
poor quality alternative accommodation, some of which had placed care leavers at 
risk of exploitation, or had led to deterioration in their emotional health and well-
being; or to them experiencing problems with drugs or alcohol.  It is vitally 
important, therefore, that local authorities commission accommodation services in 
ways that ensure that providers are equipped to respond to young peoples’ 
complex needs and operate in accordance with local safeguarding arrangements. 

3.43 When care leavers turn 18, Children’s Services are normally no longer legally 
responsible for accommodating them unless they are in a Staying Put 
arrangement (see below).  However, there remains a key role for local authority 
leaving care teams to continue to work closely with Housing Services colleagues 
to ensure that 16 and 17 year-old care leavers remain in suitable accommodation 
when they turn 18, using the sort of options listed above; or, if they are ready, to 
help them to secure and maintain an independent tenancy.  Helping care leavers 
to understand the options available in their local housing market and to prepare for 
the challenges of maintaining their own home are a key part of the pathway 
planning process. 

Staying Put 

3.44 For those who leave care at age 18 from foster care, the option now exists for 
them to move into a ‘Staying Put’ arrangement where both they and their carer 
want to continue living together.  Staying Put provides the sort of gradual transition 
to adulthood that is enjoyed by the majority of young people in the general 
population.  It provides continuity of a supportive relationship and care 
arrangements and we want to maximise the number of eligible care leavers who 
do Stay Put.   

3.45 In the first year following the introduction of the duty on local authorities to support 
Staying Put arrangements, nearly half (48%) of eligible care leavers were living 
with their former foster carer 3 months after their 18th birthday27.  We will 

27 Statistics about the care leaver cohort taken from the Department for Education’s Statistical First 
Release for children looked-after in England (including adoption) 2014-15 


 37  

                                            


 

https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/children-looked-after-in-england-including-adoption-2014-to-2015
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/children-looked-after-in-england-including-adoption-2014-to-2015




continue to provide funding to local authorities to implement Staying Put 
over the life of this Parliament, using the £22m provided in 2016/17 as the 
baseline.  We also want to review the implementation of Staying Put and will work 
with the sector to iron out any implementation issues that the review identifies.  

Staying Close 

3.46 As highlighted in section 2, in response to Sir Martin Narey’s recommendation in 
his recent report on children’s residential care in England28, we are making a 
commitment to introduce Staying Close for young people leaving residential 
care. Staying Close – similar to the Staying Put arrangements which exist for 
children in foster care – will enable young people to live independently, in a 
location close to their children’s home with ongoing support from that home. As Sir 
Martin recommends we are going to pilot variations of the scheme first, through 
opening a specific stream of the Innovation Programme, in order to understand the 
costings, practicalities and impact.  

Preventing homelessness 

3.47 During the year ending March 2015, our data show that over 90% of care leavers 
for whom information was provided were in suitable accommodation. Less than 
1% were recorded as being in Bed & Breakfast accommodation.  Around 4% were 
in custody and 1% were recorded as having no fixed abode or were homeless29. 
Where care leavers over 18 are homeless, in recognition of their vulnerability they 
are given automatic priority need within the homelessness legislation until age 22.  
Care leavers above the age of 21 who are vulnerable as a result of having been 
looked after also have a priority need.  Care leavers are also a priority group within 
statutory guidance on the allocation of ‘social housing’.   

3.48 Whilst the legislation provides a crucial safety net, our priority is to stop 
homelessness happening in the first place. Government is investing over £500 
million more over this Parliament to prevent and tackle homelessness.  Local 
housing authorities are required to produce a strategy setting out how they will 
prevent and tackle homelessness in their area.  As part of this process, they 
should work with Children’s Services to consider the needs of care leavers who 
may be homeless or at risk of homelessness.  

28 Residential care in England, Report of Sir Martin Narey’s independent review of children’s residential 
care, Sir Martin Narey, 2016 
29 Statistics about the care leaver cohort taken from the Department for Education’s Statistical First 
Release for children looked-after in England (including adoption) 2014-15 


38  

                                            


 

https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/534560/Residential-Care-in-England-Sir-Martin-Narey-July-2016.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/534560/Residential-Care-in-England-Sir-Martin-Narey-July-2016.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/children-looked-after-in-england-including-adoption-2014-to-2015
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/children-looked-after-in-england-including-adoption-2014-to-2015




3.49 This focus on prevention fits well with the approach that has been promoted in the 
‘Supported Accommodation Framework’30 for care leavers developed by 
Barnardo’s and St Basils, with funding from DCLG.  We have been working with 
local authorities to bring Children’s and Housing Services together to focus on 
solutions to the housing problems that care leavers experience, using the 
Framework to guide that work; and DCLG has committed funding to continue 
to support English local authorities to implement the Framework in 2016/17. 

NB: Issues related to the affordability of housing are covered in a later 
section on achieving financial stability. 

Keeping care leavers safe from harm 

3.50 A combination of care leavers’ previous experiences and their current 
circumstances can put them at greater risk of exploitation.  The Home Office (HO) 
is leading work to help prevent children and young people from being recruited 
into gangs, being sexually exploited and/or abusing drugs or alcohol. 

3.51 The exploitation of vulnerable young people and adults is often a feature of urban 
street gangs.  Children in care and care leavers are at higher risk of being 
groomed and/or coerced into moving or selling drugs around the country (known 
as ‘county lines’).  It is important that those looking after vulnerable young people 
understand about ‘county lines’, how to recognise it and how to prevent and 
protect young people from being targeted and exploited by gangs. 

3.52 The Home Office’s approach to Ending Gang Violence and Exploitation was 
published on 13 January 201631 and sets out the six key priorities for tackling this 
issue: tackling county lines; protecting vulnerable locations; reducing violence and 
knife crime; safe-guarding gang-associated women and girls; promoting early 
intervention; and promoting meaningful alternatives to gangs. The Home Office 
will work with DfE and DCLG to identify what more can be done to highlight the 
risks and tackle this issue locally, including identifying and spreading best practice.  

3.53 The number of recorded child sexual abuse offences has increased rapidly over 
the last two years.  Research regularly finds that children in care and care leavers 
are more likely to be victims of sexual abuse/exploitation.  For example, based on 
submissions provided, the Office of the Children’s Commissioner for England’s 
enquiry into sexual exploitation in gangs and groups found that 21% of identified 
victims were in the care system. And we know from local intelligence that 

30 Care Leavers Accomodation And Support Framework, Barnardo’s, 2015 
31 Ending Gang Violence and Exploitation, Home Office, 2016 


39  

                                            


 

http://www.barnardos.org.uk/care_leavers_accom_and_support_framework.pdf.
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ending-gang-violence-and-exploitation




children’s homes are being targeted by perpetrators of child sexual exploitation.  
We know from speaking to local practitioners and victims that a person does not 
stop being vulnerable as soon as they turn 18.  It is important that young people 
have access to support when leaving care. 

3.54 The Home Secretary launched the report ‘Tackling Child Sexual Exploitation’ in 
March 201532. This report sets out a national response to the failures seen in 
Rotherham, Manchester, Oxford and elsewhere, where children were let down by 
the very people who were responsible for protecting them. The Government has 
made significant progress since the report was launched: 


 

• We have prioritised child sexual abuse as a national threat in the Strategic Policing 

Requirement33, setting a clear expectation that forces should safeguard children, 
share intelligence and best practice and collaborate across force boundaries. 


 

• We have delivered additional funding of £10 million in 2015-16 for further specialist 
teams in the National Crime Agency to tackle online child sexual exploitation, 
enabling a near doubling of their investigative capability.   


 

• We have delivered a £7 million uplift in funding in 2015-16 for non statutory 

organisations which support victims and survivors of sexual abuse and confirmed 
continuation of this £7m fund in 2016-17. 


 

• We have launched a new national whistle-blowing helpline, operated by the 
NSPCC, for any employee who wants to raise a concern about how their 
organisation is dealing with a concern about a child. This offers a new, additional, 
confidential route and will help shine a light on problems and help authorities to 
spot patterns of failure in order to address them quickly.  


 

• We have piloted joint official health, police and education inspections in a series of 

six inspections which will be completed by July.  This series of inspections will 
focus on the quality of frontline practice in dealing with child sexual exploitation. 


 

3.55 The Home Office will continue to work closely with the DfE to ensure robust 

measures are in place to tackle child sexual exploitation including victimisation of 
children leaving care. 

32 Tackling Child Sexual Exploitation, Home Office, 2015 
33 Strategic Policing Requirement, updated 2015 


40  

                                            


 

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/tackling-child-sexual-exploitation--2
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/strategic-policing-requirement




Supporting care leavers in the criminal justice system 

3.56 We know that both children in care and care leavers are over-represented in the 
criminal justice system.  The Prison Reform Trust’s inquiry34, led by Lord Laming, 
has examined why that is the case, including whether they are more likely to be 
criminalised for relatively minor incidents of criminal damage or aggressive 
behaviour that would not normally result in police involvement if they occurred in a 
family home.  We have welcomed the Prison Reform Trust’s interest in this 
issue and will consider the findings from Lord Laming’s inquiry alongside 
the recent report from Sir Martin Narey on residential care for looked-after 
children, and the forthcoming report by Charlie Taylor on the youth justice 
system. 

3.57 The Ministry of Justice is reforming the prison system so that offenders, including 
care leavers, can get the skills and qualifications they need to make a success of 
life on the outside.  Central to the reforms is giving prison governors greater 
autonomy.  Governors will have a greater role in determining rehabilitation 
services, providing the opportunity to innovate and tailor education and training 
approaches to the needs of offenders. 

3.58 In September 2015, the Secretary of State for Justice announced that Charlie 
Taylor would be conducting a review of the youth justice system35.  The review is 
examining how children who offend are rehabilitated in the community and in 
custody, and whether the system remains fit for the challenges posed by today’s 
young offenders.  An interim report was published in February setting out 
emerging proposals for secure schools for young offenders remanded or 
sentenced to custody, and an ambition for a more devolved youth justice system.   

3.59 In 2013, the Ministry of Justice (MoJ) appointed a National Offender Management 
Service (NOMS) Care Leaver Champion – Teresa Clarke, Governor of Swinfen 
Hall Youth Offending Institute – and has built on this by putting in place a network 
of regional leads for custodial and probation services.   

3.60 MoJ has also established a National Care Leavers’ Forum within NOMS, bringing 
together key stakeholders to co-ordinate efforts to support care leavers in prison 
and probation.  The forum has agreed five priority areas upon which its work will 
focus; identification, recording, entitlements, support and wider awareness.  The 
Forum’s efforts have resulted in new data fields being added to prison and 
probation systems to enable recording of care leaver status.  To ensure care 

34 In Care, Out of Trouble, an independent review Chaired by Lord Laming  
35 Written Statement to Parliament, Youth Justice, September 2015  


41  

                                            


 

http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/Portals/0/Documents/In%20care%20out%20of%20trouble%20summary.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/youth-justice




leavers receive the support they need, regional training events are being 
held to raise awareness of care leavers’ unique status and their entitlements 
among prison and probation staff.  

3.61 The NOMS care leaver forum provides a way of developing better joint working 
arrangements between local authorities, prisons and probation services.  Local 
authorities are required to continue supporting care leavers while they are in 
prison and should visit them to see how they are getting on and to update their 
pathway plan.  This has not always happened consistently.  Last year we revised 
guidance to local authorities to make clear that those in custody who were 
pursuing a course of education should continue to be entitled to Personal Adviser 
support, up until age 25. 

3.62 The Forum will continue to explore ways of improving communication 
channels, so that local authorities are updated if a care leaver is moved to a 
different prison; and are notified in advance when a care leaver is released 
from prison, so that they have time to put a package of support in place 
when they return, including a place to live. The Forum will also explore how 
best to integrate pathway and sentencing plans so that they are coherent and so 
that Personal Advisers can work together with those in prison and probation 
responsible for the young person’s progress. 

3.63 As part of its commitment to better support the care leavers it looks after, 
NOMS will through the Forum pursue avenues for enabling direct work with 
care leavers in prisons which supports them to develop strategies that will 
help them to succeed when they leave prison or probation services. 

Supporting refugee and other foreign national care leavers 

3.64 Unaccompanied children arriving in the UK are immediately transferred into the 
care of a local authority.  The crisis in Syria and events in the Middle East have 
seen an unprecedented number of migrants and asylum seekers arriving in 
Europe.  Some have gone on to reach the UK via northern France, including many 
who are Unaccompanied Asylum Seeking Children (UASC).  

3.65 Local authorities are therefore looking after increasing numbers of UASC and 
supporting more care leavers who are former UASC.  There were 3,206 asylum 
claims from UASC in the year ending March 2016, a 57% increase on the year 
ending March 201536.  

36 Home Office Immigration Statistics, January to March 2016, Asylum Data, Volume 3 


42  

                                            


 

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/immigration-statistics-january-to-march-2016/list-of-tables%23asylum




3.66 This increase has placed pressure on some local authorities with high numbers of 
UASC in their care.  That is why we are introducing a national transfer scheme, 
underpinned by powers in the Immigration Act 2016. From 1 July 2016, the 
Home Office has also significantly increased the funding local authorities 
will receive for caring for UASC and for supporting former UASC.  

3.67 Most UASC are granted refugee status, humanitarian protection or some other 
form of leave to remain in the UK (73% of initial decisions in the year ending 
March 2016)37.  Effective pathway planning for UASC should take into account the 
child’s immigration status, support timely engagement with the Home Office to 
resolve any outstanding immigration issues, and look ahead to their long-term 
future in the UK or to the possibility that they will be expected to make plans to 
leave the UK and resume life in their home country if they have no lawful basis to 
remain here.  

3.68 For those former UASC care leavers whom the courts agree do not need our 
protection, and who have no lawful basis to remain in the UK, the Immigration Act 
201638 makes alternative provision for any accommodation, subsistence or other 
social care support the local authority considers they need prior to their departure 
from the UK.  This could include, for example, support from a Personal Adviser. 
The DfE and the Home Office will be working together with local authorities and 
relevant non-governmental organisations on the development of the regulations 
and guidance required to implement these new support arrangements. DfE will 
consult on revised guidance for local authorities on the care of 
unaccompanied and trafficked children, later this year.  

Outcome 4: Improved Access to Health Support  
“There should be more services to talk to when you just need help with your experiences 
– not necessarily CAMHS.” Care Leaver. 


 

Mental Health 
3.69 At our consultation events, care leavers reported a range of situations where they 

had experienced poor emotional health and well-being, but failed to get the 
support that they needed.  For most, this was linked to feeling lonely and isolated, 
causing them to feel depressed, anxious or to have a lack of confidence.  But 
some care leavers reported more serious cases of committing self-harm, suicidal 
thoughts or more serious personality disorders.  Older care leavers reported 

37 Home Office Immigration Statistics, January to March 2016, Asylum Data, Volume 3 
38 Immigration Act 2016 


43  

                                            


 

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/immigration-statistics-january-to-march-2016/list-of-tables%23asylum
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2016/19/contents/enacted




particular problems accessing adult services, due to the higher thresholds 
involved. 

3.70 We recognise that making the transition from being in care to living independently 
at a young age can be particularly challenging for care leavers who are receiving 
support to improve their emotional health and well-being, as it often coincides with 
a transition from CAMHS to adult mental health services. 

3.71 The government set out its plans to improve our children and young people’s 
mental health and wellbeing in the 2015 report Future in mind – promoting, 
protecting and improving our children and young people’s mental health and 
wellbeing39.  The report sets out that significant improvements can be achieved 
through better working between the NHS, local authorities, voluntary and 
community services, schools and other local services. It also makes it clear that 
many of these changes can be achieved by working differently, rather than 
needing significant investment. 

3.72 The Government is committed to implementing the vision set out in Future 
in mind, and is making available an additional £1.4 billion over the lifetime of 
this Parliament to support improvements to Child and Adolescent Mental 
Health services.  In October 2015, local areas in England were required to submit 
Local Transformation Plans (LTPs) for child and adolescent mental health, setting 
out how they will improve the emotional health and well-being of children and 
young people in their area, and support those with mental health problems, across 
the whole care pathway.   

3.73 An Expert Group has been set up to produce care pathways, quality standards 
and models of care for looked after children and care leavers with mental health 
problems. This will consider the best way of improving outcomes for care leavers 
based on the evidence available. Guidance will be produced for professionals 
working with care leavers and for commissioners responsible for their care.  
The first meeting of the Expert Working Group, which will work with NHS England, 
Health Education England, and sector partners, will take place in July 2016. The 
Group will draw up care pathways and a quality standard and will consider the 
most appropriate models of care for these groups.  Their work is expected to take 
approximately 18 months.  

3.74 Transition to adult mental health services is something that the Expert Working 
Group will be considering.  We are aware that some areas are already 

39 Future in mind - promoting, protecting and improving our children and young people's mental health and 
wellbeing, Department of Health, 2015 


 44  

                                            


 

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/improving-mental-health-services-for-young-people
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/improving-mental-health-services-for-young-people




reconfiguring their services.  In Sheffield for example, a community psychiatric 
nurse is available to care leavers for consultation within the care leaver team to 
help them gain access to adult mental health if this is needed, as well as providing 
one-to-one support.  And in Birmingham, services are being provided for children 
and young people with mental health problems up to the age of 25, to ensure 
continuity of care and to prevent people having to transfer to adult services 
automatically at the age of 18.  The government encourages innovative local 
approaches to handling transitions.  Whilst it has not mandated a ‘one size fits all’ 
approach, we are clear that the principles of good transition planning should be 
applied: built around the individual, commencing in good time and with strong 
inter-agency engagement.   

3.75 The new Mental Health Services Data Set will collect a comprehensive range 
of data about children and young people’s access to, and outcomes from, 
mental health services, including for children who are looked-after.  These 
data will help inform future delivery of services to this vulnerable group of children 
and young people. In addition, we have asked the new Expert Working Group for 
looked after children to explore improving the use of information on outcomes for 
looked after children.   

Wider health issues  

3.76 Statutory guidance on Promoting the health and well-being of looked after 
children40 requires local authorities, Clinical Commissioning Groups and NHS 
England to ensure that there are effective plans in place to enable looked-after 
children aged 16 or 17 to make a smooth transition to adulthood.  The statutory 
guidance on Joint Strategic Needs Assessments and Joint Health and Wellbeing 
Strategies41 also require health and wellbeing boards to consider the needs of 
vulnerable groups (such as care leavers) in planning local services. 

3.77 Since 2013, the Care Quality Commission (CQC) has been inspecting local health 
service arrangements for promoting the health and wellbeing of looked after 
children and care leavers.  It will publish an overview report of the first 50 
inspections shortly.  CQC, Ofsted and the other inspectorates also 
commenced joint targeted area inspections later this year.  

3.78 A third of young people leaving care report problems with drugs or alcohol a year 
later; indeed, young women leaving care are particularly susceptible to 

40 Statutory Guidance on Promoting the Health and Well-being of Looked-after Children, 2015 
41 Statutory Guidance on Joint Strategic Needs Assessments and Joint Health and Wellbeing Strategies, 
2013 


45  

                                            


 

https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/413368/Promoting_the_health_and_well-being_of_looked-after_children.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/jsnas-and-jhws-statutory-guidance




problematic substance use.  Any young person who is at increased risk of 
substance misuse, including those who are leaving care, should be provided with 
targeted prevention support, which focuses on reducing risks and strengthening 
resilience.  Clear referral pathways into specialist substance misuse services 
should be in place for those young people who are assessed as requiring 
structured drug and alcohol interventions.  Young people’s specialist substance 
misuse services are available in every local authority, commissioned by local 
public health teams.  

3.79 A quarter of young women leaving care are pregnant, and nearly half become 
pregnant within 18 to 24 months.  To support all young mothers better, the number 
of health visitors has increased by almost 50% since May 2010.  Health visitors 
deliver the Healthy Child Programme (HCP), a universal service for all families.  
As part of the HCP, health visitors will identify where families need additional 
support, and the HCP states clearly that one of the risk factors for experiencing 
additional problems is where one or both parents grew up in care. 

3.80 For disadvantaged teenage mothers, the Family Nurse Partnership (FNP)42 offers 
an evidence-based, intense programme of supportive visits.  The FNP supports 
many teenage mothers who have a care background. In October 2015, robust new 
evidence was published on the FNP programme’s effectiveness at improving short 
term outcomes in England.  The FNP National Unit is using this evidence to adapt 
and strengthen the programme so that it provides more flexibility, supporting 
nurses to tailor the intervention to client needs, in order to help local authorities to 
develop a service that meets the particular requirements of vulnerable families in 
their local area. 

Outcome 5: Achieving Financial Stability 
“It’s hard for someone (coming out of care) to live on their own, pay bills etc. Someone’s 
not going to say ‘here’s a tenner – I know you’re in arrears with your electricity.” Care 
Leaver 


 

3.81 Most care leavers who spoke to us talked about the problems they had making 

ends meet.  Paying rent, Council Tax, household bills and transport costs meant 
that many care leavers had difficulty managing their finances and they had often 
experienced debt and arrears. 

42 Family Nurse Partnership, 2015 


46  

                                            


 

http://fnp.nhs.uk/evidence/research-england




Financial Support 

3.82 During the last Parliament, the Government introduced Junior ISAs (JISAs) for all 
children who are looked after for more than 12 months.  JISAs are long term 
saving accounts which can be accessed by the account holder on their 18th 
birthday.  At this point the account will mature into a standard (adult) ISA.  
Currently over 75,000 accounts have been opened. 


 

3.83 Local authorities provide a range of financial support for care leavers.  While they 

are 16 or 17, the local authority is responsible for all of the costs of 
accommodating them; and provides them with allowances to meet their day to day 
needs as they are generally not entitled to claim benefits.  At the point at which 
they leave care, care leavers receive a ‘leaving care grant’ that helps them to 
furnish their first property.  DfE recommends that this should be at least £2,000 
and the vast majority of local authorities pay at least that amount. Where care 
leavers are in further education, they are a priority group for receipt of the 16-19 
bursary of up to £1,200 a year; and if they go to University, the local authority is 
responsible for providing them with an HE bursary of £2,000. 


 

3.84 Local authorities also support care leavers financially in lots of different ways.  

Earlier in this document we provided an example of a local authority – North 
Somerset – that does not require its care leavers to pay Council Tax until they 
reach age 22.  Many local authorities provide care leavers with free travel passes 
if they are in education, employment or training.  Others provide free access to all 
of the local authorities’ leisure centres.  And others still provide care leavers with 
help to buy clothes for interviews or with the costs of driving lessons where this will 
help their chances of finding work. We want all local authorities to be thinking 
creatively about how they can support care leavers in ways that reasonable 
parents would; and to set this out clearly in their local offers. 

Housing Costs 

3.85 Care leavers up to the age of 22 who rent privately, are currently exempt from a 
lower rate of Housing Benefit (known as the shared accommodation rate) which is 
usually applied to single people aged under 35. Instead, they are able to claim the 
higher one bedroom rate for self-contained accommodation, rather than the rate 
for a shared house or flat.  Once they reach the age of 22 however, they are 
entitled to the shared accommodation rate unless one of the other exemptions 
applies.  This could mean that some care leavers at age 22 may need to consider 
moving to a cheaper property, at a time in their lives when many of them are 
experiencing stability for the first time since leaving care. DWP and DfE will work 
together to explore if there is any benefit to care leavers from extending the 
exemption to the ‘shared accommodation rate’ to age 25, recognising that many 
young people in the general population are able to enjoy the stability of living in 


47  

the parental home until that age.  We will also look at possible ways to collect the 
relevant data relating to the impact and cost of such a change.  

3.86 The government plans to introduce changes in April 2017 that will remove 
automatic entitlement to housing support in Universal Credit in certain 
circumstances.  This will only apply to those making new UC claims; who are out 
of work, and aged 18 to 21.  This is intended to ensure that resources are targeted 
at those who are most in need, with an expectation that those who can should 
continue to live at home.  This ensures young people on benefits face the same 
choices as those in work and unable to afford to leave the parental home.  The 
option to remain living in the family home clearly does not apply to care 
leavers and we have therefore decided that care leavers will be exempt from 
these changes. 

3.87 The government intends to introduce Local Housing Allowance caps, already an 
established feature in the private rented sector, into the social rented sector.  The 
changes will take effect in April 2018 and will apply to new tenancies signed from 
April 2016 onwards (or April 2017 onwards in the case of supported housing). 

3.88 The supported housing sector, most of which is part of the social rented sector, 
provides valuable support to some of our country’s most vulnerable people, 
including care leavers. It helps them to lead independent lives or turn their lives 
around and is an investment which brings savings to other parts of the public 
sector – such as health and social care.   The government has been clear that the 
most vulnerable will be protected and supported through welfare reforms.  

3.89 We understand the concerns about the potential implications of the Local Housing 
Allowance cap; however, there is a need for more robust evidence about the 
sector, and so a joint evidence review by DWP and DCLG is underway.  
Alongside this review, which is due to report shortly, we will continue to 
work with and listen to the supported housing sector in order to develop a 
long-term sustainable funding regime.  

3.90 We need to deliver a system that provides appropriate protections both for those 
living in this type of accommodation and those who provide it, whilst also making 
sure that the taxpayer is protected, the government’s fiscal commitments are met 
and that we deliver value for money. 

Advice and guidance 

3.91 As part of care leavers’ preparation for independence, it is important that Personal 
Advisers make those in receipt of benefits aware of what they need to do to 
continue to receive them.  There are also many examples of effective local 
protocols between local authority leaving care teams and local Jobcentre Plus 
offices, which can help care leavers to understand the conditions around receipt of 


48  

benefits and ultimately remove the need to impose a sanction and ensure that 
they retain entitlement to benefit (including elements intended to meet their 
housing costs).  Care leavers aged 18 or over who receive a sanction may qualify 
for a hardship payment.  They should apply via Jobcentre Plus as soon as they 
receive their first reduced benefit payment. 

3.92 Many care leavers will not be able to access advice about their personal finances 
from parents or family members in the same way that other young people can.  It 
is therefore crucial that Personal Advisers are able to give them good quality 
information about managing their money, from budgeting to paying bills on time.  
Through our review of the Personal Adviser role we will consider how we can best 
ensure that Personal Advisers are equipped to carry out this role. 


 49  

4. DRIVING SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT 

Promoting and Sharing Best Practice 
4.1 We recognise the need to ensure that decision makers and front line practitioners 

working with care leavers understand what works – and what doesn’t work – and 
use that knowledge to improve practice. 

4.2 In the medium-term, we are establishing a new What Works Centre (WWC) for 
children’s social care.  It will be an authoritative source of evidence-based advice 
on what works.  Like NICE, it will be able to say clearly which approaches are 
proven to be effective and should be used.  The WWC will support wider reforms 
for the social work workforce, complementing and strengthening those reforms, in 
order to create an effective practice environment.  We expect the WWC to play a 
role in harvesting and disseminating the learning from a wide range of 
interventions. 

4.3 Before then, we will publish the evaluations of the projects funded from phase 1 of 
the Innovation Programme that relate to care leavers.  We will also shortly be 
publishing the independent evaluation of the New Belongings project that was 
commissioned by DfE. 

4.4 The DfE will continue to work with local authority delivery partners – primarily 
through the National Leaving Care Benchmarking Forum – to understand what 
new challenges local authorities are facing and to work with them to decide how 
best to address them. 

4.5 In December 2015, the Prime Minister announced the Partners in Practice (PiP) 
initiative that will model excellence and innovation in the delivery of children’s 
social care services.  The aim is to foster deeper partnerships between the 
national and local government and to enable and support long-term improvement; 
the PiPs will be exploring greater freedoms in how they design and deliver their 
services; provide evidence about new structural models and innovations; and 
model best practice, share learning and support the wider sector.   

Supporting and Challenging Local Authorities 
4.6 It is important that central government, local authorities and children and young 

people know how well the care system is working, to share best practice and 
make improvements when needed.  We know a lot about the characteristics of the 
looked after population but the data does not always give the information we need 
about the impact of the care system on children and young people, or the 
outcomes they achieve.  To do this, we will focus on measuring the progress 


50  

made by children in care and care leavers, as well as continuing to understand 
their needs and characteristics.   

Intervening in failure 
4.7 We are strengthening our approach to intervening in councils where they fail to 

provide adequate services for children in need of help and protection, children in 
care, or care leavers:   

• Wherever Ofsted find children’s services to be inadequate, we will provide expert 
scrutiny to diagnose problems and support the council to produce an effective 
improvement plan within three months. 


 

• We would expect most of those councils to improve with support and challenge 
from experts, but councils’ progress towards improvement will be reviewed every 
six months.  


 

• If these reviews find that insufficient progress has been made, we will appoint a 
children’s services commissioner to review whether services should be removed 
from council control. 


 

• We will also immediately appoint a commissioner wherever council failure is 
persistent or systemic, with a presumption that the service will be placed outside 
of the council’s control, unless the commissioner identifies good reasons not to do 
so.  


 

• Where a commissioner concludes that the council does not have the capacity or 
capability to make the required improvements, we will take action so children’s 
services are removed from council control. 


        51  

5. HOW WE WILL MEASURE PROGRESS 

Outcome Data 
5.1 DfE will continue to publish care leaver outcome data annually, through a 

statistical first release, based on data provided by local authorities.  For the year 
ending March 2016, as well as data on 19-21 year-olds, we will also be publishing 
data for 17 and 18 year-old care leavers.  While this data collection provides 
valuable information, DfE recognises that data collected by other Departments or 
providers offer the potential to gain a fuller understanding of the outcomes 
achieved by care leavers. A one-off data sharing agreement is in place with the 
Ministry of Justice to link pupil level data to prison, probation and police data. We 
expect the data match to be achieved in 2016. Conditional on the quality of the 
match and the benefits of the data share, we will consider if a more regular 
sharing of data would be justified. 

5.2 A separate agreement is in place with Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs, the 
DWP and BIS to explore the link between educational achievement and labour 
market outcomes. This will be used to improve the quality of destination 
measures. We will also explore the quality of outcome information this data 
sharing provides, for specific groups such as care leavers. 

Ofsted Judgements 
5.3 By the end of 2017, Ofsted will complete inspections in all local authorities under 

its inspections of services for children in need of help and protection, children 
looked after and care leavers – the single inspection framework. This cycle of 
inspections will provide the most detailed baseline assessment of children’s 
services to date. 

5.4 Between June and September 2016, Ofsted will begin to consult on a new  
approach to the inspection of local authority children’s services from 2018.  The 
consultation will include proposals for a more risk-based and proportionate 
programme of inspection. It is expected that this programme will retain a sharp 
focus on the experiences and progress of care leavers. 

The Voice of the Care Leaver 
5.5 There are a number of regular surveys that capture the views and experiences of 

children in care and care leavers, including the Office of the Children’s 
Commissioner (OCC) ‘State of the Nation’ report and Ofsted’s survey of children in 
care.  We will review how children and young people’s views change over time as 
a way of assessing the impact of the strategy. 


52  

5.6 We also recognise and support the need for care leavers to have a direct say in 
shaping and designing the policies that affect them.  To this end, the DfE will set 
up a national care leaver advisory group, consisting of care leavers aged 
between 16 and 25, which it will use to gain insight into the issues that affect 
their lives and to inform the future evolution of this strategy and the 
development of care leaver policy. 

Reviewing Progress 
5.7 The Social Justice Cabinet Committee (SJCC) will provide Ministerial oversight of 

the strategy. The Minister for Children & Families will produce a progress update 
to SJCC each year on the implementation of the strategy, as well as possible 
refinements and updates to it, following the release of the care leaver data that 
DfE publishes annually in October.  

5.8 A senior Whitehall officials’ group (representing the eight government departments 
directly contributing to the strategy) will meet twice-yearly to review progress and 
set new milestones for the next period.  A separate officials group will meet 
quarterly to ensure momentum is sustained; and one meeting per year will be an 
‘open’ meeting at which care leaver representatives from the advisory group 
mentioned above and voluntary sector organisations will be able to ask questions 
about progress and next steps.  


  53    

© Crown copyright 2016 

This publication (not including logos) is licensed under the terms of the Open 
Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. Where we have identified any 
third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright 
holders concerned. 

To view this licence: 
visit  www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3  
email  psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk 
write to Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London, TW9 4DU 

About this publication: 
enquiries   www.education.gov.uk/contactus  
download  www.gov.uk/government/publications  

Reference:  DFE-00165-2016 


  

Follow us on Twitter: 
@educationgovuk  

Like us on Facebook: 
facebook.com/educationgovuk 


 54  

http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3/
mailto:psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk
http://www.education.gov.uk/contactus
http://www.gov.uk/government/publications
http://twitter.com/educationgovuk
http://www.facebook.com/educationgovuk

	Ministerial Foreword
	SUMMARY
	1 INTRODUCTION
	A Brief History of Leaving Care Support
	Our Vision
	Developing new ways of supporting care leavers
	Making corporate parenting everyone’s responsibility
	Driving system improvement

	What are we trying to achieve?
	How well is the system working at present?
	A changing cohort
	Care leavers’ outcomes
	Ofsted judgements on the quality of leaving care services
	Feedback from care leavers

	Developing the Strategy

	2. INNOVATION AND SYSTEM REFORM
	Providing More Practical and Emotional Support
	Delivering Services Differently
	Providing a stronger offer for those leaving residential care
	Empowering Care Leavers to Provide and Design Services for Themselves
	Preparing care leavers for the challenges of living independently
	Supporting care leavers who are young parents

	3. EMBEDDING A CULTURE OF CORPORATE PARENTING
	Outcome 1: Better prepared and supported to live independently
	Corporate Parenting Principles
	Care Leaver Covenant
	Care Leaver Local Offer
	Extending support from a Personal Adviser to all care leavers to age 25

	Outcome 2: Improved access to education, training and employment
	Work-based Learning
	Further Education
	Higher Education
	Employment

	Outcome 3: Experiencing stability and feeling safe and secure
	A safe and stable place to live
	Staying Put
	Staying Close
	Preventing homelessness
	Keeping care leavers safe from harm
	Supporting care leavers in the criminal justice system
	Supporting refugee and other foreign national care leavers

	Outcome 4: Improved Access to Health Support
	Mental Health
	Wider health issues

	Outcome 5: Achieving Financial Stability
	Financial Support
	Housing Costs
	Advice and guidance




	4. DRIVING SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT
	Promoting and Sharing Best Practice
	Supporting and Challenging Local Authorities
	Intervening in failure

	5. HOW WE WILL MEASURE PROGRESS
	Outcome Data
	Ofsted Judgements
	The Voice of the Care Leaver
	Reviewing Progress




