



Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance


 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering 
and counter-terrorist finance 


 

April 2016 


               

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and 
counter-terrorist finance 


           

April 2016 


            

© Crown copyright 2016 

This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except 
where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-
government-licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National 
Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk. 

Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain 
permission from the copyright holders concerned. 

This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/publications 

Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at 
Action_Plan@homeoffice.gsi.gov.uk 

ISBN 978-1-78655-126-9 

Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum. 


   


http://nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3
http://nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3
mailto:psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk
http://www.gov.uk/government/publications
mailto:Action_Plan@homeoffice.gsi.gov.uk




Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

Contents 

Ministerial Foreword ............................................................................................................3 

Summary of Actions.............................................................................................................5 

Chapter 1 Introduction.................................................................................................7 

Chapter 2 Actions......................................................................................................12 

Chapter 3 Implementing the Action Plan...................................................................30 

Annex A  Consultation on legislative proposals .......................................................34 

Annex B  Findings from the Call for Information on the Suspicious Activity 
Reports (SARs) Regime ...........................................................................38 

Annex C  Call for information – AML Supervisory Regime.......................................44 


    1 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 


     2 


Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

Ministerial Foreword 

This Action Plan represents the most significant change to our anti-money laundering and 
terrorist finance regime in over a decade. It sends a clear message: that we will not stand 
for money laundering or the funding of terrorism through UK institutions. We are 
determined to protect the security and prosperity of our citizens, and the integrity of our 
world-leading financial system, and will vigorously pursue those who abuse it for illicit 
means. 

This Action Plan is principally concerned with three priorities. First, we need a more robust 
law enforcement response to the threats we face. That means creating aggressive new 
legal powers and building new capabilities in our law enforcement agencies to enable the 
relentless disruption of criminals and terrorists. This is in addition to the cross-agency 
taskforce recently announced by the Prime Minister to investigate any evidence of illegality 
that may be found in the ‘Mossack Fonseca’ papers.  

Second, to reform the supervisory regime and ensure that those few companies who 
facilitate or enable money laundering are brought to task. The Government wants to 
ensure a risk-based approach to tackling money laundering and terrorist finance. We 
expect the banks and other firms subject to the Money Laundering Regulations to take a 
proportionate approach, focusing their efforts on the highest risks, without troubling low 
risk clients with unnecessary red-tape. We will continue to maintain our strong regulatory 
regime to ensure that our financial services industry is the best regulated in the world. 

Third, to increase our international reach to tackle money laundering and terrorist financing 
threats by working with international groups, such as the G20 and Financial Action Task 
Force, to take action overseas.  

Underpinning these three priorities, and central to the success of the Action Plan, is a new 
way of working with the private sector. We need radically more information to be shared 
between law enforcement agencies, supervisors, and the private sector; and we need to 
take joint action to disrupt criminals and terrorists. The pilot Joint Money Laundering 
Intelligence Taskforce (JMLIT), which has brought together law enforcement agencies and 
ten banks under the leadership of the National Crime Agency (NCA) to share information 
on money laundering and terrorist financing, has demonstrated the opportunities offered 
by this type of approach.  

The Prime Minister’s Anti-Corruption Summit next month will galvanise the international 
response and address issues including corporate secrecy, government transparency, the 
enforcement of international anti-corruption laws, and the strengthening of international 
institutions. 


 3 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

This Government has done more than any other to tackle money laundering and terrorist 
financing. More assets have been recovered from criminals than ever before, with a record 
£199m recovered in 2014/15, and hundreds of millions more frozen and put beyond the 
reach of criminals. This Government is committed to pursuing further significant reforms, 
following this Action Plan and the Prime Minister’s Anti-Corruption Summit. 


   

John Hayes Harriett Baldwin 

Minister for Security Economic Secretary to the Treasury 


 4 


Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

Summary of Actions 

 Action Lead Completed by 

A stronger partnership with the private sector 

1 Reform the Suspicious Activity Reports 
(SARs) regime, making the necessary 
legislative, operational and technical 
changes to deliver the proposals detailed in 
this Action Plan.  

Home Office / 
National Crime 
Agency (NCA) 

Oct 2018 

2 Move Joint Money Laundering Intelligence 
Taskforce (JMLIT) to a permanent footing. 

NCA July 2016 

3 Create a register of banks’ particular 
business specialisms and make it available 
to JMLIT to ensure that relevant expertise is 
brought into JMLIT work on money 
laundering and terrorist financing typologies. 

British Bankers’ 
Association 

End 2016 

4 Explore legislation to achieve better 
information sharing between law 
enforcement agencies and the private 
sector, and between private sector entities. 

Home Office Oct 2017 

5 Deliver Prevent campaigns to raise 
awareness amongst professionals in the 
regulated sector of money laundering risks 
and the actions needed to mitigate them. 

Home Office, 
HM Treasury 
(HMT) 

Ongoing 

6 Public-private partnership to run a Prevent 
campaign to educate consumers and 
businesses as to the risks of becoming 
involved in money laundering. 

British Bankers’ 
Association, Home 
Office, HMT 

End 2017 

Enhancing the law enforcement response 

7 Deliver improvements in intelligence 
collection capability. 

NCA Jan 2017 

8 Ensure an effective multi-agency 
investigation response, drawing on private 
sector expertise, to target the most complex 
high-end money laundering cases.  

NCA Oct 2016 

9 Create a programme to upskill intelligence, 
analytical, investigative and legal staff to 
take on complex money laundering cases. 

NCA June 2017 

10 Establish a more sustainable funding model 
for Regional Asset Recovery Teams to 
ensure their robust response to money 
laundering linked to serious and organised 
crime, including through asset confiscation 
and denial. 

Home Office Oct 2016 


 5 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

 Action Lead Completed by 

11 Explore new powers to tackle money 
laundering. 

Home Office Oct 2016 

12 Reduce vulnerabilities and close loopholes 
that can be exploited by terrorists. 

Home Office Oct 2017 

Improving the effectiveness of the supervisory regime 

13 Complete the review of the supervisory 
regime taking into account relevant 
evidence submitted to the Cutting Red Tape 
Review, and announce reforms. 

HMT Autumn 2016 

Increasing our international reach 

14 Create new NCA International Liaison 
Officer posts in important jurisdictions. 

NCA Mar 2017 

15 Develop a new approach for cross-border 
information sharing between private sector 
and Government entities. 

HMT, Home Office ongoing 

16 Submit a new approach for international law 
enforcement and prosecutor co-operation on 
international corruption cases. 

NCA Mar 2017 

17 Deliver training to, and share expertise with, 
key overseas partners to help them build 
their capacity and capability to investigate 
and combat the financing of terrorism. 

NTFIU Ongoing 

18 Continue to support Counter-ISIL Finance 
Group efforts to degrade Daesh finances 
and work to support activity to combat 
terrorist finance. 

FCO Ongoing 

19 Support UK charities operating in difficult 
environments overseas to mitigate the risk 
of their funds being abused for terrorist 
purposes. 

Charity 
Commission 

Ongoing 


  6 


Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

1. Introduction 

The threat 

1.1 This Action Plan tackles money laundering in all its forms, but it is particularly 
focussed on money laundering as a critical enabler of serious and organised crime, 
grand corruption, and terrorism. The November 2015 National Security Strategy 
(NSS) and Strategic Defence and Security Review (SDSR) identified terrorism and 
serious and organised crime as Tier One and Tier Two national security threats.1 
Terrorism poses a direct and immediate threat to our domestic security and 
overseas interests. Serious and organised crime costs the UK at least £24 billion 
annually, causes loss of life and deprives people of their security and prosperity.2  

1.2 Money laundering and terrorist financing undermine the integrity of our financial 
institutions and markets, enable criminals to hide, store and benefit from the 
proceeds of their crime, and enable terrorist groups to function, recruit and commit 
terrorist acts. Money laundering into and through the UK financial system is also 
related to grand corruption overseas – the bribery and theft of public funds. 

1.3 The UK remains the largest centre for cross-border banking, accounting for 17% of 
the total global value of international bank lending and 41% of global foreign 
exchange trading. The size of the UK's financial and professional services sector, 
our open economy, and the attractiveness of the London property market to 
overseas investors makes the UK unusually exposed to international money 
laundering risks. Substantial sums from crimes committed overseas are laundered 
through the UK.3 There is no definitive measure of the scale of money laundering, 
but the best available international estimate of amounts laundered globally would be 
equivalent to some 2.7% of global GDP or US$1.6 trillion in 2009.4  

1.4 Most businesses want to comply with the law and those subject to the regime can 
play a significant part in tackling money laundering and terrorist financing. 
Government has a duty to help them comply and is aware that the current regime 
does not work as well as it could and that more could be done to help businesses 
comply and better focus resources on serious crime. A more effective response to 
the threat, so that resources can be better targeted at areas of real risk, for example 
by removing duplication or conflicting compliance advice, will help lift unnecessary 
bureaucratic burdens that do not contribute to the fight against crime and help 
resource be used better elsewhere. The Government is committed to reducing the 
regulatory burden on business, which can distract or make it harder for companies 
to focus on real risks and will also ensure that any additional burdens placed on 
businesses and individuals are targeted, proportionate and justified by evidence of 
significant need. 

                                            
1  ‘National Security Strategy and Strategic Defence and Security Review’, HM Government, November 

2015. 
2  ‘Understanding organised crime: estimating the scale and social and economic costs’, Home Office, 

October 2013. 
3  ‘National Strategic Assessment of Serious and Organised Crime 2015’, NCA, June 2015. 
4  ‘Estimated illicit financial flows resulting from drugs trafficking and other transnational organised crime’, 

UNODC, October 2011. 


 7 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

The UK’s Strategic Approach 

1.5 The Government's strategic response to money laundering is founded upon a 
risk-based approach. The 2013 Serious and Organised Crime Strategy aims to 
substantially reduce the level of serious and organised crime affecting the UK and 
its interests. It is based upon the UK's successful counter-terrorism framework, 
which has four main elements: prosecuting and disrupting serious and organised 
crime (Pursue); preventing people from engaging in serious and organised crime 
(Prevent); increasing protection against serious and organised crime (Protect), and 
reducing the impact of serious and organised crime where it takes place (Prepare).5 

1.6 Countering terrorist financing is important in protecting national security and forms a 
key part of the UK's counter-terrorism strategy, CONTEST,6 the aim being to 
reduce the terrorist threat to the UK and its interests overseas by depriving terroris
and violent extremists of the financial resources and systems required for terrori
related activity. 


ts sm-

                                           

1.7 The SDSR set out the Government's intention to introduce new measures to make 
the UK a more hostile place for those seeking to move, hide or use the proceeds of 
crime or corruption or to evade ‘sanctions’. In order to achieve that aim, the SDSR 
committed the Government to enhancing its cooperation with the private sector, 
building on the work of the JMLIT, and publishing this Action Plan.  

1.8 Central to the approach taken in this Action Plan is the recognition of the need to 
establish a much more effective public-private partnership to tackle illicit finances 
than has existed until now. Only by bringing together the efforts of law enforcement 
agencies, supervisors and regulators, and the private sector; and by making sure 
that law enforcement agencies and supervisors have the right 'pursue' powers and 
capabilities, can the threat from money laundering and terrorist financing be 
addressed successfully. This Action Plan will deliver the Government's strategic aim 
to make the UK a more hostile place for those seeking to move, hide or use the 
proceeds of crime or corruption through a focus on four priority areas: 

 A stronger partnership with the private sector  

o Law enforcement agencies, supervisors and the private sector working in 
partnership to target resources at the highest money laundering and 
terrorist financing risks.  

o New means of information sharing to strengthen the application of the 
risk-based approach and mitigate vulnerabilities. 

o A collaborative approach to preventing individuals becoming involved in 
money laundering. 

 Enhancing the law enforcement response 

o New capabilities and new legal powers to build the intelligence picture, 
disrupt money launderers and terrorists, recover criminal proceeds, and 
protect the integrity of the UK's financial system. For example, the 
Government has established a Task Force, led jointly by the NCA and 


 

5  ‘Serious and Organised Crime Strategy’, HM Government, October 2013 
6  CONTEST: The United Kingdom’s Strategy for Countering Terrorism’, HM Government, July 2011 


8 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

HMRC, to investigate all forms of illegality stemming from the data related 
to Mossack Fonseca, the law firm based in Panama. 

 Improving the effectiveness of the supervisory regime 

o Investigate the effectiveness of the current supervisory regime, and 
consider radical options for improvement to ensure that a risk-based 
approach is fully embedded, beginning with the understanding of specific 
risks, and the spotting of criminal activity, rather than a focus on tick-box 
compliance. 

 Increasing our international reach 

o Increase the international reach of law enforcement agencies and 
international information sharing to tackle money laundering and terrorist 
financing threats. The international leadership being shown by the UK 
through the Prime Minister's Anti-Corruption Summit will lead to greater 
disruption of money laundering and terrorist financing activities, the 
prosecution of those responsible and increased recovery of the proceeds 
of crime, and a greater protection of the UK financial system. The Summit 
will galvanise the international response and address issues including 
corporate secrecy, government transparency, the enforcement of 
international anti-corruption laws, and the strengthening of international 
institutions. 

1.9 A successful anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance regime will result 
in the relentless disruption of money laundering and terrorist finance activities, the 
prosecution of those responsible and the recovery of the proceeds of crime. 
A successful regime will dissuade those seeking to undertake money laundering 
and terrorist finance activities from doing so. It will help the regulated sector better 
protect itself through targeted support from its supervisors, and it will help deliver 
a stronger international effort to tackle upstream money laundering and terrorist 
finance threats. 

1.10 The success of this Action Plan depends on the efforts of law enforcement and 
prosecutorial agencies, government departments, supervisors, and the private 
sector. It requires a collective understanding of the risks, and a willingness to 
collaborate and target resources and activities as the threat changes and develops 
in what must be a shared endeavour. It also requires international co-operation from 
key jurisdictions, particularly other global and regional financial centres and 
international organisations, such as the European Union, Europol, Interpol and 
FATF. 

1.11 Most businesses want to comply with the law and those subject to the anti-money 
laundering regime can play a significant part in tackling money laundering and 
terrorist financing. A more effective response to the threat, so that resources can be 
targeted at areas of real risk, will help lift bureaucratic burdens that do not 
contribute to the fight against crime. 

What we have done so far 

1.12 The UK was a founder member of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), the 
inter-governmental body established in 1989, that sets global standards and 


 9 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

promotes effective legal, regulatory and operational measures to combat money 
laundering and the financing of terrorist activities.  

1.13 Since 2010 we have taken important steps to strengthen our response. In 2011, 
the CONTEST counter terrorism strategy was refreshed. In 2013, the Government 
founded the NCA to lead, co-ordinate and support the national response to serious 
and organised crime, including money laundering. At the same time, it published a 
new Serious and Organised Crime Strategy that made attacking criminal finances 
central to our efforts to tackle serious and organised crime. Since then, more assets 
have been recovered from criminals than ever before, with a record £199m 
recovered in 2014/15, and hundreds of millions more frozen and put beyond the 
reach of criminals.  

1.14 In 2014, the Serious and Organised Crime Financial Sector Forum was set up to 
facilitate practical collaboration between government, law enforcement, the 
regulators and the financial sector. A new International Corruption Unit in the NCA 
was formed, to become a UK centre of excellence for dealing with overseas bribery 
and corruption, and the Cabinet Office launched a review of the wider law 
enforcement response to bribery and corruption. The Serious Crime Act 2015 
strengthened asset recovery powers, and brought in a new offence of participating 
in the activities of an organised crime group.  

1.15 The FATF requires countries to assess and take action against their understanding 
and assessment of their national risks, through a National Risk Assessment, and to 
then take a risk-based approach, meaning the legal, regulatory and operational 
measures that are commensurate with these risks.  

National Risk Assessment of Money Laundering and Terrorist 
Financing 

1.16 In October 2015, the Government published the National Risk Assessment for 
Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing (NRA).7 It provides a candid and robust 
assessment to better understand the UK's money laundering and terrorist finance 
risks, and to inform the efficient allocation of resources to the highest risks and 
where there will be the greatest impact.  

1.17 The most significant money laundering threats are: 

 High-end money laundering of criminal funds into or through the UK, 
particularly linked to grand corruption and major fraud. 

 The role of professionals in the financial, legal and accountancy and related 
service sectors such as Trust and Company Service Providers (TCSPs) to 
enable the laundering of the proceeds of UK and overseas crime into, through 
and out of the UK. 

 The role of 'international controllers' in facilitating the laundering of proceeds of 
crime from the UK, or from overseas and into the UK, linked to money service 
businesses (MSBs). 

                                            
7  ‘National Risk Assessment of Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing’, HM Government, October 

2015 


10 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

 The proceeds of crime from major crimes including organised immigration 
crime and modern slavery. 

1.18 The most significant terrorist financing threats are: 

 The raising of terrorist funds through the exploitation of vulnerabilities in the 
financial sector and the movement of funds for the financing of terrorism 
through MSBs and cash couriering. 

 The abuse of the charitable sector, both for raising and moving funds 
specifically for terrorist purposes. 

1.19 The NRA identified six areas in which action is needed to strengthen the anti-money 
laundering and counter-terrorist finance regimes. These areas are listed below.  

 Reform the suspicious activity reports regime, and upgrade the capabilities of 
the UK Financial Intelligence Unit  

 Transform information sharing between law enforcement agencies, the private 
sector and supervisors, building on the progress already made through the 
JMLIT 

 Fill intelligence gaps, particularly those associated with high end money 
laundering through the financial and professional services sectors  

 Enhance our law enforcement response to tackle the most serious threats 

 Address the inconsistencies in the supervisory regime that have been identified  

 Work with supervisors to improve individuals' and firms' knowledge of money 
laundering and terrorist financing risks in key parts of the regulated sector to 
help them avoid being exploited by criminals and terrorists  

1.20 This Action Plan and the 4th Anti-Money Laundering Directive, due to be 
transposed by June 2017, will increase the UK's emphasis on this risk-based 
approach.8 The Directive will require private sector firms to reinforce this approach 
across all aspects of their anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 
regimes. The consultation on its transposition will launch this year.  

1.21 This Action Plan contains a range of measures which the Government is committed 
to implementing, and a series of proposals on which the Government is seeking the 
views of stakeholders. Questions on the legislative proposals, and details of how to 
provide comment on them, can be found at Annex A. The Call for Information 
regarding proposals for changes to the supervisory regime and how to provide 
comment can be found at Annex C.  

1.22 The Government will monitor the implementation of this Action Plan. An update to 
the National Risk Assessment will be conducted in 2017. 


 

                                            
8  Directive of the Parliament and of the Council on the prevention of the use of the financial system for the 

purpose of money laundering and terrorist financing, 2015/849 



 11 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

2. Actions 

2(a): A stronger partnership with the private sector 

The Government wants to find new ways for the public and private sectors to work 
in partnership in order to increase radically the effectiveness of our collective 
response to money laundering and terrorist financing, and strip away unnecessary 
bureaucratic burdens in the process. The private sector collectively spends billions 
of pounds a year on financial crime compliance, but it is not always an effective 
first-line of defence against those seeking to engage in money laundering and 
terrorist finance, despite these efforts. Reform of the Suspicious Activity Reports 
(SARs) regime, and building on the success of the Joint Money Laundering 
Intelligence Taskforce (JMLIT) pilot will be central to founding a new and more 
collaborative public-private partnership.  

2.1 The private sector forms the first line of defence against money laundering and 
terrorist financing. The British Bankers’ Association (BBA) estimates that its 
members are collectively spending at least £5 billion annually on core financial 
crime compliance, including enhanced systems and controls and recruitment of 
staff. Other parts of the private sector spend additional sums. Despite this very 
significant investment, money laundering and terrorist financing still occurs. Too 
much resource at present is focused on dealing with regulatory compliance, and too 
little is focused on tackling financial crime risk. The public and private sectors need 
to work together to ensure that existing resources are used to greatest effect. The 
Government is committed to considering potentially radical reforms to the way the 
public and private sectors work together for a more effective regime against money 
laundering and terrorist financing, including in the way the system of business 
supervision works (see section 2c below). 

2.2 Effective exchange of knowledge within the private sector, and between the public 
and private sectors, is necessary to increase our collective knowledge of threats 
and vulnerabilities. Developing a common understanding of the highest priority risks 
will provide the basis for a more focused and efficient use of public and private 
resources that will have the greatest effect on money laundering and terrorist 
financing threats. To deliver this, law enforcement agencies need information from 
the private sector to inform their intelligence, while the private and supervisory 
sectors need information from each other and from law enforcement agencies to 
assist them in managing the risks and vulnerabilities that they face as the threat 
changes and develops.  

The Suspicious Activity Reports regime 

2.3 The SARs regime is central to the UK’s anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist 
financing structures. The Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (POCA) requires persons in 
the regulated sector to report to the NCA where there are reasonable grounds to 
know or suspect that another person is engaged in money laundering. The 
Terrorism Act 2000 imposes a duty of disclosure upon persons in the regulated 
sector and also upon any person who in the course of a trade, profession or 
business or in the course of their employment believes or suspects that someone 
has committed any of the principal terrorist financing offences in the Act. If a SAR is 


12 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

submitted and consent is gained, the reporter gains a statutory defence from a 
money laundering or terrorist financing prosecution.  

2.4 SARs have the potential to be a critical intelligence resource, and provide important 
opportunities for law enforcement agencies to intervene to disrupt money 
laundering and terrorist financing, and build investigations against those involved. 
Last year, over 350,000 SARs were filed with the UK Financial Intelligence Unit 
(UKFIU) in the NCA, which operates the SARs regime.9 In recent years, however, 
both law enforcement agencies and the private sector have expressed increasing 
concerns about the effectiveness of the SARs regime.  


 

2.5 The Home Office launched a review of the SARs regime in February 2015. 
Following a call for evidence from the ‘regulated sector’,10 supervisors, law 
enforcement agencies and non-governmental organisations, a number of areas 
were identified where action was needed to improve the regime. A summary of the 
responses, and the key themes, can be found at Annex B. Many of the proposals in 
this Plan address these responses and reflect subsequent engagement with the 
reporting sector and others. 

2.6 The Home Office review of the SARs regime found that the most effective way for 
the UK to improve its response to the threat from money laundering and terrorist 
finance is through stronger partnership working between the public and private 
sectors, and through jointly identifying and tackling those entities – individuals, 
companies, and others – that pose the highest risk. At present, too much resource 
in both the public and private sectors is devoted to dealing reactively with relatively 
low risk transactions. Radical changes to the way that the SARs regime operates 
will be required to make this operate effectively and the Government will take action 
to address the concerns of legitimate businesses in these reforms for example by 
helping business to focus reports on areas of concern rather than taking a box 
ticking approach. Key changes that the Government proposes to make to the SARs 
regime are outlined below. The JMLIT and new legal powers for law enforcement 
agencies, detailed in the next section, will also be integral to the reformed SARs 
regime.  

                                            
9  ‘Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs) Annual Report 2014’, NCA, December 2014. 
10  The ‘regulated sector’ means those firms that are subject to the Money Laundering Regulations 2007, 

such as firms in the financial, legal, accountancy and gambling sectors. 



 13 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

Re-focus the regime on the highest risk entities 

2.7 The SARs regime will be reformed to focus the public and private sector effort on 
tackling those entities, such as individuals and organisations, that pose the highest 
money laundering and the financing of terrorism risks, rather than targeting 
transactions. The volume and speed of financial transactions in the 21st century 
makes a transaction-focused regime less effective. Instead, public and private 
resources will be directed at the highest risks. Reporters will still need to provide 
reports where they have suspicion, but the Government will enable the reporting 
sector to work with the NCA and other law enforcement agencies to provide more 
effective SARs where there are strong suspicions of criminal activity, through new 
information sharing legal gateways, improved official guidance, and a permanent 
and strengthened JMLIT.  

Remove the current consent regime 

2.8 The consent regime is inefficient and we will consider whether it should be 
removed.11 We envisage that it could be replaced with an intelligence-led approach, 
supported by information sharing through the JMLIT (see below). The statutory 
money laundering defence provided by the current consent regime would also be 
removed, although the POCA would be amended to ensure that reporters who fulfill 
their legal and regulatory obligations would not be criminalised. The Government 
would create powers to enable reporters to be granted immunity for taking specified 
courses of action (e.g. maintaining a customer relationship when to terminate it 
would alert the subject to the existence of a law enforcement investigation). The 
Government would also legislate to provide a power for the NCA to oblige reporters 
to provide further information on a SAR where there is a need to do so. 

Upgrade the UK Financial Intelligence Unit’s capabilities 

2.9 The NCA will oversee the upgrade to the UK Financial Intelligence Unit’s (UKFIU) 
capabilities, including the development of a replacement for the SARs IT system, 
which is nearing the end of its working life. This would provide a modern IT system 
both for reporters to submit reports, and which will automatically check SARs 
against law enforcement data and other information to assess whether a SAR 
should be prioritised for further investigation or other action by law enforcement 
agencies, supervisors, or the reporter. The Government considers that those who 
will benefit from the new IT system should share the costs for developing it. 

Develop better analysis of SARs 

2.10 As part of the upgrade of the capabilities of the UKFIU, the NCA will develop 
capabilities to enable a better analysis of the SARs submitted, to identify the 
typologies of money laundering and the financing of terrorism, and provide 
assessments of these to the private sector, to allow them to both identify those 
responsible and work with law enforcement agencies to tackle them, and to take 
measures to protect themselves. 

                                            
11  Under the Proceeds of Crime Act (POCA), individual persons and businesses in the regulated sector are 

required to report the suspicious transactions or activity that they become aware of. A reporter can avail 
themselves of a defence against committing a money-laundering offence if they seek the consent of the 
FIU, under section 335 of POCA, to conduct a transaction or activity about which they have suspicions. 


14 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

Data sharing to develop more effective SARs 

2.11 The Government would consider legislation to permit the reporting sector to share 
information, under legal safe harbour, on money laundering and terrorist finance 
risks. The Government will work with the reporting sector to address issues about 
confidentiality and protection, and learn from the experiences of law enforcement 
agencies and banks in using the powers provided in section 314 of the USA 
PATRIOT Act in this regard. This will enable firms to better understand the risks 
they face and to submit higher quality SARs as a result.  

Action 1: 

Reform the SARs regime, making the necessary legislative, operational and 
technical changes to deliver the proposals detailed in this Action Plan. (Pursue, 
Protect) 

Lead: Home Office and NCA 

Joint Money Laundering Intelligence Taskforce (JMLIT) 

2.12 The Government has already taken steps to build better cooperation between the 
public and private sectors on illicit finances. The JMLIT was established under the 
Serious and Organised Crime Financial Sector Forum, chaired by the Home Office, 
the British Bankers’ Association (BBA) and the NCA. The JMLIT is led by the NCA 
and includes representatives from the financial sector, City of London Police, 
Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), HMRC and the Home Office.  

2.13 The JMLIT was established as a pilot in February 2015 to provide an environment 
in which the financial sector and law enforcement agencies could exchange and 
analyse information and intelligence to detect, prevent and disrupt money 
laundering and wider economic crime threats against the UK. The pilot has 
demonstrated the clear benefits of partnership working between law enforcement 
agencies and the financial sector. Strategically, the JMLIT has increased the UK’s 
public and private sectors’ resilience to economic crime and this must continue as 
the threat changes and develops.  

2.14 From an operational perspective, it has enhanced collective anti-money laundering 
detection capability and generated increased prevention and disruption 
opportunities relating to money laundering in the UK through the sharing of tactical 
intelligence using the legal framework set out in the Crime and Courts Act 2013. 
As of February 2016, the JMLIT pilot has directly contributed to law enforcement 
operations, including eleven arrests and restraint of £558,144 of criminal funds. 
Over 1,700 bank accounts linked to suspected criminal activity have been identified, 
261 have been closed, and 517 are subject to heightened monitoring by the banks. 
Twelve alerts have been issued to the financial sector to raise awareness of threats. 


  15 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 


 

2.15 The Terrorist Finance Experts Group within the JMLIT supports the exchange and 
analysis of terrorist finance information and intelligence and thematic pieces of work 
related to terrorist finance and methodologies. The group is chaired by the Home 
Office and the BBA, and includes the National Terrorist Financial Investigation Unit 
and representatives of the financial sector. The overall purpose of the Group is to 
build a greater common understanding of terrorist financing risks and to foster a 
closer working relationship between the private and public sector to counter the 
financing of terrorism affecting the UK and its interests.  

2.16 With the JMLIT approaching the end of its pilot, the Government will build on the 
experience gained to put the taskforce on a permanent footing and make it an 
integral part of the UK’s anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing 
regime. The Government, in partnership with private sector members of JMLIT, will 
seek to increase its scale and capabilities, in order to tackle economic crime threats 
including money laundering linked to corruption, trade-based finance, high-priority 
crimes and terrorist finance. An expansion of JMLIT will require all participants to 
build up its analytical capability and devote greater resources to its work. Its 
membership should be expanded to include more banks and other financial 
services firms.  

Action 2: 

Move JMLIT to a permanent footing, increase its analytical capability and expand its 
membership to include more banks and other financial services firms. Consider 
how the taskforce approach could be developed in other reporting sectors. (Protect 
and Pursue) 

Lead: NCA, supported by Home Office and British Bankers’ Association. 

2.17 Many banks will not have the resources to provide a permanent member of staff to 
JMLIT. It will be important for firms with specialist knowledge and expertise to be 
able to contribute to JMLIT to work on, for example, money laundering typologies, 
that touch upon their areas of expertise. To that end, a register of financial sector 
firms’ specialisms should be made available to JMLIT to ensure that all relevant 
information and expertise is available to it. 


16 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

Action 3: 

Create a register of banks’ particular business specialisms and make it available to 
JMLIT to ensure that relevant expertise is brought into JMLIT work on money 
laundering and terrorist financing typologies. 

Lead: British Bankers’ Association. 

2.18 Criminals often launder the proceeds of their crimes across multiple private sector 
firms. Whilst the Data Protection Act permits the sharing of information between 
firms in certain circumstances, the limited nature of those permitted circumstances, 
in combination with case law, data protection rules, and the risk of legal challenge in 
the civil courts militates against firms sharing information to prevent and detect 
money laundering and terrorist financing. The JMLIT pilot has demonstrated that 
existing legal information sharing gateways are insufficient for sharing data directly 
between private sector organisations. There is a need for legal ‘safe harbour’ 
provisions to allow data and intelligence to be shared lawfully between financial 
institutions in order to prevent and detect money laundering and terrorist financing. 
The Government intends to consider legislating to create the necessary legal 
information sharing gateways. 

Action 4: 

Explore legislation to achieve better information sharing between law enforcement 
agencies and the private sector, and between private sector entities through the 
introduction of ‘safe harbour’ information sharing powers.  

This will facilitate the development of a coherent public-private sector response to 
financial crime in all its forms. (Pursue, Protect) 

Lead: Home Office 

2.19 The Home Office has worked with supervisors, firms and law enforcement agencies 
to run public communications campaigns in 2014 and 2015 targeting solicitors and 
accountants to raise awareness of the money laundering risks they face. The 
campaigns have aimed to prevent professionals getting drawn into money 
laundering, as they have skills that are particularly attractive to criminals seeking to 
launder their funds. The campaigns have been welcomed by private sector 
representatives.  

2.20 The first campaign led to a 20% increase in suspicious activity reports from the 
sector. The second campaign is still running at the time of publication. Its impact will 
be fully evaluated on completion. These campaigns have proven the importance of 
the Prevent strand in tackling money laundering. There will continue to be a need 
for Government, supervisors, law enforcement agencies and the sectors 
themselves to work together in the future to prevent professionals wittingly or 
unwittingly facilitating money laundering and terrorist financing. 



 17 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

Action 5: 

Public-private partnerships to run sector-specific Prevent campaigns to raise 
awareness amongst professionals in the regulated sector of money laundering risks 
and the actions needed to mitigate them. (Prevent). 

Lead: Home Office, HM Treasury, supervisors and law enforcement agencies 

Action 6: 

Public-private partnership to run a Prevent campaign to educate consumers and 
businesses as to the risks of becoming involved in money laundering. 

Lead: British Bankers’ Association, supported by Home Office and HMT. 

2(b): Enhancing the law enforcement response 

The law enforcement response will be strengthened to disrupt the highest-priority 
threats to the UK and pursue those seeking to engage in money laundering and 
terrorist finance. Intelligence collection capabilities will be targeted to build a better 
intelligence picture and resources will be marshalled to the most complex, high-end 
money laundering investigations. As an example, the cross-agency taskforce, 
recently announced by the Prime Minister, will investigate the data from Mossack 
Fonseca, the Panamanian law firm, and any forms of illegality that it is found. 
Powers will be strengthened to protect the integrity of the UK financial system. 

2.21 The speed and complexity of the global financial system, the links between money 
laundering, terrorist finance and a wide range of predicate crimes, often committed 
overseas, presents difficulties for law enforcement agencies seeking to tackle illicit 
finances. To be effective, UK law enforcement agencies need to have the right 
capabilities in place to enable them to build a strong intelligence picture and to 
intervene to disrupt the threat, supported by appropriate legal powers. 

Building the intelligence picture 

2.22 The NRA identified significant intelligence gaps, in particular in relation to ‘high-end’ 
money laundering. The intelligence picture in other areas – such as high value 
dealers, gambling and new payment methods – was mixed. The NCA, as the lead 
on the national response to economic crime, including money laundering, has a 
programme of work to build a better intelligence picture, supported by other law 
enforcement agencies and the intelligence community. They will work with their 
partners to increase their knowledge of high-end money laundering techniques and 
instruments so that the NCA can identify, develop and action an increased number 
of opportunities for disruption and regular reassessment of the threat. They will also 
continue to monitor emerging threats and to inform the propositions for the 
regulatory approach. The private sector holds much of the data needed to develop 
the intelligence picture, and will play an enhanced role both through the 
strengthened JMLIT and by producing better quality reports through a reformed 
SARs regime. 


18 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

2.23 HM Treasury launched a Call for Information in 2014 on the benefits and risks 
associated with digital currencies. Respondents to the Call for Information identified 
that digital currencies and associated technology have the potential to deliver real 
benefits for businesses and consumers. Responses also highlighted that some 
features of digital currencies could provide opportunities for illicit use. HM Treasury 
notes this potential risk, while acknowledging that evidence from across 
government, law enforcement and academia suggests that there is currently a low 
level of illicit activity in digital currency networks.  

2.24 We intend to bring digital currency exchange firms into anti-money laundering 
regulation, as it is at the point where users “cash in” and “cash out” of digital 
currency networks that money laundering and terrorist finance risk is highest. This 
is consistent with a risk-based approach, and we note that extending the perimeter 
of anti-money laundering regulations beyond digital currency exchange firms (e.g. 
to wallet providers) would not deliver any benefits in terms of mitigating money 
laundering and terrorist finance risk, and would place significant burdens on firms in 
this innovative and embryonic sector.  

Action 7: 

Deliver improvements in intelligence collection capability including through:  

 greater and better use of sensitive intelligence 

 greater exploitation of SARs 

 enhanced intelligence exchanges with the financial and legal sectors, including 
through JMLIT; and  

 closer co-operation with domestic and international partners.  

Produce a new set of intelligence collection requirements on high end money 
laundering, to assist with intelligence collection. Regularly re-assess the threat, 
particularly that posed by high-end money laundering. (Pursue) 

Lead: NCA 

Investigative capabilities 

2.25 The NRA found that the law enforcement response to money laundering has been 
weak for an extended period of time. The NCA was launched in 2013 to lead, 
coordinate and support UK law enforcement agencies’ response to serious and 
organised crime including money laundering, bribery and corruption.12 Other law 
enforcement agencies, in particular Serious Fraud Office (SFO) and HMRC have 
expert officers and access to a wide range of legal powers. Law enforcement 
agencies will pool their resources in order to take on the high-end money laundering 
cases that pose the greatest risk to the UK.  

2.26 High-end money laundering is complex, and can involve the misuse of the 
accountancy service providers and legal professionals such as TCSPs to provide 
legitimacy and access to other regulated sectors without detection. Proceeds can 

                                            
12  The Cabinet Office is taking forward a review of the enforcement response to bribery and corruption. It 

includes full consideration of the powers, capabilities and structures involved in the response to bribery 
and corruption. Once concluded it will report to the Inter-Ministerial Group on Anti-Corruption. 



 19 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

be held in bank accounts, real estate and other investments. Ownership is 
disguised behind multiple corporate structures, often registered overseas. To 
respond adequately to this threat, it is necessary for UK law enforcement agencies 
to review their existing financial investigation capabilities and to develop the expert 
intelligence, analytical, investigative and legal skills needed, while drawing on the 
specialist knowledge available in the private sector. 

Action 8: 

Ensure an effective multi-agency investigation response, drawing on private sector 
expertise, to target the most complex high-end money laundering cases. (Pursue)  

Lead: NCA, supported by CPS, SFO, HMRC 


 

Action 9:  

Create a programme to upskill intelligence, analytical, investigative and legal staff to 
take on complex money laundering cases. (Pursue) 

Lead: NCA, supported by HMRC, SFO, CPS, National Police Chiefs’ Council 


 

2.27 The regional policing tier is critical if the UK is to provide an effective pursue 
response to money laundering. Whilst national agencies will be expected to take on 
the most serious threats, there will remain a significant number of money laundering 
cases for which specialist capabilities will be required.  

2.28 The Strategic Policing Requirement is the Home Secretary’s statement of the 
national threats and the national policing capabilities which are required to counter 
them. Police and crime commissioners (PCCs) are required to have regard to the 
SPR when issuing their police and crime plans, and Chief Constables must have 
regard to both the police and crime plan and the SPR when exercising their 
functions. It helps PCCs plan for threats that span local force boundaries. Serious 
and organised crime is one of the six national threats in the 2015 SPR.13 

2.29 Regional Asset Recovery Teams (RARTs) sit within Regional Organised Crime 
Units (ROCUs) and develop financial intelligence in aid of the investigation and 
disruption of criminal entities. They also utilise financial investigation to conduct 
money laundering investigations, disrupt subjects and recover assets using the 
powers provided in the Proceeds of Crime Act. Their core financial intelligence and 
investigation capabilities must be maintained and developed to fulfil this purpose, as 
well as to respond to requirements set through the national tasking and coordination 
arrangements.  

2.30 Most funding for the ROCUs comes from the PCCs of the forces in each region. 
The Home Office provides additional funding for ROCUs (£25 million in 2015/16). 
The 2015 Conservative Party Manifesto included a commitment to allow police 
forces to retain a greater percentage of the value of assets they seize from 
criminals. Under the Asset Recovery Incentivisation Scheme (ARIS) half of all 
recovered assets are returned to operational partners.  

                                            
13  ‘The Strategic Policing Requirement’, Home Office, March 2015. 


20 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

Action 10: 

Establish a more sustainable funding model for Regional Asset Recovery Teams to 
ensure their robust response to money laundering linked to serious and organised 
crime, including through asset confiscation and denial. (Pursue) 

Lead: Home Office 

New powers 

2.31 The POCA contains comprehensive money laundering offences, and provides law 
enforcement agencies with specialised financial investigation powers and a suite of 
asset recovery measures. But it does not go far enough in providing law 
enforcement agencies with the powers they need to deal with money laundering for 
which the predicate offence was committed overseas. Nor does it offer the 
administrative powers that other countries, notably the U.S, use effectively to 
disrupt money launderers. There are some important gaps in the asset recovery 
provisions which have made it more difficult than it should be for law enforcement 
agencies to forfeit the proceeds of crime held in bank accounts. Finally, the financial 
investigation powers in POCA, whilst powerful, could be made more flexible and 
effective. 

2.32 The experience of UK law enforcement agencies in investigating the proceeds of 
international corruption suspected to have entered the UK in recent years has 
demonstrated POCA’s limits. In cases in which offences were conducted abroad, 
UK law enforcement agencies are forced to rely on the cooperation of the country in 
which the offence took place if they are to conduct a money laundering investigation 
with a realistic chance of successfully securing a conviction. But in many cases the 
country in which the offences took place lacks either the will, the capability, or the 
human rights record that would allow effective cooperation to take place. This can 
result in assets suspected of being the proceeds of crime overseas remaining in the 
UK out of the reach of our law enforcement authorities.  

2.33 The Government will explore options for new legal powers. Unexplained Wealth 
Orders (UWOs) are already used in some countries, such as Ireland and Australia, 
to tackle this problem. A UWO, when served on the defendant, requires him or her 
to explain to the court the origin of his or her assets. This can provide critical 
information on which law enforcement agencies can build their case. The 
Government will also explore whether a new forfeiture power should be created to 
enable the forfeiture of any assets for which a satisfactory explanation cannot be 
given to the court. Some countries have criminalised illicit enrichment, making it a 
criminal offence to possess assets which cannot be accounted for by way of lawful 
income. It is a requirement under the UN Convention Against Corruption (UNCAC) 
for states to consider introducing an illicit enrichment offence and the Government 
intends to explore whether such an offence will be effective in the UK, and whether 
it will be compatible with our legal system.14 

2.34 The UK’s large financial sector makes it vulnerable to money laundering risks from 
overseas. It is not possible to seek traditional criminal justice outcomes – 
prosecutions and convictions in the UK courts – against money laundering threats 
across the globe. The UK may be able to learn from the approach taken in the U.S., 
which has a similarly large and internationally-focussed financial sector. Section 

                                            
14  See Article 20 of the UN Convention Against Corruption. 



 21 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

311 of the USA PATRIOT Act enables U.S. regulators to designate entities of 
‘primary money laundering concern’. Once a designation is made, banks and other 
firms are required to take special regulatory precautions in dealing with the entity in 
question. These designations help U.S. firms protect themselves against the riskiest 
customers, and can have a very powerful disruptive effect against the entity in 
question, often, in effect, freezing them out of the international financial system. The 
Government intends to explore what the UK could learn from the U.S. approach, 
and to consider how a similar approach could be applied in the UK.  

2.35 POCA offers a variety of different tools for asset recovery. In practice, however, law 
enforcement agencies lack a flexible and effective tool to forfeit suspected proceeds 
of crime held in bank accounts. POCA enables highly effective action to be taken 
against criminal cash. No similar power applies to money held in bank accounts. 
POCA civil recovery powers enable prosecutors to recover any form of property, but 
civil recovery proceedings are complex and the specialist resources in UK law 
enforcement agencies are rightly focussed on the highest value cases. Therefore, 
the Government intends to explore whether new powers are needed to enable the 
quick and effective forfeiture of money held in bank accounts in cases where there 
is no criminal conviction against the account holder (because, for example, the 
account was opened under a false identity) and there is suspicion that the funds are 
the proceeds of crime.  

2.36 The Government will also explore whether, following an initial hearing at a 
magistrates’ court, the new power could be used administratively, with forfeitures 
authorised by senior law enforcement officers where the value held in the account is 
below a certain limit (for example, £100,000) and the case is uncontested. This new 
power will form an important part of the changes to the Suspicious Activity Reports 
regime described earlier in this document.  

2.37 The Government will also explore whether the same power could also apply to 
other forms of readily moveable property that may be the proceeds of crime (e.g. 
jewellery and precious metals). 

Action 11: 

 Explore new powers to tackle money laundering, including: 

 New powers to impose an obligation on an individual or entity to explain the 
source of their wealth in support of an investigation;  

 a new forfeiture power or criminal offence for those who cannot provide a 
satisfactory explanation; 

 new administrative powers to designate entities of money laundering concern 
and require the regulated sector to take special measures when dealing with 
them;  

 updated POCA financial investigation powers to make them more flexible and 
effective; and 

 new powers to more easily seize criminal funds held in bank accounts, 
(‘suspended accounts’) through civil forfeiture. (Pursue) 

Lead: Home Office 


22 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

2.38 Compliance with sanctions is key to ensuring those sanctions regimes have the 
desired effect as a foreign policy and national security tool. The Government 
intends to legislate to increase the maximum legal penalty for breaches of financial 
sanctions prohibitions from 2 years imprisonment to 7 years, thus making it a 
‘serious crime’. Deferred prosecution agreements, serious crime prevention orders 
and monetary penalties will also be introduced for breaches of financial sanctions 
prohibitions, to ensure that there is an effective and proportionate enforcement 
toolkit across all financial sanctions regimes in the UK. HM Treasury is also 
establishing an Office of Financial Sanctions Implementation to improve awareness 
of sanctions by the private sector and enhance cooperation with the law 
enforcement community. Properly targeted and robustly enforced sanctions are a 
vital foreign policy tool which we increasingly rely on to deliver important national 
security objectives. It underlines the Government’s commitment to introduce new 
measures to make the UK a more hostile place for those seeking to move, hide or 
use the proceeds of crime and corruption or to evade sanctions. 

2.39 The law enforcement response to terrorist financing is led by NTFIU within the 
Metropolitan police, supported by regional police counter terrorism units (CTUs). 
With terrorist finance there is a greater focus on the raising and movement of 
smaller scale funds since terrorist attacks or travel for terrorist purposes can be 
funded relatively cheaply. The Government will focus on reducing vulnerabilities 
and closing loopholes that can be exploited by terrorists to raise and move funds, 
including through new legislation where necessary. This includes vulnerabilities that 
enable funds to be raised through fraud or other criminal activity for terrorist 
purposes. The Government will also ensure that operational partners have and are 
able to use an appropriate and effective suite of tools to counter-terrorist finance 
and will look to maximise the use of these tools. 

Action 12: 

Reduce vulnerabilities and close loopholes that can be exploited by terrorists to 
raise and move funds and ensure that operational partners have, and are able to 
use, an appropriate and effective suite of tools to counter-terrorist finance. (Pursue, 
Protect) 

Lead: HO supported by HMT, FCO, NTFIU, HMRC 

2(c): Improving the effectiveness of the supervisory regime 

It is the Government’s duty to help those businesses who wish to comply with the 
law to do so. As the Government is aware that the current supervisory regime is not 
working as well as it could, and that more could be done to help businesses comply 
and better focus resources on serious crime.   The Government   is fully committed 
to considering evidence submitted to date – for example that submitted to the 
Cutting Red tape Review – and investigating further the effectiveness of the current 
supervisory regime in detail, and considering radical options for improvement.  The 
structure, remit and powers of the supervisors to incentivise compliance will be 
considered as will the strengths and weaknesses of professional body supervision.   
The Government wants to ensure that a risk-based approach is fully embedded, 
beginning with the understanding of specific risks, and spotting criminal activity.  
Tick-box compliance that risks imposing needless bureaucracy on compliant 
businesses while making the regime less effective helps no one combat crime and 
needs to be avoided . An effective approach should focus resources on the areas of 



 23 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

highest risk while taking a proportionate approach to those presenting low risk.  
The Government values the views of all interested parties and is issuing a Call for 
Information as Annex C to this Action Plan. This sets out some potentially radical 
reforms aimed at improving the effectiveness of the supervisory regime and 
addressing the concerns of businesses and Non-Government Organisations who 
have identified areas of concern in the way it currently operates, including to the 
Cutting Red Tape Review. 

2.40 The UK’s supervisory regime is unique in respect of the number and diversity of 
bodies that supervise businesses for AML/CTF purposes. These include statutory 
regulators and professional bodies and the number of Treasury-approved 
supervisors has grown over the years. While there are advantages in sector 
specialisms, the NRA found that there were inconsistencies in the supervisory 
regime, including in understanding and applying the risk-based approach to 
supervision, in the provision of guidance and in providing a credible deterrent. A key 
element of the risk-based approach is the identification and assessment of risks by 
supervisors and businesses. To aid a more consistent approach, the Government 
could work with supervisors to develop a common risk assessment methodology 
(suitably tailored for individual sectors) that allows risks to be identified and 
assessed in a comparable way. The Government is also aware of concerns about 
aspects of the supervisory regime that appear to businesses in the regulated sector 
to be unclear, unnecessarily cumbersome, conflicting or confusing. This also has 
the potential to contribute to a less effective regime. 

2.41 The Government believes that the large number of professional body supervisors in 
some sectors and the inconsistencies in their approach is a particular concern. 
While the majority of professionals in the regulated sector are not complicit in 
money laundering, those who are non-compliant or negligent have the potential to 
cause significant harm. They may, deliberately or unwittingly, assist criminals by 
facilitating them in hiding the source of wealth, the wealth itself and to giving that 
wealth a veneer of legitimacy, which is an integral aspect of money laundering. An 
awareness raising Prevent communications campaign, designed to deter potential 
involvement in organised crime, specifically fraud and money laundering, will 
continue this year, delivered by the Home Office in partnership with the NCA, 
HMRC, HMT and professional trade bodies and regulators.  

2.42 The Government launched a review of the impact on business of the current 
AML/CTF regime as part of the Cutting Red Tape Review programme in August 
2015. The Review has specifically sought evidence on the role of supervisors in the 
regime and is examining the potential to improve compliance and efficiency, by 
identifying aspects of the supervisory regime that appear to be unclear, inefficient or 
unnecessarily cumbersome. The clear aim of this Review is to identify scope for 
better regulation that makes the regime more effective while reducing those 
regulatory burdens that do not effectively contribute to tackling money laundering or 
terrorist financing. 

2.43 Charities have an important role in delivering aid overseas and Money Service 
Businesses, including Hawala systems, remain important in delivering remittances 
to some of the poorest countries, which is why it is important to ensure that both 
sectors are properly supervised to prevent them being used for the financing of 
terrorism. Any changes will need to be considered carefully to avoid unintended 
effects on these important sectors. 


24 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

2.44 Work is underway to identify what additional powers and tools could be used to 
increase oversight and supervision of the MSB sector and improve compliance with 
Regulations, including the use of targeted action to address non-compliant MSBs 
and tackle criminal exploitation of MSBs. 

2.45 The Charities (Protection and Social Investment) Bill contains provisions which will 
assist the Charity Commission’s work to prevent and disrupt abuse of the charitable 
sector for terrorist purposes. Provisions of the Bill include an expansion of offences 
which automatically disqualify an individual from being a charity trustee – these 
include specified terrorism and money laundering offences, a general power to 
disqualify individuals from acting as trustees and an amendment to existing law to 
enable the Commission to consider past conduct, in another charity, against a 
trustee.  

2.46 The UK has an anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing regime that 
makes the UK a hostile environment for illicit finance. The regime relating to 
Politically Exposed Person (PEPs) will be both robust and proportionate, with 
resources focused on higher-risk individuals in line with international best practice. 

2.47 Considerations of how to improve the supervisory regime, will be informed by the 
findings of the Cutting Red Tape Review and the Government will engage closely 
with supervisors, regulated entities, law enforcement and NGOs to fully understand 
their views and present a range of options for change. In developing these options, 
the Government will consider: 

 How to ensure supervisors and their supervised populations are supported to 
adopt a truly risk-based approach – focusing on those with a high risk of 
criminality and negligent practice, which drives money laundering and terrorist 
financing, with a more proportionate approach to those with lower risks. 

 How the FCA, as the supervisor for the financial sector, ensures compliance 
while taking a proportionate approach to money laundering and terrorist 
financing risks. 

 Whether the number of supervisors impacts on the effectiveness of supervision. 

 Whether the advantages associated with professional body supervision, 
including in-depth knowledge of the risks and latest developments in their 
sectors, outweigh the disadvantages of having supervisory and industry 
advocacy roles combined. 

 Whether all supervisors have and use appropriate incentives and powers, such 
as fines, disqualification, education, ability to impose changes to business 
models and prosecution to take effective, proportionate and dissuasive action 
against non-compliance. 

 Whether businesses get the right amount of appropriate guidance from 
supervisors. Is it consistent, clear, effective and up to date? What should the 
Government’s role in producing or approving guidance be? 

 Whether the regime keeps up with digital innovations and allows technology to 
offer effective ways of meeting requirements. 

 Whether information and intelligence can be more effectively shared between 
supervisors, the businesses they supervise and law enforcement 



 25 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

2.48 A Call for Information to inform the Government’s review of the supervisory regime 
is included at Annex C. Your views are welcomed and responses will be accepted 
for a period of six weeks from the publication of this document. The Government will 
respond to the findings of the Cutting Red Tape review, joining this work up where 
relevant with the review of the supervisory regime, with clear plans for reform in the 
Autumn. 

Action 13: 

Complete the review of the supervisory regime, taking into account relevant 
evidence submitted to the Cutting Red Tape review and announce reforms. (Prevent 
and Protect) 

Lead: HMT 

2(d): Increasing our international reach 

Money laundering and terrorist finance are global threats. The UK, as an open 
economy and a major global financial centre, is particularly exposed to risks from 
overseas. The Prime Minister’s Anti-Corruption Summit in May 2016 will address 
issues including corporate secrecy, Government transparency, the enforcement of 
international anti-corruption laws, and the strengthening of international 
institutions. Appropriate customer due diligence measures contribute to the 
safeguarding of the UK’s financial system and national security. The Government 
will enhance efforts to protect the UK from those who engage in money laundering 
and terrorist finance. To pursue those who do so, the UK will continue to work 
through international groups, such as the G20 and the Financial Action Task Force 
(FATF), and with like-minded international partners to take action on an 
international basis, and to achieve greater cooperation with important jurisdictions 
overseas.  

2.49 Investor visa regimes around the world, including the UK’s, have been criticised as 
representing a quick money laundering route for corrupt foreign individuals. The 
Government has taken a number of measures designed to reduce the UK scheme’s 
vulnerabilities to abuse. Specifically, in November 2014, the Government took 
powers to refuse applications where (1) there are reasonable ground to believe the 
applicant is not in control of the funds; (2) the funds were obtained unlawfully (or by 
conduct which would be unlawful in UK); and, (3) the character, conduct and 
associations of a third party providing the funds mean granting is not conducive to 
public good. In addition, in April 2015, the Government made a further change to 
require that Tier 1 (Investor) applicants must have opened a UK account with an 
FCA regulated bank for the purposes of making their qualified investment. This 
measure ensures that prospective applicants will have been subjected to UK due 
diligence and anti-money laundering checks before being able to gain a visa 
through the route. The Government will continue to keep the route under review. 

2.50 In July 2015, the Prime Minister announced that the UK Government will consider 
measures to enhance the provision of beneficial ownership information for foreign 
companies investing in the UK. The Prime Minister identified two areas where this 
information would be useful – the purchase of land or property, and public 
procurement. As a first step, the Government issued a discussion paper on 
beneficial ownership transparency assessing options for requiring foreign 
companies to provide their beneficial ownership information when either purchasing 


26 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

property or bidding for public contracts. This was closed on the 4th of April and 
responses are currently being analysed.  

2.51 At last December’s Joint Ministerial Council, Overseas Territory leaders agreed to 
hold company beneficial ownership information in central registers or similarly 
effective systems. Furthermore, they agreed to develop a timely, safe and secure 
information exchange process for law enforcement purposes. The Prime Minister 
informed the House of Commons on 11 April that arrangements had been finalised 
so, for the first time, UK law enforcement will be able to see exactly who owns and 
controls companies incorporated in the Overseas Territories and the Crown 
Dependencies.  

2.52 The UK will increase its law enforcement cooperation and policy dialogue with 
jurisdictions of importance for money laundering and terrorist finance. The UK will 
look to tackle international corruption, where the sums of money siphoned off by 
corrupt politically exposed persons, businesses and criminals, through bribery and 
theft of public funds, can be significant. The NCA, as the lead law enforcement 
agency on economic crime including money laundering and international corruption, 
will create new International Liaison Officer posts in important jurisdictions to 
support this work. Other UK law enforcement agencies also have overseas 
networks, and the NCA will work with them to ensure a coherent approach. The 
NCA officers will also support work to develop capacity in other countries, and 
identify potential new threats to the UK. We will also expand our policy dialogue 
with important jurisdictions to ensure joined-up and comprehensive approaches 
are taken. 

Action 14: 

Create new NCA International Liaison Officer posts in important jurisdictions. 
Review UK law enforcement agencies’ overseas networks and ensure a coherent 
approach. (Pursue)  

Lead: NCA, supported by HMRC and other law enforcement agencies 

2.53 A lack of consistency in the legal and regulatory frameworks that govern information 
sharing creates vulnerabilities for private sector firms. The sharing of information 
and intelligence about suspected money laundering within these firms and with UK 
law enforcement agencies is hampered by domestic data protection rules, and in 
turn creates obstacles to law enforcement investigations. The UK will work with 
international groups, such as the G20 and the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) 
to promote better and more effective international information sharing on money 
launderers between Governments, law enforcement agencies and financial 
intelligence units, and private sector firms.  



 27 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

Action 15: 

Develop a new approach for cross-border information sharing between both private 
sector firms and Government entities (Pursue, Protect)  

Lead: HMT, Home Office 

2.54 Recent high profile international corruption cases have demonstrated that criminal 
funds were used to obtain real estate in the UK. In preparation for the May 2016 
Anti-Corruption Summit, the NCA and Serious Fraud Office are leading work to 
establish more effective international mechanisms for investigators and prosecutors 
from multiple jurisdictions to work together on serious money laundering cases that 
span international boundaries. 

Action 16: 

In preparation for the Anti-Corruption Summit, submit a new approach for 
international law enforcement and prosecutor co-operation on international 
corruption cases. (Pursue, Prepare) 

Lead: NCA, SFO, CPS, Home Office, Cabinet Office 

2.55 For terrorist finance, this co-operation will take the form of working with key partners 
to improve their capacity and capability. The UK will continue to deliver training to, 
and share expertise with, key overseas partners to help investigate and combat the 
financing of terrorism. The UK is a member of the Counter ISIL Finance Group and 
works within the group to ensure closer and more effective working with 
international partners to degrade Daesh finances. The UK will continue to support 
the Group’s efforts. We will also work to support activity to combat terrorist finance 
alongside other EU member states and alongside action at the UN and 
domestically.  

2.56 The EU Commission published a new Terrorist Finance Action Plan on 2 February. 
The UK welcomes the Commission Action Plan and will continue to engage at EU 
level to help prevent and disrupt terrorist financing in a way that complements the 
UK’s domestic counter-terrorist finance regime. In particular, the UK welcomes 
plans for accelerated and effective implementation of United Nations’ freezing 
orders; consideration of appropriate measures regarding high denomination notes; 
and the call for Member States to undertake national risk assessments. The UK is 
ready and willing to share its experiences in undertaking its recent NRA with other 
EU Member States. 

Action 17: 

Deliver training to, and share expertise with, key overseas partners to help them 
build their capacity and capability to investigate and combat the financing of 
terrorism. (Pursue) 

Lead: NTFIU supported by Home Office and FCO 


 28 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

Action 18: 

Continue to support Counter-ISIL Finance Group efforts to degrade Daesh finances 
and work to support activity to combat terrorist finance alongside other EU member 
states and alongside action at the UN and domestically. 

Lead: FCO (Daesh Task Force), supported by MoD, Home Office, HMT 


 

2.57 A large number of UK based charities work in difficult environments overseas in 
support of humanitarian goals, often having to work in areas where terrorists 
operate. We must support legitimate charities that operate in these environments to 
reduce the risk of charitable funds being looted by or diverted to terrorist 
organisations, or otherwise abused for terrorist purposes. 

Action 19: 

Support UK charities operating in difficult environments overseas to mitigate the 
risk their funds being abused for terrorist purposes 

Lead: Charity Commission, supported by Department for International Development, 
Foreign and Commonwealth Office, Home Office 


   29 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

3. Implementing the Action Plan 

3.1 A successful anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance regime means: 

 Reduced vulnerability of the regulated sector to money laundering and terrorist 
finance. 

 Relentless disruption of money laundering and terrorist finance, the prosecution 
of those responsible and the forfeiture of their criminal assets. 

 Fewer people engaged in money laundering and terrorist finance. 

 Targeted support through the supervisory regime to financial institutions and 
other businesses so that they can continue to act as an effective first-line 
defence.  

 Better international collaboration to disrupt global crime threats. 

3.2 This Action Plan will deliver the Government’s objective, set out in the SDSR, to 
make the UK a more hostile place for those seeking to move, hide or use the 
proceeds of crime or corruption. The four priority areas are: 

 A stronger partnership with the private sector 

o Law enforcement agencies, supervisors and the private sector working in 
partnership to target resources at the highest money laundering and 
terrorist financing risks.  

o News means of information sharing to strengthen the application of the 
risk-based approach in practice and mitigate vulnerabilities. 

o A collaborative approach to preventing individuals becoming involved in 
money laundering. 

 Enhancing the law enforcement response 

o New capabilities and new legal powers to build the intelligence picture, 
disrupt money launderers and terrorists, recover criminal proceeds, and 
protect the integrity of the UK’s financial system.  

 Improving the effectiveness of the supervisory regime 

o Investigate the effectiveness of the current supervisory regime, and 
consider radical options for improvement to ensure that a risk-based 
approach is fully embedded, beginning with the understanding of specific 
risks, and the spotting criminal activity, rather than a focus on tick-box 
compliance 

 Increasing our international reach 


30 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

o Work with international partners to tackle money laundering and terrorist 
financing threats upstream, and develop multilateral approaches in 
preparation for the Prime Minister’s Anti-Corruption Summit in May 2016. 

3.3 Quantitative and qualitative metrics to assess the impact of these actions will be 
developed, covering the Pursue, Prevent and Protect outcomes, including: 
prosecution, asset recovery and disruption assessment statistics; changes in 
criminals’ behaviour as a result of public and private sector disruptions; changes in 
the behaviour of professionals in the regulated sector as a result of Prevent 
information campaigns; and changes to public and private sector understanding of 
the threat. The NCA will regularly re-assess the threat, including through the 
production of a baseline assessment on high end money laundering by the summer 
of 2016, and through regular updates thereafter, including the National Strategic 
Assessment on Serious Organised Crime. 

3.4 The effectiveness of the Action Plan in meeting its money laundering objectives will 
be overseen by the joint Ministerial Home Office and HMT chaired Criminal 
Finances Board, with input from the Financial Sector Forum, chaired by the Home 
Office, British Bankers’ Association and the NCA. The Criminal Finances Board will 
also oversee preparations for the FATF Mutual Evaluation Review (FATF MER) in 
2018. Preparation for the FATF MER will include a second National Risk 
Assessment of Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing.  

3.5 Deliver of the terrorist financing elements of the Action Plan will be monitored 
through the Ministerial Terrorist Finance Board. 

Grid of actions 

 Action Lead Completed by 

A stronger partnership with the private sector 

1 Reform the SARs regime, making the 
necessary legislative, operational and 
technical changes to deliver the proposals 
detailed in this Action Plan.  

Home Office / NCA Oct 2018 

2 Move JMLIT to a permanent footing. NCA July 2016 

3 Create a register of banks’ particular 
business specialisms and make it available 
to JMLIT to ensure that relevant expertise 
is brought into JMLIT work on money 
laundering and terrorist financing 
typologies. 

British Bankers’ 
Association 

End 2016 

4 Explore legislation to achieve better 
information sharing between law 
enforcement agencies and the private 
sector, and between private sector entities. 

Home Office Oct 2017 

5 Deliver Prevent campaigns to raise 
awareness amongst professionals in the 
regulated sector of money laundering risks 
and the actions needed to mitigate them. 

Home Office, HM 
Treasury 

Ongoing 



 31 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

 Action Lead Completed by 

6 Public-private partnership to run a Prevent 
campaign to educate consumers and 
businesses as to the risks of becoming 
involved in money laundering. 

British Bankers’ 
Association, Home 
Office, HMT 

End 2017 

Enhancing the law enforcement response 

7 Deliver improvements in intelligence 
collection capability. 

NCA Jan 2017 

8 Ensure an effective multi-agency 
investigation response, drawing on private 
sector expertise, to target the most 
complex high-end money laundering 
cases.  

NCA Oct 2016 

9 Create a programme to upskill intelligence, 
analytical, investigative and legal staff to 
take on complex money laundering cases. 

NCA June 2017 

10 Establish a more sustainable funding 
model for Regional Asset Recovery Teams 
to ensure their robust response to money 
laundering linked to serious and organised 
crime, including through asset confiscation 
and denial. 

Home Office Oct 2016 

11 Explore new powers to tackle money 
laundering. 

Home Office Oct 2016 

12 Reduce vulnerabilities and close loopholes 
that can be exploited by terrorists. 

Home Office Oct 2017 

Improving the effectiveness of the supervisory regime 

13 Complete the review of the supervisory 
regime, taking into account relevant 
evidence submitted to the Cutting Red 
Tape Review, and announce reforms. 

HMT Autumn 2016 

Increasing our international reach 

14 Create new NCA International Liaison 
Officer posts in important jurisdictions. 

NCA Mar 2017 

15 Develop a new approach for cross-border 
information sharing between private sector 
and Government entities. 

HMT, Home Office ongoing 

16 Submit a new approach for international 
law enforcement and prosecutor 
co-operation on international corruption 
cases. 

NCA Mar 2017 


32 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

 Action Lead Completed by 

17 Deliver training to, and share expertise 
with, key overseas partners to help them 
build their capacity and capability to 
investigate and combat the financing of 
terrorism. 

NTFIU Ongoing 

18 Continue to support Counter-ISIL Finance 
Group efforts to degrade Daesh finances 
and work to support activity to combat 
terrorist finance. 

FCO Ongoing 

19 Support UK charities operating in difficult 
environments overseas to mitigate the risk 
of their funds being abused for terrorist 
purposes. 

Charity Commission Ongoing 


  33 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

Annex A: Consultation on legislative 
proposals 

The Action Plan contains a number of proposals on which the Government wishes to 
consult, as they will involve potential changes to legislation. These are: 

 Removal of the SARs consent regime 

 New powers for law enforcement agencies to require reporters to take actions in 
relation to their customers, and to request further information on SARs 

 Data sharing between private sector organisations to tackle money laundering and 
terrorist financing 

 The creation of a new power to require individuals to declare their sources of wealth 

 The creation of a linked power to seek forfeiture of assets if they fail to declare their 
sources of wealth 

 The creation of an illicit enrichment offence 

 A power to designate an entity as being of money laundering concern 

 Development of a new power to allow money held in bank accounts to be swiftly 
seized and forfeited 

 Changes to the civil recovery powers to allow administrative seizure up to £100,000. 

Section 2(a): Public-private partnership 

1. The Government is seeking views on the change in focus of the SARs regime from 
one on transactions to one on the entities responsible for money laundering and 
terrorist financing. 

 What benefits are there for the reporting sector in moving the focus of the SARs 
regime from transactions to entities for tackling money laundering and the 
financing of terrorism?  

 What would be the effect on costs to business in making that shift? 

2. To support that change, the Government is considering removing the current 
consent regime. 

 What are the risks in removing the consent regime, and how could these be 
overcome?  

 If the current SARs consent regime is replaced, removing the statutory defence 
for SARs reporters, what legal protections should be available for reporters who 
unwittingly come into the possession of criminal property? 


34 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

 What would be the costs to your business of this change? 

3. Should a reformed SARs regime include powers for law enforcement agencies to 
direct reporters to take certain actions, including maintaining a customer 
relationship, and provide legal cover for the reporter to do so? 

4. The Government is proposing to provide legislative cover to support better data 
sharing within the private sector. 

 What legislation and guidance needs to be in place to allow effective sharing of 
information between private sector firms in order to prevent and detect financial 
crime?  

 What benefits would you see from having the ability to develop SARs in 
partnership / report jointly with other private sector entities? 

 What can we learn from the U.S. experience of data sharing between private 
sector entities under the s314 of the USA PATRIOT Act? 

5. Under the EU 4th Anti-Money Laundering Directive (4AMLD), Financial Intelligence 
Units are required to have a power to request further information in relation to a 
SAR. How should such information be gathered, and should it be regarded as part 
of the overall SAR?  

6. The Government wants to support the financial sector in dealing with suspected 
proceeds of crime held in suspended bank accounts.  

 What new powers are required to allow the criminal funds held in UK bank 
accounts to be forfeited more easily?  

 What safeguards should be put in place around any new powers in order to 
protect innocent account holders? 

 In uncontested cases, should administrative forfeiture be permitted, in the same 
way that POCA already enables the administrative forfeiture of cash? 

Section 2(b): Enhanced law enforcement response 

7. What do you see as the benefits of introducing a power to require individuals to 
explain the sources of their wealth? 

8. Would you see a benefit in a linked forfeiture power where the explanation is not 
satisfactory or no explanation is provided? 

9. What benefit would you see in an illicit enrichment offence, targeting those who 
use their public position to enrich themselves? What are the potential impacts on 
business? 

10. The Government is considering the introduction of a power to enable the 
Government to designate entities of primary money laundering concern. 

 What benefit would such a power provide? 

 What would be the impact of such a power on firms in the regulated sector?  



 35 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

 What legal recourse should be available for designated entities who wish to 
challenge their designation? 

 What can the UK learn from the U.S. experience of using section 311 of the 
USA PATRIOT Act? 

 What would be the costs to your business? 

11. What benefit would you see in the provision of a power, similar to the provisions for 
cash seizure, to allow seizure and forfeiture of other forms of readily moveable 
property such as high value jewellery or precious metals?  

12. What benefit would you see in enabling the administrative forfeiture of the proceeds 
of crime in uncontested cases, following an initial hearing at a magistrates’ court? 
Should a limit be set on the value of property that could be administratively forfeited, 
and what should that limit be? 

13. If we amend the investigative powers within POCA so they can be sought earlier in 
the investigative process, and make applications and administration more flexible, 
what would be the impact on your business? 

14. In addition to the proposals in this Action Plan, are there additional powers that UK 
law enforcement agencies should have to tackle money laundering? 

Responses  

The Home Office welcomes your views in response to the questions posed in this Annex.  

The Government would be keen to hear examples of how the proposed changes may help 
or hinder the AML/CTF regime in the UK in practice. This will help ensure evidence-based 
policy decisions in these areas. 

Electronic responses are preferred and should be sent to: 
Action_Plan@homeoffice.gsi.gov.uk.  

Questions or enquiries specifically relating to this consultation should also be sent to the 
above email address. Please include the words CONSULTATION VIEWS or 
CONSULTATION ENQUIRY (as appropriate) in your email title. If you do not wish your 
views to be published alongside the Government response to this consultation, please 
clearly specify this in your email.  

Hard copy responses may be submitted to: 

Action Plan questions on tackling money laundering & terrorist financing 
Home Office 
6th Floor Peel Building 
2 Marsham Street 
London 
SW1P 4DF 


36 


mailto:Action_Plan@homeoffice.gsi.gov.uk




Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

Confidentiality and Disclosure policy 

Information provided in response to this consultation, including personal information, might 
be published or disclosed in accordance with the access to information regimes. These are 
primarily the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (FOIA) and the Data Protection Act (DPA). 
If you want the information that you provide to be treated as confidential, please be aware 
that, under the FOIA, there is a statutory Code of Practice with which public authorities 
must comply with and which deals, amongst other things, with obligations of confidence.  

In view of this it would be helpful if you could explain to the Home Office why you regard 
the information you have provided as confidential. If Government receives a request for 
disclosure of the information, the Home Office will take full account of your explanation, but 
it cannot give an assurance that confidentiality will be maintained in all circumstances. 

An automatic confidentiality disclaimer generated by your IT system will not, of itself, be 
regarded as binding on the Department. Your personal data will be processed in 
accordance with the DPA, and in the majority of circumstances, this will mean that your 
personal data will not be disclosed. 

Timetable 

The closing date for responses to be submitted is 2 June 2016.  


   37 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

Annex B: Findings from the Call for 
Information on the Suspicious Activity 
Reports (SARs) Regime 

Introduction 

In the UK Anti-Corruption Plan, published on 18 December 2014, the Coalition 
Government committed to carrying out a review of the SARs regime to develop ways of 
better identifying money laundering and terrorist financing, and to prevent the dissipation 
of the proceeds of corruption.  

SARs play an important role in the ability of the UK to identify money laundering and the 
financing of terrorism. Part 7 of the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 requires a person to 
report to the NCA where there are reasonable grounds to know or suspect that another 
person is engaged in money laundering. Although this requirement to submit SARs applies 
to any individual, those businesses in the "regulated sector" such as banks, money service 
businesses, accountants and lawyers are obliged to report. 

The Home Office ran a Call for Information on the operation of the SARs regime between 
25 February and 25 March 2015. We received more than 60 responses from a wide range 
of stakeholders, including law enforcement agencies, the financial sector, and the legal 
and accountancy sectors. 

The responses contained a wide range of views on the SARs regime. There were a large 
number of specific points that were made for each of the sections that were set out in the 
Call for Information, together with a number of general points about the operation of the 
regime. A summary of the points is set out below.  

The Government is grateful for all of the contributions made by respondents throughout 
the Call for Information process. This document summarises the submissions received in 
response to the Call for Information questions.  

Key themes  

A number of key themes emerged from the Call for Information:  

 Definition of Purpose: The current regime fulfils the role of the UK reporting and 
intelligence gathering mechanism for suspected money laundering and terrorist 
financing activity. Many respondents believe that the regime is ineffective, and want to 
see it used in a more active manner, that will lead to clear operational outcomes, such 
as arrests and asset recovery. The reporting sector sees the review as an opportunity 
to develop a more effective regime.  

 Active information sharing: The review has highlighted the need for a better 
information sharing model to support greater collaboration between law enforcement 
agencies, regulators and the private sector. Most respondents want to share relevant 
information to assist in tackling money laundering. The reporting sector is concerned 
that existing legislation does not explicitly support the sharing of information within and 


38 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

between members of the reporting sector, and that more definite legal arrangements 
are required. The Joint Money Laundering Intelligence Taskforce has made some 
significant steps in building trust between law enforcement agencies and the financial 
sector, but to do this on a longer term basis, some respondents wanted explicit legal 
cover. 

 Improve the quality of SARs / reduce the volume: The reporting sector has 
concerns regarding the phrasing of the requirement to report suspicious transactions, 
as set out in POCA. This concern, and the penalties for failure to report, drive a 
significant level of defensive reporting, where reports are made more because of 
concerns regarding a failure to comply with POCA than because of genuine suspicion. 
This places a burden on the regime, and detracts from a focus on serious and 
organised crime. The Government is committed to taking action to recognise and 
address this concern.  

 Clarify the “tipping off” offence: There are concerns relating to the “tipping off’ 
offence in POCA. Reporters are concerned that any sharing of information, even to 
assist in preventing or detecting crime, could be an offence. The poor quality and large 
number of SARs places the regime under strain. The poor quality is often as a result 
of the lack of knowledge on the part of the reporter, and the use of an all crimes 
approach, with no de minimus, obliges reporters to raise SARs that are of little value.  

 Upgrade the capabilities of the UK Financial Intelligence Unit (UKFIU): All sectors 
viewed the technical infrastructure and the resources of UKFIU that support the 
regime as inadequate. The reporting sector felt that the IT system did not allow them 
to report as effectively as it could, and that the UKFIU was short of the capabilities 
necessary to utilise the information provided in the SARs.  

 Consent regime: The consent regime is seen by many in the reporting sector as 
problematic. They say it causes delays, and difficulties with customers, and some also 
view it as incompatible with their business. Law enforcement agencies believe that 
there has to be a mechanism that allows transactions that involve the transfer of 
criminal assets to be investigated and prevented.  

Specific points  

The Call for information sought the views of respondents on the following areas: 

1. Context for each respondent. 

2. How can money laundering and the financing of terrorism be better identified?  

3. How can information sharing between and within sectors be improved to prevent 
crime and protect the regulated sector and the wider financial system? 

4. How can SARs reporting be made more efficient? 

5. How can the consent regime be improved? 

6. What can we learn from international best practice? 



 39 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

Summaries of responses received are outlined below:  

Context for each respondent 

 Most respondents felt that they had a good understanding of SARs and how they 
should be raised. Staff training was seen as vital, and is carried out by many 
respondents. However, respondents working for smaller organisations felt they had 
difficulties with training, as they did not know what to look for. The role of regulators 
and supervisors in assisting with training was welcomed, although others mentioned 
concerns, particularly outside the financial sector, with the quality of oversight, and the 
number of regulators in particular sectors. 

How can money laundering and the financing of terrorism be better identified 

 Purpose of the SARs regime: There is concern over what the regime is for, and what 
it is seeking to achieve, coupled with a wider concern over the lack of information on 
the effectiveness of the regime, and what the regulated sector needs to provide to 
assist law enforcement agencies.  

 Information sharing on risks and threats: A lack of guidance on what to look for or 
to focus on leads to large numbers of SARs being raised on a guesswork basis. One 
respondent argued that it is unreasonable for governments to expect the regulated 
sector to know more about money laundering than law enforcement agencies do, and 
that information held by such agencies needed to be shared. The focus on an “all 
crimes” regime is leading to high levels of defensive SARs. Many respondents wanted 
strengthening of the definition of “suspicion”, to allow better judgements to be made. 
Suggested solutions included better information sharing on trends and typologies 
including new forms of transactions such as online banking and virtual currencies. 

 Due diligence: Respondents said that financial institutions should conduct proper 
due diligence not only on the source of wealth but on the source of funds. Some 
respondents were unclear which of these (or both) should be done.  

 Regulatory oversight of non-banking sector: The banking sector is subject to 
considerable regulation, and is responsible for most SARs. Criminals may have 
recognised this, and will use other avenues where there is less reporting. Improved 
oversight, and rationalisation of supervisors in some of the non-bank sectors is 
required to address this. 

 Difficulty of use: Some respondents felt that the regime itself is difficult to use because 
the nature of their business model does not allow them to use the SARs regime 
effectively. This particularly applies where the transactions are many and rapid. 

 Duplication of reporting: Respondents were often unclear where they should report 
different crime types to, or felt that they needed to provide duplicate reports, such as 
one to Action Fraud and a SAR. Clarification of the need for reporting, and to whom, 
would be useful for some, particularly where both fraud and money laundering were 
involved. This could include bulk reporting of fraud to the NFIB. 

 UKFIU capabilities: The level of resources applied to work on submitted SARs and to 
investigate money laundering is seen by most respondents as too low. Respondents 
recommended an increase in staffing, improved IT, and work to reduce the volume of 
SARs, and thought that capabilities (particularly analysis skills) needed to be improved 
to support this work.  


40 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

 Willingness to restrain: Concerns were raised over the difficulty in obtaining restraint 
orders, particularly in cases where relatively small sums are involved. 

Improving information sharing between and within sectors to prevent crime and 
protect the regulated sector and the wider financial system 

 Legislation to permit sharing of data: Many respondents are willing to share more 
information than they do now, but see the current legislation as restricting their ability 
to do so between sectors and within sectors. Some of this relates to the Crime and 
Courts Act section 7 gateway, which enables data sharing with the NCA, and some to 
wider issues of data protection. Suggested solutions include a statutory protection for 
those sharing information in this area, and a definition of when it is acceptable to refer 
to the fact of a SAR being raised. The USA PATRIOT Act provisions on data sharing 
are seen as worth exploring.  

 Effective information sharing structures: The Joint Money Laundering Intelligence 
Taskforce (JMLIT), which is run as a pilot by the NCA and some banks, was 
supported as a means of testing information sharing on a collaborative cross-sector 
basis. Some non-bank contributors asked for an equivalent structure. Respondents 
felt that the JMLIT is a good starting point, but needs development before it could be a 
long-term solution. 

 Cross-Government data sharing: Respondents said that Government and other 
public bodies have data that would be useful to enrich the information provided 
through SARs. These datasets should be available to the NCA to improve the 
effectiveness of the regime. 

 Tipping off offence: Some respondents argued that the tipping off offence at section 
333A of POCA is drawn too widely, and has a detrimental effect on sharing 
information for the purpose of identifying or preventing crime. In the age of fast 
transactions, a customer cannot avoid noticing that their transaction has been held up, 
and can draw their own conclusions. Suggestions included restricting it to a deliberate 
action to inform the subject of a SAR for the purpose of assisting them, or scrapping 
the provision altogether and relying on alternatives such as aiding and abetting. 
Respondents also want a form of words, agreed with the NCA, to use with customers 
who question the delay of their transactions. 

 Outputs to the reporting sector: Some private sector respondents would like access 
to SARs data. However, others felt that they did not want access themselves, and that 
access should remain limited, perhaps only to supervisors or regulators. Most wanted 
access to trend and threat data, and some to information on those convicted (or 
strongly suspected) of money laundering. They would like information on matters 
already under investigation by law enforcement, and not be required to raise additional 
SARs on those.  

 Collaborative working: Respondents see a future regime operating on a much more 
collaborative basis. Some talked about creating a CIFAS-style anti-money laundering 
(AML) information sharing exchange, which would provide reporters with details of 
trends etc. A number wanted to see a regime that used trusted or security cleared 
staff (such as MLROs) far more, to share information between and within sectors. 



 41 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

How can SARs reporting be made more efficient? 

 Prioritisation of SARs: Some respondents would like information that help them to 
identify criminality more effectively, and to use this as the basis for a tiered approach 
to reporting, whereby SARs are graded according to the degree of suspicion relating 
to the transaction, and where the reporter provides a significant level of input where 
they firmly believe the transaction is criminal.  

 De minimus value for SARs: A number of respondents felt that there should be a 
realistic de minimus value for SARs, to allow reporters to focus on the higher value 
transactions, and to reduce the number of SARs raised.  

 New technical architecture: The current IT infrastructure is seen as having 
significant problems, and to be unable to support the workload. A number of proposals 
have been put forward for functionality that any new system should have, all of which 
would need to use structured data that allows effective interrogation and analysis. 
More use of standardised formats, alongside priority indicators, was seen as useful. 
Any solution would need a significant analytical capability, along with the resources to 
use that effectively. Bulk or linked reporting of SARs would allow the reporting sector 
to develop a better report package for law enforcement agencies, containing more 
information relating to the transaction. Non-bank respondents felt that any new 
technical solution needs industry-specific templates. This would help with training and 
the provision of relevant information. 

 Bulk information sharing: alongside priority indicators, the reporting sector could be 
asked to provide bulk data for specific areas, which law enforcement agencies could 
mine for further information. 

How can the consent regime be improved? 

 Consent regime: Some respondents would like the consent regime to be replaced by 
a restructured SARs regime, based on tiered reporting. The transactions where a bank 
has evidence of criminality would be subject to review by the NCA prior to action being 
taken. The reporter would not commit an offence if the transaction proceeded during 
the review period. The consent regime is supported by law enforcement agencies. 
Some sectors feel that a consent regime that is focused on bank transactions does not 
work for the more immediate transactions that they deal with. 

 Focus on accounts rather than transactions: Some suggest that it would be better 
for consent requests to operate on the whole account, rather than on each transaction. 
They believe this would be better as it would freeze the whole account in one go, 
rather than require SARs for individual transactions. 

 Review the moratorium period: There are diverse views on whether the length of 
the moratorium period is right. Businesses generally view it as too long, or of having 
the effect of causing any transaction subject to it to fall through. Law enforcement 
agencies believe that the time to obtain information to make a decision on further 
action, particularly where the request is from overseas, is not long enough, and should 
be extendable through a court order. 

 Start process before customer instruction: Some respondents think if the reporter 
could start the consent process before the customer gives instructions, this would 
speed up the process, and reduce the impact on the customer. 


42 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

What can we learn from international best practice? 

 U.S: Some respondents argue that provisions similar to those in the PATRIOT Act on 
information sharing would be very useful, and would provide legal cover for the 
regulated sector to share information. 

 Spain: The Spanish FIU is seen as working closely with the reporting sector, and 
provides effective feedback, and useful information on typologies. This is caveated 
with a recognition that the volume of SARs in Spain is much smaller than that in 
the UK. 

 International information sharing: Respondents see a number of challenges to 
sharing information internationally, due to the different data protection laws in other 
jurisdictions. This is a problem for global institutions, who may not be able to share 
information on customers across different parts of the group. It is also a problem for 
law enforcement agencies, who do not receive intelligence disseminations.  

 Impact of the 4th Anti-Money Laundering Directive (4AMLD): Respondents 
thought that the impact of 4AMLD could be significant, if it drives up the number of 
SARs being reported, requires additional work from the UKFIU, and prevents 
information sharing between or within sectors.  


   43 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

Annex C: Call for information – 
AML Supervisory Regime 

Background 

The government’s aim for the Anti-Money Laundering (AML) and Counter Financing of 
Terrorism (CFT) regime is to make the UK financial system a hostile environment for illicit 
finances, while minimising the burden on legitimate businesses and reducing the overall 
burden of regulation.  

The UK’s financial sector is one of the most sophisticated and open in the world. This 
brings huge advantages in terms of encouraging investment, entrepreneurship, and 
financial innovation – but it also makes it a target for criminals seeking to launder and 
move their ill-gotten gains around the world. It is essential, therefore, that those 
businesses most likely to be targeted by such criminals are properly regulated and that the 
bodies in place to supervise them are effective and proportionate. The UK has an 
anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing regime that makes the UK a hostile 
environment for illicit finance. The regime relating to Politically Exposed Person (PEPs) will 
be both robust and proportionate, with resources focused on higher-risk individuals in line 
with international best practice. 

The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) sets out high-level principles for the organisation 
of national AML/CFT regimes and demands that jurisdictions should ensure effective 
supervision of regulated entities on a risk-sensitive basis by supervisors that have 
adequate powers to ensure compliance. The government is committed to upholding these 
principles and to showing that the UK has an effective AML/CFT regime during its Mutual 
Evaluation which will be conducted by FATF in 2017/18.  

In preparation for the Mutual Evaluation and the transposition of the European Union’s 
Fourth Money Laundering Directive, the government published the National Risk 
Assessment (NRA) of ML/TF risks in October 2015. This found that, while the UK’s 
response to money laundering and terrorist financing risks is well developed, more could 
be done to strengthen the AML and CFT regime. Of interest to this call for information is 
the finding that: 

“The effectiveness of the supervisory regime in the UK is inconsistent. Some 
supervisors are highly effective in certain areas, but there is room for improvement 
across the board, including in understanding and applying a risk-based approach to 
supervision and in providing a credible deterrent. The large number of professional 
body supervisors in some sectors risks inconsistencies of approach. Data is not yet 
shared between supervisors freely or frequently enough, which exposes some 
supervised sectors where there are overlaps in supervision.”15  

Currently, the Treasury has responsibility for appointing and removing the supervisors 
through the Money Laundering Regulations. The Treasury engages with the supervisors, 
law enforcement and the regulated populations though fora such as the Money Laundering 
Advisory Committee, the Anti-Money Laundering Supervisors’ Forum and the Financial 
Sector Forum as well as monitoring their activities through an annual Supervisor’s Report. 

                                            
15  National Risk Assessment, p. 5 


44 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

However, there is no formal and systematic mechanism for assessing performance and 
driving changes. 

The government has committed to dealing with the issues raised in the NRA and seeks 
views from supervisors, regulated businesses, NGOs and the public on how best to 
address them. It is important that in considering how to improve the regime we do not 
create needless burdens on business and the government launched a review of the impact 
on business of the current AML/CFT regime as part of the Cutting Red Tape programme in 
August 2015. Evidence gathered through that review will be fully considered when looking 
at how to improve the regime.  

Scope 

The scope of this call for information is the AML/CFT supervisory regime, focusing on the 
system of appointing supervisors, the powers of supervisors to incentivise compliance, 
adoption of the risk-based approach and how they interact with supervised businesses.  

The Home Office is conducting a review of the structure of the Suspicious Activity Reports 
(SARs) regime which is an important element of the AML/CFT regime, so this will be out of 
scope of this call for information.  

Purpose 

The purpose of this call for information is to enable the government to examine options to 
improve the supervisory regime and address inconsistencies, ensuring that the UK’s 
regime is effective, proportionate and meets the standards set down by FATF. 

Once the government has a fuller picture of the benefits and risks, it will be able to take an 
informed decision on what changes are needed. 

Identification of risks 

The first step in taking a risk-based approach to combatting money laundering and terrorist 
financing is to have a robust methodology for identifying and assessing risks. Supervisors 
have developed their own risk assessment methodologies largely independently and these 
are not always directly comparable. Where a number of supervisors cover similar types of 
business, having a methodology that is significantly different may give rise to 
inconsistencies, for example potentially leading to two supervisors viewing the same 
business type as having materially different risks. 

The NRA found that some supervisors had difficulties explaining how their risk assessment 
translates into specific monitoring activities. This does not mean that supervisors are not 
taking a risk based approach or that their risk assessments do not inform their monitoring 
decisions, but it does suggest that the communication of monitoring decisions needs to 
be improved.  

Once risks have been identified and assessed, supervisors should allocate resources 
accordingly and focus on areas of highest risk. However, this does not mean that other 
areas should be neglected and it is important that ongoing monitoring enables supervisors 
to detect new risks or changes to existing risks that necessitate a reallocation of 
resources.  

The NRA found that there is a risk of the priority attached to AML/CFT supervision by 
supervisors varying over time as it is prioritised against assessments of compliance in 
other areas, although there is no evidence that individual supervisors are not sufficiently 
prioritising AML/CFT efforts.  



 45 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

1. Should the government address the issue of non-comparable risk assessment 
methodologies and if so, how? Should it work with supervisors to develop a single 
methodology, with appropriate sector-specific modifications? 

2. How should the government best support supervisors – and supervisors support 
each other – to link their risk-assessments to monitoring activities and to properly 
articulate how they do so? 

3. Should the government monitor the identification and assessment of risks by the 
supervisors on an ongoing basis? Should the supervisors monitor each other’s 
identification and assessment of risks? How might this work? 

4. Should smaller supervisors be encouraged to pool AML/CFT resources into a joint 
risk function and would this lead to efficiencies? If so, how should they be 
encouraged? 

5. How should the ability of the supervisors and law enforcement agencies to share 
information on risks be improved? 

Supervisors Accountability 

To have confidence in the supervisory regime it is important that government is able to 
hold supervisors to account and ensure that they are carrying out their duties in an 
effective and proportionate manner. The variety of supervisory models means that 
government does not have the same influence over each supervisor. While statutory 
bodies (such as the FCA) are answerable to parliament, professional bodies which are 
granted authority to supervise by the Treasury are ultimately answerable to their members.  

While the Treasury has instigated an annual report on the activities of the supervisors, not 
all supervisors submit returns, and the mechanism for assessing their performance in 
detail, identifying weaknesses and ensuring that action is taken could be strengthened. 
While most supervisors attend the AML/CFT Supervisors’ Forum (AMLSF) and meet in the 
smaller affinity groups (accountancy, public sector and legal), these fora provide a means 
of information exchange and discussion rather than challenge, support and accountability. 
Some supervisors are also members of the Money Laundering Advisory Committee 
(MLAC) along with representatives from industry, law enforcement and government 
departments, this provides another forum for discussion and advises the government on its 
approach to preventing money laundering. 

It has been suggested that a clear and transparent method for ‘supervising the 
supervisors’ is needed, not only to create a well understood mechanism for holding them 
to account, but also to give supervisors support and clarity on what is expected of them. 
The government is interested in views on whether such a mechanism is required and, if 
so, what it might look like. 

6. To promote discussions between the supervisors, should attendance at the AMLSF 
and submission of an annual return to the Treasury be made compulsory for 
supervisors? How could the government ensure that this happened? 

7. Could the Money Laundering Advisory Committee (MLAC) have a greater role in 
driving improvements in the supervisory regime?  

8. Should the government instigate a formal mechanism for assessing the 
effectiveness of all the supervisors AML/CFT activities, with the power to compel 
action to address shortcomings? If so, should this be carried out by the Treasury 


46 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

directly, through another body such as the National Audit Office, or through creating 
a new body, perhaps along the same lines as the Legal Services Board which 
oversees legal services supervisors or the Financial Reporting Council which 
promotes high quality corporate governance and reporting? Are there other ways of 
ensuring effectiveness that should be considered? 

9. Would an overarching body be able to add value by maintaining a more strategic 
view of the entire AML/CFT landscape and identifying cross-cutting issues which 
individual supervisors might struggle to identify? Should such a body have the 
authority to guide and compel the activities of the supervisors, up to and including 
the power to revoke approval for bodies to be supervisors? 

Penalties and Enforcement 

Supervisors should use appropriate enforcement procedures when AML/CFT breaches 
have been identified. Under the Money Laundering Regulations and the Fourth Anti-Money 
Laundering Directive (4AMLD), penalties should be “effective, proportionate and 
dissuasive”. Furthermore, article 59 of 4AMLD sets out minimum requirements for 
measures that should be available in cases of serious, repeated or systematic breaches. 

There is no common approach across all supervisors to using enforcement tools to 
incentivise AML/CFT compliance. Typically, if a supervised business cannot provide 
evidence that it is applying AML/CFT controls to a satisfactory standard, a supervisor will 
schedule a follow-up visit to ask for evidence of improvement, leading to a referral to an 
investigation department if no credible evidence is forthcoming. There is scope for 
supervisors to take differing approaches in enforcing AML/CFT compliance, and for 
supervisors to take differing views on whether education or sanctions are the most 
appropriate remedy in a given situation.  

There is also no common approach to use of sanctions or in setting the level of penalties 
applicable and this could give rise to inconsistencies. While some supervisors are not 
limited in the fines that they can impose, others set limits as low as £2500. It should be 
noted that having different upper limits for fines may not necessarily lead to an inconsistent 
approach to enforcement, provided that any penalty levied is proportionate to the breach 
that is being sanctioned. The supervised population ranges from sole traders to 
multi-national corporations, so an effective regime should not seek consistency in the 
absolute level of penalties but the approach should be proportionate – that is, there should 
be consistency in the way that supervisors decide on penalties and consistency in their 
effect. To this end, article 60(4) of 4AMLD sets out a non-exhaustive list of circumstances 
that should be taken into account when deciding on the type and level of administrative 
sanctions to apply.  

Some supervisors have indicated that they can “fast track” disciplinary matters once a 
member has been convicted of an offence. However, the speed of the procedure varies 
from a matter of weeks to 6 months after conviction, potentially allowing a convicted 
criminal to practice for up to 6 months even after conviction. Public sector supervisors 
(such as HMRC) can also be constrained in “naming and shaming” those subject to 
conviction, which could reduce their ability to incentivise compliance, although it should be 
noted that article 60 of 4AMLD imposes, in certain circumstances, a duty to publish 
decisions where a penalty is imposed. Furthermore, many of the supervisors currently 
share information on members that have been disciplined for AML/CFT related breaches 
with the aim of ensuring continuity should they seek to move to a new supervisor within the 
same sector. 



 47 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

There are variations in how the discipline/enforcement committees of supervisors are 
constituted. Whilst some supervisors have disciplinary procedures that are operationally 
independent of the supervisor, others have no lay members, external oversight or recourse 
to an independent disciplinary tribunal. Supervisors’ disciplinary procedures should have 
sufficient independence to instil public confidence and there should be an adequate 
appeals system in place. 

Finally, different supervisors have different powers to investigate their supervised 
populations. The Money Laundering Regulations allow FCA staff and officers of HMRC the 
power to require information from and attendance of relevant and connected persons, 
including the power to require the relevant person to attend before an officer at a specified 
time and place and answer questions. The Money Laundering Regulations also give 
powers to HMRC and FCA to enter premises with or without a warrant, and this does not 
directly apply to the other supervisors.  

Furthermore, HMRC have authority to instigate proceedings for breaches of the 
Regulations that are prosecuted by the Crown Prosecution Service, whereas the other 
public sector supervisors (the FCA and the Gambling Commission) do not. The Gambling 
Commission does however have powers to take regulatory action under the Gambling Act 
for breaches in AML/CFT compliance, including suspension or revocation of a licence. 
Professional bodies, on the other hand, lack such direct powers to compel.  

10. Should the government seek to harmonise approaches to penalties and powers? 
For example, should supervisors have access to a certain minimum range of 
penalties and powers and what should these be? Should there be a common 
approach for deciding on penalties and calculating fines based on variables such as 
turnover that are scalable to the size of the business? 

11. Should the government seek to establish a single standard for supervisors 
disciplinary and appeals functions? 

12. Does the inability of some supervisors to directly compel attendance of relevant 
persons to answer questions or to enter premises reduce their ability to effectively 
supervise, or is liaison with law enforcement agencies an appropriate mechanism? 
If so, how could the government address this? 

Ensuring high standards in supervised populations 

Supervisors have a range of criteria that supervised businesses must meet. These can 
include adherence to codes of conduct, undergoing a fit and proper person test or 
requirements to obtain qualifications and training in order to be accepted for the purposes 
of supervision. Supervisors may also require their population to carry out continuing 
professional development in order to retain accreditation. The requirements will vary 
depending on the supervisor, and there may, in some cases, be no requirement to meet 
professional standards in order to become supervised.  

There are also barriers to supervisors informing themselves of the background of their 
supervised populations, making it difficult to effectively manage entry into the sector. Most 
supervisors do not have access to police databases and therefore do not know, other than 
through declarations, if a person has a criminal conviction. Not all supervisors have 
powers to carry out a fit and proper test of the supervised population. Supervisors may 
also lack appropriate powers to deregister those who are no longer deemed fit and proper. 
In some sectors, individuals or businesses deregistered by one supervisor may continue to 
practice by simply registering with an alternate supervisor. The government will consider 
the extension of fit and proper tests and the ability of supervisors to de-register 


48 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

businesses/individuals as part of its forthcoming consultation on the transposition of the 
Fourth Money Laundering Directive and submissions to that consultation are encouraged. 

While most supervisors require the supervised population to complete a comprehensive 
annual return containing information on the firm, principals, shareholders and 
management; not all supervisors can compel the supervised population to do so. 
Therefore they may not have access to up-to-date information, making it difficult to carry 
out a risk assessment of the activity carried out by a supervised business. 

Supervisors also work with their regulated populations in a number of ways to drive up 
standards, including through the use of more collaborative methods such as; industry 
workshops, bulletins, continuous professional development etc. 

13. Should all supervisors have powers to compel supervised businesses to submit 
comprehensive and up-to-date information to aid risk assessment?  

14. Is there a need for supervisors themselves to undergo training and/or continuous 
professional development? Is so, what form might this take and should it be 
government-recognised? 

15. Is there a need for relevant persons in the supervised populations across all sectors 
to undergo training and/or continuous professional development to aid their 
understanding of AML/CFT issues? 

The role of professional bodies in AML/CFT supervision 

The Treasury follows best practice on better regulation by allowing professional body 
supervision for AML/CFT. The NRA found that there is a risk that conflicts of interest could 
compromise professional body supervision as these bodies represent and are funded by 
the firms they supervise. A report published in February 2013 into the economic and legal 
effectiveness of AML/CFT policy raised concerns around the role of trade bodies in 
supervision. The study,16 published by Utrecht University, noted that “a high number of 
sanctions imposed by the professional association could lead to the impression that the 
professionals do not maintain a high quality standard.”  

The evidence gathered through the consultation undertaken as part of the NRA process 
did not indicate that this potential conflict of interest is undermining supervision, but the 
perception of risk remains very real. In Sir David Clementi’s report17 of 2004, he quotes 
from the Council for Licensed Conveyancers: “It is difficult to understand how one body 
can effectively both regulate a profession and also represent and lobby for its interests 
without prejudice to either its regulatory or representative functions.” The report argues 
that issues such as changes in practice should be examined, not against the wishes of the 
membership, but against the test of public interest and, even where a body does place the 
public interest ahead of that of its members, there remains an issue of perception.  

The Clementi report led to the establishment of the Legal Services Board and the 
separation of lobbying and supervisory functions for lawyers in England and Wales. This 
separation mitigates the risk of conflict of interest, as recognised by the NRA. Furthermore, 
it may make it easier for law enforcement to share information with supervisors if the 

                                            
16  Project ECOLEF report - 

http://www2.econ.uu.nl/users/unger/ecolef_files/Final%20ECOLEF%20report%20(digital%20version).pdf 
17  http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/+/http://www.legal-services-

review.org.uk/content/report/index.htm 



 49 


http://www2.econ.uu.nl/users/unger/ecolef_files/Final%20ECOLEF%20report%20(digital%20version).pdf
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/+/http:/www.legal-services-review.org.uk/content/report/index.htm
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/+/http:/www.legal-services-review.org.uk/content/report/index.htm




Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

supervisory arm is distinct from the representative arm and is established with appropriate 
safeguards and firewalls to give confidence that sensitive information would be protected.  

16. What safeguards should be put in place to ensure that there is sufficient separation 
between the advocacy and AML/CFT supervisory functions in professional bodies? 
To what extent are appropriate safeguards already in place? 

17. Should the government mandate the separation of representative and AML/CFT 
supervisory roles? What impacts might this have on the professional bodies 
themselves? 

18. How does the UK approach to professional body supervision compare to other 
countries’ regimes?  

Guidance 

The international AML/CFT standards set by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) 
require supervisors to provide their supervised population with a clear understanding of 
their AML/CFT obligations and ML/TF risks. This can include the production of AML/CFT 
guidance. Currently, supervisors and other stakeholders produce guidance which provides 
assistance for firms in their sector on the practical application of the Money Laundering 
Regulations. The Treasury does not currently issue guidance on the interpretation of the 
Money Laundering Regulations but instead may approve the guidance produced by 
supervisors and industry bodies. Treasury approved guidance means that a court must 
consider whether the person followed the guidance when deciding whether they failed to 
comply with the Regulations (or the POCA or the Terrorism Act 2000). 

Evidence submitted to the Cutting Red Tape Review suggests that the large number of 
supervisors has resulted in a great deal of Treasury approved guidance. The current 
process for obtaining Treasury approval for each piece of guidance is criticised by 
respondents as inefficient and taking too long. Further, submissions to the review suggest 
that much of the guidance itself is too long, challenging to understand and is jargon-laden. 
Respondents complained that there is insufficient clarity around the difference between 
minimum legal requirements and best practice. The status of the FCA Financial Crime 
Guide is specifically mentioned as being unclear and inconsistent with the guidance 
produced by the Joint Money Laundering Steering Group (JMLSG), a finance, trade and 
banking industry consortium. 

This results in firms having to familiarise themselves with multiple sets of guidance which, 
it is felt, often does not provide enough specific or practical advice on how to comply, 
leading to businesses being unsure of what is expected of them, or going beyond 
expected levels of compliance in order to minimise risk of being found non-compliant. 

The government may consider, in cooperation with industry and supervisors, taking a more 
active role in the production of guidance that explains the legal framework of the UK’s 
AML/CFT regime. Guidance on how to apply this legal framework to the particular sector, 
along with examples of best practice, would then be produced by appropriate industry and 
supervisory bodies and may not require Treasury approval. This could result in a 
consolidation in the amount of AML/CFT guidance produced and provide greater clarity to 
supervisors and to business. 

19. How could inconsistencies between the JMLSG guidance and the FCA’s Financial 
Crime Guide best be resolved? Should the two be merged? Or should one be 
discontinued and if so, which one and why? 


50 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

20. What alternative system for approving guidance should be considered and what 
should the government’s role be? Is it important to maintain the principle of 
providing legal safe harbour to businesses that follow the guidance? 

21. Should the government produce a single piece of guidance to help regulated 
businesses understand the intent and meaning of the Money Laundering 
Regulations, leaving the supervisors and industry bodies to issue specific guidance 
on how different sectors can comply? If so, would this industry guidance need to be 
Treasury approved? Should it be made clear that the supervised population is to 
follow the industry guidance? 

Transparency 

A transparent AML/CFT regime is more likely to maintain public confidence in the UK’s 
approach to tackling money laundering and terrorist financing. The publication of National 
Risk Assessment had the clear objective of enabling a better understanding of the UK’s 
money laundering and terrorist financing risks, informing the efficient allocation of 
resources and mitigating money laundering and terrorist financing risks.  

Taking an open approach to improving the understanding of money laundering and 
terrorist financing risks should assist the government, supervisors and the private sector in 
targeting their resources at the areas of highest risk. In a drive towards greater 
transparency in AML/CFT supervision, the Treasury has developed a voluntary reporting 
process for supervisors which is now in its fifth year. The Annual Supervision Report plays 
a key role in encouraging good practice and improving the transparency and accountability 
of supervision and enforcement in the UK. It should also be noted that 4AMLD further 
encourages transparency and article 60 requires the publication of details of enforcement 
action in certain circumstances. 

A transparent approach means that all – government, supervisors, and the private sector –
can be held to account for their contribution in the fight to protect the UK from the scourge 
of money laundering and terrorist financing. With this in mind, concerns that a candid 
approach which sets out the risks and vulnerabilities would serve as a roadmap to 
criminals should be balanced against the argument that openly identifying weaknesses 
provides a strong impetus for change. This argument holds that it is only through 
identifying and sharing understanding of weaknesses that these can be addressed, in 
order to ensure that the UK’s AML/CFT regime is robust, proportionate and responsive to 
emerging threats.  

22. Should supervisors be required to publish details of their enforcement actions and 
enforcement strategy, perhaps as part of the Treasury’s annual report on 
supervisors, or in their own reports? What are the benefits and risks in doing so? 

23. Should the government publish more of the detail gathered by the annual 
supervisor’s report process? For example, sharing good practice or weaknesses 
across all supervisors? 

24. Should supervisors be required to undertake thematic reviews of particular activities 
or sections of their supervised populations, as the FCA currently does? If so, how 
often should such reviews be undertaken? 



 51 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

Information sharing 

A key component of an effective AML/CFT regime is the effective sharing of information 
between supervisors and law enforcement agencies, and among supervisors. The NRA 
notes that supervisors collectively need to share more information with each other in order 
to properly mitigate the risks. For a supervisor to act effectively it must have information-
sharing gateways and appropriate mechanisms that allow it and law enforcement to share 
information to counter money laundering and terrorist financing. The ability to share skills, 
knowledge and experiences can also add to the overall effectiveness of supervision.  

Following of review of the Money Laundering Regulations in 2012, the Treasury amended 
the Regulations to provide a legal gateway to allow supervisors to disclose information to 
other UK supervisors relevant to their functions. This enables supervisors to inform each 
other of firms or individuals they have de-registered or have particular concerns about, in 
order to help prevent regulatory arbitrage and non-compliant firms from evading proper 
controls.  

The Financial Crime Information Network (FIN-NET) is an organisation that operates under 
the umbrella of the FCA and allows the sharing of information between law enforcement 
and regulators on specific individuals and entities. Membership of FIN-NET requires 
certain pre-requisites, appended to this document. While some AML/CFT supervisors are 
full members of FIN-NET, the majority are not.  

Another inconsistency with regard to the sharing of information is that regulation 25 of the 
Money Laundering Regulations requires HMRC to keep registers for certain sectors that it 
supervises, including High Value Dealers (HVDs), Money Service Businesses (MSBs) and 
Trust or Company Service Providers (TCSPs). The FCA also keeps a list of authorised 
firms on its register which is easily searchable but there is no such obligation on legal and 
accountancy service providers to keep registers for TCSPs and the FCA is not obliged to 
keep a register for MSBs or TCSPs that it supervises. The Regulations allow for HMRC to 
publish these registers, but they currently do not do so.  

25. What is the best way to facilitate intelligence sharing among supervisors and 
between supervisors and law enforcement? What safeguards should be imposed? 

26. As one means of facilitating better sharing of intelligence among supervisors and 
between supervisors and law enforcement, could the government mandate that all 
supervisors should fulfil the conditions for, and become members of, a mechanism 
such as FIN-NET? Are there other suitable mechanisms, such as the Shared 
Intelligence System (also hosted by the FCA)? 

27. Should the government require all supervisors to maintain registers of supervised 
businesses? If so, should these registers cover all registered businesses or just 
certain sectors? Should such registers be public? What are the likely costs and 
benefits of doing so? 

Ensuring the effectiveness of the FCA 

The UK is a global financial centre, and is home to some of the most successful 
international financial services firms in the world as well as being the largest centre for 
cross-border bank lending. Because of the size and complexity of the sector it is exposed 
to criminals who seek to use it to move and disguise the proceeds of crime and funds of 
terrorism. As the conduct supervisor for credit and many financial institutions, the Financial 
Conduct Authority (FCA) plays a key role in protecting the financial sector from ML/TF 


52 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

threats and the government is particularly motivated to ensure that the FCA is able to 
effectively mitigate the risks presented.  

Egregious cases of banks allowing themselves to be used for ML/TF purposes may have 
effects beyond simply damaging the reputation of the UK financial sector and facilitating 
the predicate offence(s). In such a situation, enforcement action against the offending 
bank by a regulator or law enforcement agency could potentially lead to fines or revocation 
of licences which lead to the failure of the bank. This could, depending on the size of the 
bank, have systemic implications. This makes it all the more important that the FCA is able 
to effectively monitor banks and ensure that their systems prevent such breaches 
occurring.  

The FCA seeks to apply a risk-based approach to its supervision of banks and other 
financial institutions. In 2014 it adapted its approach to AML/CFT supervision to try to 
target its resource more effectively and focuses on firms that present the highest money 
laundering risks, irrespective of their size. This includes carrying out deep dive 
assessments of major retail and investment banks as part of the Systematic Anti-Money 
Laundering Programme (SAMLP), regular inspections of smaller firms that are assesses 
as higher risk, thematic reviews and event-driven work, for example when a high risk of 
financial crime is identified. The FCA also publishes a Financial Crime Guide which gives 
specific guidance on anti-money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism, 
including examples of good practice. 

Submissions to the Cutting Red Tape review show there is a perception that the FCA’s 
supervision can focus on procedural requirements which are thought not be the most 
effective way of detecting and preventing money laundering and terrorist financing. This 
narrative contends that ‘tick-box’ approach by the FCA prevents banks from adopting truly 
effective approaches and leads them to ‘over-compliance’ – that is, demanding information 
from customers or imposing procedures that would not be required under a truly 
risk-based approach and are not demanded by regulations – as well as withdrawing from 
certain services or classes of customer in order to avoid the risk of regulatory sanctions. 
However, it should be noted that in order to assess the AML/CFT regime of an institution, 
there will be a need to do a certain amount of checking of procedures and policies which 
may, erroneously, be seen as ‘box-ticking’.  

It has been suggested that the FCA’s approach to supervising the financial sector for 
AML/CFT compliance leads to smaller firms not receiving the scrutiny that might be 
warranted under a truly risk-based approach, due to the FCA’s focus on the largest firms. 

28. How can credit and financial institutions best be encouraged to take a proportionate 
approach to their relationships with customers and avoid creating burdensome 
requirements not strictly required by the regulations? 

29. Does failure of AML/CFT compliance pose a credible systemic financial stability 
risk? If so, does this mean that the FCA should devote more resource to the largest 
banks which have the greatest potential to have systemic effects?  

30. How should the FCA address the perception from evidence submitted to the Cutting 
Red Tape Review that it is overly focused on process and ensure that its AML/CFT 
supervision is focused proportionately on firms which pose the greatest risk? 



 53 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

The number of supervisors 

The UK’s supervisory regime is unique in respect of the number and diversity of bodies 
that supervise businesses for AML/CFT purposes. These range from statutory regulators 
to professional bodies and the system has grown up organically over the years. There are 
currently 27 bodies appointed by Treasury as AML/CFT supervisors. This may provide 
advantages, allowing supervisors to leverage their specialist knowledge of their sectors in 
order to more effectively manage the risk of financial crime. However, there can be an 
overlap in the sectors covered by supervisors. 

A number of the inconsistencies outlined in this document could potentially be addressed 
by encouraging the supervisors to work in similar ways or establishing other means of 
oversight. However, there is an argument that it is simply the number of bodies in 
existence which give rise to more opportunities for inconsistency. While this makes 
mechanisms that allow cooperation and sharing of best practice among supervisors all the 
more important, the government is also interested in views as to whether the high number 
by itself makes achieving greater consistency difficult and whether consideration should be 
given to consolidation. 

31. Is the number of supervisors in itself a barrier to effective and consistent 
supervision? Is so, how should the number be reduced and what number would 
allow a consistent approach? 

32. If this is an issue, are there other ways to address it? For example, would 
supervisors within a single sector benefit from pooling their AML/CFT resources and 
establishing a joint supervisory function? 

List of questions 

1. Should the government address the issue of non-comparable risk assessment 
methodologies and if so, how? Should it work with supervisors to develop a single 
methodology, with appropriate sector-specific modifications? 

2. How should the government best support supervisors – and supervisors support 
each other – to link their risk-assessments to monitoring activities and to properly 
articulate how they do so? 

3. Should the government monitor the identification and assessment of risks by the 
supervisors on an ongoing basis? Should the supervisors monitor each other’s 
identification and assessment of risks? How might this work? 

4. Should smaller supervisors be encouraged to pool AML/CFT resources into a joint 
risk function and would this lead to efficiencies? If so, how should they be 
encouraged? 

5. How should the ability of the supervisors and law enforcement agencies to share 
information on risks be improved? 

6. To promote discussions between the supervisors, should attendance at the AMLSF 
and submission of an annual return to the Treasury be made compulsory for 
supervisors? How could the government ensure that this happened? 

7. Could the Money Laundering Advisory Committee (MLAC) have a greater role in 
driving improvements in the supervisory regime?  


54 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

8. Should the government instigate a formal mechanism for assessing the 
effectiveness of all the supervisors AML/CFT activities with the power to compel 
action to address shortcomings? If so, should this be carried out by the Treasury 
directly, through another body such as the National Audit Office, or through creating 
a new body, perhaps along the same lines as the Legal Services Board which 
oversees legal services supervisors or the Financial Reporting Council which 
promotes high quality corporate governance and reporting? Are there other ways of 
ensuring effectiveness that should be considered? 

9. Would an overarching body be able to add value by maintaining a more strategic 
view of the entire AML/CFT landscape and identifying cross-cutting issues which 
individual supervisors might struggle to identify? Should such a body have the 
authority to guide and compel the activities of the supervisors, up to and including 
the power to revoke approval for bodies to be supervisors? 

10. Should the government seek to harmonise approaches to penalties and powers? 
For example, should supervisors have access to a certain minimum range of 
penalties and powers and what should these be? Should there be a common 
approach for deciding on penalties and calculating fines based on variables such as 
turnover that are scalable to the size of the business? 

11. Should the government seek to establish a single standard for supervisors 
disciplinary and appeals functions? 

12. Does the inability of some supervisors to directly compel attendance of relevant 
persons to answer questions or to enter premises reduce their ability to effectively 
supervise, or is liaison with law enforcement agencies an appropriate mechanism? 
If so, how could the government address this?  

13. Should all supervisors have powers to compel supervised businesses to submit 
comprehensive and up-to-date information to aid risk assessment?  

14. Is there a need for supervisors themselves to undergo training and/or continuous 
professional development? Is so, what form might this take and should it be 
government-recognised? 

15. Is there a need for relevant persons in the supervised populations across all sectors 
to undergo training and/or continuous professional development to aid their 
understanding of AML/CFT issues? 

16. What safeguards should be put in place to ensure that there is sufficient separation 
between the advocacy and AML/CFT supervisory functions in professional bodies? 
To what extent are appropriate safeguards already in place? 

17. Should the government mandate the separation of representative and AML/CFT 
supervisory roles? What impacts might this have on the professional bodies 
themselves? 

18. How does the UK approach to professional body supervision compare to other 
countries’ regimes?  

19. How could inconsistencies between the JMLSG guidance and the FCA’s Financial 
Crime Guide best be resolved? Should the two be merged? Or should one be 
discontinued and if so, which one and why? 



 55 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

20. What alternative system for approving guidance should be considered and what 
should the government’s role be? Is it important to maintain the principle of 
providing legal safe harbour to businesses that follow the guidance? 

21. Should the government produce a single piece of guidance to help regulated 
businesses understand the intent and meaning of the Money Laundering 
Regulations, leaving the supervisors and industry bodies to issue specific guidance 
on how different sectors can comply? If so, would this industry guidance need to be 
Treasury approved? Should it be made clear that the supervised population is to 
follow the industry guidance? 

22. Should supervisors be required to publish details of their enforcement actions and 
enforcement strategy, perhaps as part of the Treasury’s annual report on 
supervisors, or in their own reports? What are the benefits and risks in doing so? 

23. Should the government publish more of the detail gathered by the annual 
supervisor’s report process? For example, sharing good practice or weaknesses 
across all supervisors? 

24. Should supervisors be required to undertake thematic reviews of particular activities 
or sections of their supervised populations, as the FCA currently does? If so, how 
often should such reviews be undertaken? 

25. What is the best way to facilitate intelligence sharing among supervisors and 
between supervisors and law enforcement? What safeguards should be imposed? 

26. As one means of facilitating better sharing of intelligence among supervisors and 
between supervisors and law enforcement, could the government mandate that all 
supervisors should fulfil the conditions for, and become members of, a mechanism 
such as FIN-NET? Are there other suitable mechanisms, such as the Shared 
Intelligence System (also hosted by the FCA)? 

27. Should the government require all supervisors to maintain registers of supervised 
businesses? If so, should these registers cover all registered businesses or just 
certain sectors? Should such registers be public? What are the likely costs and 
benefits of doing so? 

28. How can credit and financial institutions best be encouraged to take a proportionate 
approach to their relationships with customers and avoid creating burdensome 
requirements not strictly required by the regulations? 

29. Does failure of AML/CFT compliance pose a credible systemic financial stability 
risk? If so, does this mean that the FCA should devote more resource to the largest 
banks which have the greatest potential to have systemic effects?  

30. How should the FCA address the perception from evidence submitted to the Cutting 
Red Tape Review that it is overly focused on process and ensure that its AML/CFT 
supervision is focused proportionately on firms which pose the greatest risk? 

31. Is the number of supervisors in itself a barrier to effective and consistent 
supervision? Is so, how should the number be reduced and what number would 
allow a consistent approach? 


56 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

32. If this is an issue, are there other ways to address it? For example, would 
supervisors within a single sector benefit from pooling their AML/CFT resources and 
establishing a joint supervisory function? 

Responses  

The Treasury welcomes your views in response to the questions posed in this Annex and 
would be keen to hear views on how to best deal with the issues raised with a view to 
making the supervisory regime more effective. This will help ensure evidence-based policy 
decisions in these areas. 

Electronic responses are preferred and should be sent to: aml@hmtreasury.gsi.gov.uk 

Questions or enquiries specifically relating to this consultation should also be sent to the 
above email address. Please include the words CONSULTATION VIEWS or 
CONSULTATION ENQUIRY (as appropriate) in your email title. If you do not wish your 
views to be published alongside the Government response to this consultation, please 
clearly specify this in your email.  

Hard copy responses may be submitted to: 

Review of AML/CFT Supervision 
Sanctions and Illicit Finance Team  
1st Floor Blue 
HM Treasury 
1 Horse Guards Road 
London 
SW1A 2HQ 

Confidentiality and Disclosure policy 

Information provided in response to this consultation, including personal information, might 
be published or disclosed in accordance with the access to information regimes. These are 
primarily the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (FOIA) and the Data Protection Act (DPA). 
If you want the information that you provide to be treated as confidential, please be aware 
that, under the FOIA, there is a statutory Code of Practice with which public authorities 
must comply with and which deals, amongst other things, with obligations of confidence.  

In view of this it would be helpful if you could explain to the Treasury why you regard the 
information you have provided as confidential. If Government receives a request for 
disclosure of the information, the Treasury will take full account of your explanation, but it 
cannot give an assurance that confidentiality will be maintained in all circumstances. 

An automatic confidentiality disclaimer generated by your IT system will not, of itself, be 
regarded as binding on the Department. Your personal data will be processed in 
accordance with the DPA, and in the majority of circumstances, this will mean that your 
personal data will not be disclosed. 

Timetable 

The closing date for comments to be submitted is 2 June 2016.  


  57 


mailto:aml@hmtreasury.gsi.gov.uk




Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 

Appendix to Annex C – Criteria for 
Membership of FIN-NET 

Before receiving approval as a member of FIN-NET a potential member must demonstrate 
that they satisfy the following criteria: 

1. Mandate Mandate to regulate entities involved in the financial services sector 
and/or combat financial fraud and other serious crime, which makes use of or 
impacts on the UK financial system. 

2. Gateways Legal ability to share information with a significant proportion of the 
FIN-NET membership. Ability to share must include instances where disclosure 
limited to the matter being matter investigated is not in itself a breach of the entity's 
rules/laws. 

3. FCA Even if gateways do not exist with all FIN-NET Members, the entity must be 
able to disclose confidential information to the FCA (or such other entity that is 
hosting the FIN-NET Secretariat). 

4. Legal identity The entity should have the ability to enter into contracts in its own 
name. 

5. Integrity of information Existence of primary interest in the cases it is submitting 
to FIN-NET and the ability to stand behind the information on such cases. 

6. Commitment General ability and willingness to contribute actively to FIN-NET's 
objectives and to share information with other members, including responding 
promptly and fully to referrals/enquiries from FIN-NET Members. 

7. Confidentiality Legal ability to hold information received from FIN-NET members 
free from any requirement to make public disclosure if required (subject to Court 
orders or the requirements of DPA and FOIA).  

8. Security Adequate physical and electronic security to ensure that all documentation 
received from FIN-NET members is held securely. 

9. Clearance If applying to become a Main Member, willingness to submit appropriate 
staff for clearance to required level and, if necessary pay for "developed vetting". 

10. Communication Access to, or willingness to install, an accredited secure means of 
communication (ideally electronic) with the FIN-NET Secretariat. 

11. Funding Agreement to pay contributions to the costs of FIN-NET, as set by the 
FIN-NET Steering Group. 

12. Reputation A proven track record of working with at least one FIN-NET member 
over a reasonable period of time. 


  58 

Action Plan for anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist finance 



 59          

	Contents
	Ministerial Foreword
	Summary of Actions
	1. Introduction
	2. Actions
	3. Implementing the Action Plan
	Annex A: Consultation on legislative proposals
	Annex B: Findings from the Call for Information on the Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs) Regime
	Annex C: Call for information – AML Supervisory Regime




