

        

Foreword  


 

DExEU prides itself on its core values: 


 

● embracing our exceptional context, with dynamism, rigour and 
professionalism,  

● empowered to deliver, bringing new thinking to challenges we face together 
and  

● fostering collaboration,  through an environment that respects and values 
diversity.  


 

To succeed, our culture must reflect those values, not least through a focus on 
well-being and diversity and inclusion, ensuring it is ​embedded in everything we do.  


 

The Department’s pay approach supports the fair treatment and reward of all staff 
irrespective of gender.  


 

This report sets out where we are in terms of the gender pay gap in DExEU. It 
provides in an open way the evidence we need to further advance our agenda of 
inclusion and fair treatment for all.  


 

We want everyone in DExEU to have the opportunity to develop their career, both 
while they are working with us and beyond. We will use the DExEU Difference to 
help us do that. We will use the evidence in this and future gender pay gap reports to 
ensure we do so in an inclusive and fair way and hope to see evidence of that in the 
makeup of the Department 


         

DExEU Gender Pay Gap Report 2016/17 1 


  

Contents  


 

Summary of findings 
Background  
Organisational context 
Reporting requirements  
Gender pay gap data 
Pay by quartiles 
Bonus gap 
Closing the gap 
Wider inclusion 
Conclusion 


 

Summary of findings  


 

This report sets out the Department’s gender pay gap figures as at 31 March 2017. 
The report also sets out the how as a department we are closing the gap through a 
number of initiatives and working closely with our equalities network and womens 
network. 


 

Mean pay in DExEU shows a gap in favour of men of 15.26%. The DExEU median 
pay shows a gap of 8.91% in favour of men.  


 

Background 


 

Earlier this year, the Government introduced world-leading legislation that made it 
statutory for organisations with 250 or more employees to report annually on their 
gender pay gap. Government departments are covered by the Equality Act 2010 
(Specific Duties and Public Authorities) Regulations 2017 which came into force on 
31 March 2017. These regulations underpin the Public Sector Equality Duty and 
require the relevant organisations to publish their gender pay gap data by 30 March 
2018 [and then annually], including mean and median gender pay gaps; the mean 
and median gender bonus gaps; the proportion of men and women who received 
bonuses; and the proportions of male and female employees in each pay quartile.  


  

The ​gender pay gap​ shows the difference in the average pay between all men and 
women in a workforce. If a workforce has a particularly high gender pay gap, this can 
indicate there may be a number of issues to deal with, and the individual calculations 
may help to identify what those issues are. 


  

DExEU Gender Pay Gap Report 2016/17 2 


    

The gender pay gap is different to equal pay. ​Equal pay​ deals with the pay 
differences between men and women who carry out the same jobs, similar jobs or 
work of equal value. It is unlawful to pay people unequally because they are a man 
or a woman. 


  

DExEU supports the fair treatment and reward of all staff irrespective of gender as 
set out above and supported by Permanent Secretary Philip Rycroft. 


 

While the Department had less than the 250 staff on payroll as at 31 March 2017, we 
are publishing this report as part of an initiative to improve transparency across the 
Civil Service. This report fulfils the reporting requirements, analyses the figures in 
more detail and sets out what we are doing to close the gender pay gap in the 
organisation.  


 

Organisational context 


 

The Prime Minister established DExEU in July 2016 following the result of the UK’s 
Referendum on membership of the European Union. From a standing start, the 
Department has increased significantly, with 228 staff on payroll at 31 March 2017, 
increasing to over 550 at the end of October 2017. This means we are not reviewing 
a static workforce as we have seen an increase of 125% between the snapshot date 
and now. Additionally, as a new Department there is no previous data we can use to 
review trends but we intend to use this report as the starting point. In the future we 
will use this data and other similar reports as a benchmark for the gender pay gap.  


 

DExEU’s employment model reflects the time limited nature of the Department 
through a non-permanent workforce made up of loans, secondments and fixed term 
appointments.  


 

DExEU Pay Guidance 


 

We are governed by the HM Treasury Civil Service pay guidance.  As such, we are 
subject to current public sector pay rules and pay restraint.  


 

DExEU uses the Civil Service grades ranging from administrative assistant / officer 
to senior manager roles. The grades represents the level of responsibility an 
employee has and there are set pay ranges within each grade. All staff are based in 
London so we only operate a London payscale.  


   

DExEU Gender Pay Gap Report 2016/17 3 


  

DExEU grades Civil Service common grades 

Band A+ Grade 6 

Band A Grade 7 

Band B2 HEO/SEO 

Band B/Fast Stream HEO (D) 

Band B1 EO 

Band C AA/AO 


 

Senior Civil Servants are covered by central pay arrangements which apply across 
the Civil Service.  


 

Reporting requirements  


 

What do we report on? 


 

For the purpose of reporting, the definition of an employee follows the definition set 
out in section 83 of the Equality Act 2010. Public sector organisations are required to 
base their data on staff employed on the ‘snapshot’ date of 31 March 2017. The data 
is drawn from the payroll system and includes grade, gender, contractual hour, 
working pattern, gross monthly salary, salary sacrifice, overtime and allowances.  


 

The gender pay gap differs from equal pay. The gender pay gap is defined as a 
measure of the difference between men and women’s average earnings across an 
organisation (no matter what their role is). Equal pay refers to the right to equal pay 
between women and men when carrying out the same or a similar role in an 
organisation. Both are set out in the Equality Act 2010 . 1


        

1 https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2010/15/section/78 


  

DExEU Gender Pay Gap Report 2016/17 4 


  

Table of definitions 


 

Mean gap The difference between the mean* hourly rate of pay of 
men and women 
*average pay for all men and average for all women employees  

Median gap The difference between the median* hourly rate of pay of 
men and women  
* middle value of pay for all men and middle value for all women 
employees  

Mean bonus gap The difference between the mean* bonus paid to men and 
women  
*average bonus for all men and average for all women employees  

Median bonus gap The difference between the median bonus pay paid to men 
and women  
*middle values of bonuses paid to all men compared to all women 
employees  

Bonus proportions 


 

The proportions of men who were paid a bonus and 
women paid a bonus  

Quartile bands The proportions of men and women in the lower; lower 
middle; upper middle; and upper quartile pay bands  


  


Gender pay gap data 


        

DExEU Gender Pay Gap Report 2016/17 5 


   

Both the mean and median gender pay gap outcomes are in favour of men, based 
on a snapshot of earnings taken on 31 March 2017. 


 

Mean pay in DExEU shows a gap in favour of men of 15.26%. The DExEU median 
pay shows a gap of 8.91% in favour of men.  


 

What this means?  


 

The mean is the arithmetic average of men and women’s pay in DExEU. It captures 
difference across distribution and gives a clearer understanding of gender disparities 
in income. In comparison, the median is the middle point of men and women’s 
salaries when they are put in numerical order. The median compares typical values 
and is less affected by extreme values such as a small number of very high earners. 
The median also gives a better indication of typical pay and inequalities. 


 

The mean is significantly higher than the median, suggesting that the dataset is 
skewed this can be attributed to the presence of very low earners (where the mean 
is below the median), and/or by a group of very high earners (where the mean is 
above the median) .  2


 

The majority of DExEU’s staff included in the snapshot date (90%) are on loan from 
26 other government departments and devolved administrations, who operate their 
own pay scales and grading systems. Those staff who came across to DExEU on 
loan have their base pay determined by their home department which DExEU have 
no control over. As many staff come from departments with higher pay scales, this 
could have had an impact on skewing our data in terms of the mean being above the 
median.  


            

2 https://www.cipd.co.uk/knowledge/fundamentals/relations/gender-pay-gap-reporting/guide 


  

DExEU Gender Pay Gap Report 2016/17 6 


   

This table shows the proportion of men and women at each grade on DExEU payroll: 


    

Grade (increasing 
seniority) 


 

Number of Men 
(who work at this 
grade) 


  

Number of Women 
(who work at this 
grade)  

 % Women in 
DExEU vs. Civil 
Service as a whole 

Band C (AA/AO) * * 75% | 58% 

Band B1 (EO) 10  20  67% | 56% 

Band B/FS (HEO) * *  52% | 48% 

Band B2 
(HEO/SEO) 

38  41 52% | 48% 


 

Band A and A+ 
(Grade 7/6) 

37  40  52% | 52% 

SCS (all pay 
bands) 


21  

11 38% | 42% 

Total gender % 48% 52%  
*Any figures fewer than 5 are exempt from disclosure as this could allow individuals to be identified 
and disclosure of the information would, among other things contravene one of the data protection 
principles in schedule 1 of the Data Protection Act 1998. Disclosure of this information would 
contravene the first Data Protection principle, which provides that personal data must be processed 
fairly and lawfully.  


 

Women are overrepresented in more junior grades, where pay is lower, and they are 
under-represented in more senior grades. As set out in table 1, above, this is fairly 
consistent with the wider Civil Service but indicates an issue for the Department to 
address. 


 

If we were to adjust this factor and remove the SCS from our calculations, our 
median pay gap drops to 2.06% and the mean gender pay gap drops to -0.39% -  a 
negative percentage means that women are paid more than men. Therefore, it can 
be said that the lack of representation from women in the SCS is a significant 
contributing factor to our gender pay gap. 


    

DExEU Gender Pay Gap Report 2016/17 7 


  

Pay by quartiles - hourly pay by quartiles 


 

Pay quartiles are created by ranking all relevant employees (based on definition set 
out in section 83 of the Equality Act 2010) from highest to lowest paid and dividing 
them into 4 equal parts (quartiles). The percentage of men and women in each of the 
4 quartiles is then calculated. 


 

As at 31 March 2017 the pay by quartiles was: 

First (lower) 
quartile 


  

  ​34%            66% 

Second quartile 


   

   ​56%            44% 

Third quartile 


   

  ​  55%            45%  

Fourth (upper) 
quartile 


  

  ​48%            52% 


 

66% of the lower quartile earners in DExEU pay grades are women and 52% of the 
upper quartile are women. As 52% of the department’s employees overall are 
women, this illustrates that the pay gap is largely as a result of a higher 
concentration of women in more junior grades.  


 

What this means? 


 

In the lower quartiles there is an uneven distribution of men and women with the 
lowest quartile made up of 66% women. Breaking down the gender pay gap by 
quartiles has helped the department to identify exactly where the attention should be 
focused on.  


 

The highest quartile in DExEU is made up of 52% women despite only 38% of the 
SCS being women. This can be explained by the presence of slightly more women 
than men at Band A/A+ grade.  


      

DExEU Gender Pay Gap Report 2016/17 8 


  

Bonus gap 


 

As a new department, we did not have any bonuses paid in the snapshot period. 
However, the department has now developed and implemented a reward and 
recognition policy so we will be able to report on this in future years.  


 

Closing the gap  


 

DExEU is committed to tackling the gender pay gap and developing an inclusive 
culture where all staff are treated fairly and feel supported. Set out below are the key 
actions we are taking to close the gap: 


 

Publicising Consistent Pay & Reward Processes 


 

The majority of staff within DExEU (90% at snapshot date) are on loan from other 
government departments, meaning their salaries on joining are based on the salaries 
set by their home department. As each department can determine their own pay 
scales these vary widely across Government. Starting salaries are only determined 
by DExEU when an individual is joining from external to the Civil Service. The factors 
taken into account when assessing these starting salaries in DExEU are skills and 
experience.  


 

DExEU has recently introduced a reward policy which encompasses a wide range of 
rewards and recognition options, both financial and non-financial. The policy 
encourages equal opportunities to always be at the forefront of all decisions with 
stock takes undertaken by HR to ensure consistency and fairness.  We expect all 
reward decisions to be made collaboratively and in line with performance standards. 
Furthermore, certain rewards allow nominations from colleagues, not just managers, 
in order to create a more inclusive environment.  


 

The introduction of this policy also means the Department will have data to publish 
on bonuses next year.  


 

Supporting career progression 


 

DExEU is committed to supporting the development of staff and has introduced 
talent management for all grades both at mid- and end-of-year. We encourage and 
support staff to create both short term and longer term development and career 
plans. We ensure all staff and managers take the time to have regular career 


  

DExEU Gender Pay Gap Report 2016/17 9 


  

conversations. This dedicated focus will support all staff to identify their career 
aspirations and potential to progress within DExEU and the wider Civil Service. 


 

DExEU has established an internal Talent and Workforce committee to take a more 
tailored and inclusive approach to improve our talent pipeline and maximise the 
benefits of a diverse workforce.  


 

As we have identified an underrepresentation of women in the SCS we have 
supported talent management schemes to support career progression. This includes 
the Positive Action Pathways scheme which is a ​cross government development 
programme for staff in under-represented groups at all grades​. This is currently open 
for nominations. 


 

Over the course of the department’s lifetime four women have progressed to the Civil 
Service Future Leaders Scheme and a total of seven women have or will be taking 
part in a​ ​cross government leadership programme. These development programmes 
are designed to give women the skills to progress into senior leadership roles. 


 

Attracting diverse talent  


 

DExEU has developed its recruitment processes in line with the Civil Service 
Commissioners’ principles (appointments made on merit, fair and open competition) 
and cross government best practice. 


 

The process provides a consistent approach for all campaigns and includes actions 
such as: 


 

● ensuring all roles are available on full time, part time and jobshare basis apart 
from in  exceptional circumstances; 

● running an anonymous application process at sift stage; 
● ensuring all interviews have gender balanced panels; and 
● mandating that all panel members complete the CSL unconscious bias 

training within the past 12 months 


 

The review of quartiles revealed that a majority of staff in the lower quartile are 
women. We would like to see a greater representation at all levels and will therefore 
be working  to ensure a review of the diversity data from recruitment is undertaken to 
identify trends and identify any further actions that can be taken in attraction or 
recruitment. 


   

DExEU Gender Pay Gap Report 2016/17 10 


  

Wider inclusion 


 

We are also committed to supporting the wider inclusion agenda through the 
following activities:  


 

Promoting Family-friendly Policies 


 

DExEU supports and encourages flexibility, taking account of the needs of our work 
and employees. Therefore, DExEU operates a flexible working policy with a wide 
variety of options including ​home working, compressed hours, job sharing and 
flexitime​ to support staff the work-life balance of our staff. 


 

Alongside this, DExEU has a range of policies in place to support parents, foster 
carers and carers. These policies and their corresponding toolkits cover the run up to 
the period of leave, the time away and return to work to support all staff the best we 
can. The policies cover maternity, shared parental leave, paternity, adoption, foster 
carers’ and family and friends carers’ leave. 


 

Our Values and Culture 


 

Staff were fully involved in shaping and identifying the Department’s values to ensure 
we have an inclusive culture in which all are valued. The DExEU values define what is 
important and what makes DExEU unique. They are: 

● Embracing our exceptional context, with dynamism, rigour and 
professionalism; 

● Empowered to deliver, bringing new thinking to challenges we face together; 


and 


● Fostering collaboration,  through an environment that respects and values 
diversity. 

United by our strong sense of public service, we continue to live by the Civil Service 
values – integrity, honesty, impartiality and objectivity – that run through all that we 


do. 


We are also guided by the vision for ‘A Brilliant Civil Service‘,  that is, one that is 
capable of serving modern Britain. One that truly reflects the people it serves and 
provides opportunity for talented people to fulfil their potential, regardless of their 
background. 


  

DExEU Gender Pay Gap Report 2016/17 11 


  

Defining and valuing employees contribution: The DExEU Difference   


 

‘The DExEU Difference’ was launched in November 2017 and encompasses a well 
rounded employee value proposition - it puts the focus on our staff, their health and 
wellbeing, support available in the department and their learning and development. It 
shows the department’s commitment to diversity and inclusion and incorporates 
various tools staff might need or want to reach their full potential such as mentoring 
or coaching.  


   

Supporting Learning and Development: The DExEU Academy 


 

DExEU values learning and development (L&D) and wants to provide staff an equal 
opportunity to develop and succeed. We created the DExEU Academy which 
provides a ‘one stop shop’ for a range of different L&D opportunities. It provides 
access to ​learning which is specific to the unique and challenging context in which 
DExEU operates - designed to be accessible and relevant and tailored to personal 
development needs. 


 

Along with a broad range of optional L&D opportunities, DExEU has mandatory 
training courses including one on Unconscious Bias. This online course helps staff 
understand unconscious bias and how it affects attitudes, behaviours and decision 


  

DExEU Gender Pay Gap Report 2016/17 12 


  

making. ​The course provides practical techniques that help reduce the impact of 
unconscious bias and so, ultimately, create a more inclusive and diverse team. This 
training must be undertaken by all staff on an annual basis. 


 

Promoting Employee Voice 


 

We utilise a variety of channels for everyone in the Department to have their say and 
shape the department. One of these is a shadow board made up of a diverse range 
of staff from across the department which​ sees and discusses all the papers going to 
the Executive Board, offering feedback and inputting the views of staff so the 
Executive Board can take a well-rounded view before making decisions.   


 

Collaborating with Equality, Diversity and Peer Networks 


 

DExEU has a broad range of equality and diversity networks and peer networks 
available for all staff to access in the department. All of the DExEU diversity and 
equality networks have signed a charter which ensures that DExEU maintains an 
enjoyable, supportive and inclusive environment, where diversity is respected and 
everyone feels valued. The diversity and equality networks in the department include 
those relating to Age, BAME, Disability, LGBT, Mental Health, Social Mobility, 
Religion, Gender, Parenting and Flexible Working.  


 

Alongside the equality and diversity networks, we also have peer networks for 
different pay grades. These networks run events and workshops to further help 
career progression within the department.  


 

Transparent Performance Management approach 


 

For the 2017/18 Performance Management year, DExEU has launched a new 
approach to reflect the exceptional context of the department. The new approach 
was created with, and by our staff to ensure a more transparent  system based on 
merit, and removing forced distribution. Our new approach helps to bring individuals’ 
areas of excellence to the forefront, as well as identifying areas for development 
against a set of consistent Performance Standards for each grade, centered around 
our DExEU values. It allows for a more supportive environment where managers can 
help their staff to reach their highest potential.  


 

Embedding Diversity and Inclusion: Our Strategy 


 

The department will be developing the 2018/19 Diversity and Inclusion strategy in 
line with the​ Civil Service Diversity and Inclusion strategy​. Gender equality will be an 


  

DExEU Gender Pay Gap Report 2016/17 13 


 

https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/658488/Strategy_v10_FINAL_WEB6_TEST_021117.pdf


 

area of focus within the strategy as we are keen to increase representation of 
women in senior roles in the department. In line with our Public Sector Equality 
Duties we will continue to advance equality of opportunity. 


 

Conclusion 


 

Overall the findings show that whilst our gender pay gap is lower than the national 
average there is still much more that needs to be done. We will continue to develop 
the initiatives set out above to help close the gap. We will continue to work with the 
women's network and the wider equalities network to promote the whole diversity 
and inclusion agenda.  


 

The Department has grown significantly since 31 March 2017 and as such the 
findings in this report are based on 41% of our current workforce.  


 

Why will we continue to work on this? 


 

The business case for diversity and inclusion is well known and evidenced. As a 
Department we take the diversity and inclusion agenda seriously and have made 
good headway since the establishment last year. There is more we can and will be 
doing and the actions above set out our focus on tackling the gender pay gap and 
the wider diversity and inclusion strategy.  


 

We will review and reassess these actions on an annual basis.  


 

Declaration 


 

The data presented in this report has been established in line with the requirements 
of the Equality Act 2010 (Gender Pay Gap Information) Regulations 2017. The report 
has been reviewed by the Operations Committee and women's network who support 
the actions to close the gap and the wider diversity and inclusion agenda.  


  

DExEU Gender Pay Gap Report 2016/17 14 


 

