



The Government’s mandate to NHS England for 2016-17 


 

March 2017 

The Government’s mandate 
to NHS England for 2016-17




The Government’s mandate to NHS England for 2016-17 


  2       

The Government’s mandate 
to NHS England 2016-17 


 

A mandate from the Government to NHS England:  
April 2016 to March 2017 
Presented to Parliament pursuant to Section 13A(1) of the National Health Service Act 2006  




The Government’s mandate to NHS England for 2016-17 


  3                               

You may re-use the text of this document (not including logos) free of charge in any format or 
medium, under the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit 
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/ 

© Crown copyright  
Published to gov.uk, in PDF format only.  
www.gov.uk/dh  

http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/
http://www.gov.uk/dh




The Government’s mandate to NHS England for 2016-17 


  4 

Contents 
Contents ..................................................................................................................................... 4 
Foreword .................................................................................................................................... 5 

1. Introduction .......................................................................................................................... 6 

2. NHS England’s objectives ................................................................................................... 8 
3. NHS England’s budget ...................................................................................................... 11 

Annex: How we will assess NHS England’s performance ........................................................ 12 


 


The Government’s mandate to NHS England for 2016-17 


  5 

Foreword 
The NHS is a truly remarkable institution.  Made up of over 8,300 separate organisations and 
served by more than 1.3 million staff, it sees more than a million patients every 36 hours.  It has 
been independently rated as the fairest and most patient-centred health system in the world, is 
achieving near record levels of satisfaction and record lows in dissatisfaction despite 
unprecedented increases in demand, and is still the single institution that makes us most proud 
to be British.  The consultation on this mandate alone received almost 130,000 responses, 
demonstrating just how much the public care about our NHS.  

Stewarding this formidable service on behalf of the patients and taxpayers is both an enormous 
privilege and a weighty responsibility for myself and NHS England.  We are united with NHS 
staff across the country in a shared objective of sustaining a comprehensive service, free at the 
point of use, which constantly improves patient care. 

The Government has set NHS England an ambitious mandate to do just that in the year ahead, 
by making big strides in our drive to make the NHS the safest, most compassionate and most 
efficient health system in the world.  At a time when other areas of government spending still 
face difficult reductions in expenditure, we have committed a substantial £3.8 billion extra 
funding to the NHS next year to fund this ambitious programme. 

Extra investment from taxpayers must come with serious reform, so we have asked NHS 
England to make rapid progress on tackling the unacceptable variation in the standard of 
weekend services, focusing on transforming weekend provision of urgent and emergency care 
across an initial 20% of the country over the mandate period. 

We are also continuing to back and fund the NHS’s own plan for the future, the Five Year 
Forward View.  This blueprint for the transformation of out of hospital services achieved an 
extraordinary level of consensus across the NHS, and next year we will see those plans coming 
to fruition through the vanguards and new models of care programmes.  We anticipate real 
progress in patient outcomes across these transformation areas, including a reduction in 
emergency admissions, and improvement in accident and emergency performance to ensure 
that standards are met.  

I have great confidence in the leadership and passion of those at NHS England, working with 
NHS Improvement, to deliver this mandate for the benefit of patients and taxpayers, and look 
forward to reporting on progress in the months ahead. 


 

Rt Hon Jeremy Hunt MP 
Secretary of State for Health 




The Government’s mandate to NHS England for 2016-17 


  6 

1. Introduction 


 

1.1. The Government is committed to providing for patients and the public the highest quality, 

most compassionate health and care service in the world, built on the guiding principles 
of the NHS: that access to health care is based on need and not the ability to pay, and 
that services are comprehensive and available to all. 

The mandate to NHS England  
1.2. NHS England is responsible for arranging the provision of health services in England. 

The mandate to NHS England sets the Government’s objectives and any requirements 
for NHS England, as well as its budget.1 In doing so, the mandate sets direction for the 
NHS, and helps ensure the NHS is accountable to Parliament and the public. Every 
year, the Secretary of State must publish a mandate to ensure that NHS England’s 
objectives remain up to date.2 

1.3. This year, every government department is producing a plan setting out its objectives to 
2020 and how it will achieve them. The mandate therefore sets out NHS England’s 
contribution to the Government’s goals for the health and care system as a whole, in line 
with the manifesto commitments.  

1.4. This mandate sets out objectives to 2020, sets requirements relating to the Better Care 
Fund, and sets NHS England’s budget for five years. Setting a multi-year mandate with 
a multi-year budget will enable the NHS to plan more effectively to deliver our long-term 
aims.  

1.5. For the first time, the objectives in the mandate are underpinned by specific deliverables 
to be achieved in the short term, for the year 2016-17, and to be achieved in the long 
term, by 2020 or beyond, as set out in the annex. The mandate must be refreshed each 
year and laid before Parliament, to ensure the objectives and requirements are up to 
date and to agree new annual deliverables. Together, this mandate and its annex form 
the mandate to NHS England for 2016-17.  

1.6. NHS England is legally required to seek to achieve the objectives, and comply with the 
requirements in this document.3 We will assess NHS England’s performance against its 
objectives, by reviewing progress against agreed yearly deliverables and metrics, 
alongside improvement in outcomes measures. Our assessment will be published in the 
Secretary of State’s annual assessment of NHS England. In turn, we expect NHS 
England to ensure clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) play their part in delivering the 
mandate. 

The Five Year Forward View and a seven-day NHS 
1.7. The coalition government gave the NHS important freedoms to develop its own plan. 

NHS England and its partner organisations have done just that, with the NHS’s Five 

                                            
1 NHS England’s legal name is the National Health Service Commissioning Board 
2 In accordance with section 13A(1) of the National Health Service Act 2006, as amended by the Health and Social 
Care Act 2012 
3 This requirement is at section 13A(7) of the National Health Service Act 2006 




The Government’s mandate to NHS England for 2016-17 


  7 

Year Forward View. In return, people need to have the confidence that the high-quality 
NHS services will be there when they need them.  

1.8. This Government will increase spending in real terms every year in this Parliament. The 
NHS will receive £10 billion more per year in real terms by 2020-2021 than in 2014-15. 
This investment backs in full the Five Year Forward View and will mean patients receive 
a truly seven-day health service, with the services people need being offered in hospitals 
at the weekend and people able to access a GP at evenings and weekends.  

1.9. In this new mandate to NHS England to 2020, the Government is entrusting NHS 
England with the NHS budget to help deliver these commitments, and to meet the 
evolving needs of the population in a way that is sustainable now and into the future. We 
will hold NHS England to account for its leadership of and contribution to delivery of the 
Five Year Forward View and a truly seven-day NHS. 




The Government’s mandate to NHS England for 2016-17 


  8 

2. NHS England’s objectives  


 

2.1. This mandate is based on the shared priorities of Government and its partner 

organisations for health and care – the priorities we believe are central to delivering the 
changes needed to ensure the NHS is always there whenever people need it most. As 
leader of the commissioning system, but working with others, NHS England has a 
central role to play. This mandate sets objectives for NHS England that reflects its 
contribution to these ambitions to 2020.   


 

 OBJECTIVE 1: Through better commissioning, improve local and national health 
outcomes, particularly by addressing poor outcomes and inequalities. 

2.2. To do this, we need greater transparency about the quality and outcomes of care. We 
expect NHS England to establish and maintain a new CCG assessment framework, to 
make it easier for local areas to see how their services and outcomes compare to others 
and make consistent improvements. We expect NHS England to demonstrate 
improvements against the NHS Outcomes Framework, and work with CCGs to reduce 
variations in quality of care and outcomes at a local level.4 NHS England must secure 
measurable reductions in inequalities in access to health services, in people’s 
experience of the health system, and across a specified range of health outcomes.  


 

 OBJECTIVE 2: To help create the safest, highest quality health and care service.  
2.3. Everyone deserves care that is safe, compassionate and effective, at all times and 

regardless of their condition. We want NHS England to help ensure the NHS provides 
the same standards of care, seven days a week, for people who need urgent and 
emergency hospital care. We want the NHS to become the world’s largest learning 
organisation, with a culture that uses all sources of insight, including from complaints,5 to 
improve services and quality of care, particularly for the most vulnerable. NHS England 
should ensure the NHS helps to identify violence and abuse early and supports victims 
to get their lives back sooner, including through improved data sharing with community 
partners.  

2.4. NHS England should ensure the NHS meets the needs of each individual with a service 
where people’s experience of their care is seen as an integral part of overall quality. We 
want people to be empowered to shape and manage their own health and care and 
make meaningful choices, particularly for maternity services, people with long term 
conditions and end-of-life care. Carers should routinely be identified and given access to 
information and advice about the support available. 

2.5. A priority for NHS England will be to improve early diagnosis, services and outcomes for 
cancer patients, as outlined in Achieving World-Class Cancer Outcomes: A strategy for 
England 2015-20.  


 

                                            
4 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/nhs-outcomes-framework-2015-to-2016 
5 http://www.healthwatch.co.uk/resource/my-expectations-raising-concerns-and-complaints-report 

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/nhs-outcomes-framework-2015-to-2016
http://www.healthwatch.co.uk/resource/my-expectations-raising-concerns-and-complaints-report




The Government’s mandate to NHS England for 2016-17 


  9 

 OBJECTIVE 3: To balance the NHS budget and improve efficiency and productivity.  
2.6. Meeting the demands of today’s and tomorrow’s patients from within the NHS budget 

depends on delivering the necessary efficiencies at the heart of the Five Year Forward 
View. The Government has fully funded the NHS’s Five Year Forward View, increasing 
its funding by £10 billion in real terms over the course of the Parliament.  

2.7. We expect NHS England, working with NHS Improvement, to ensure that the NHS lives 
within its means and achieves the year on year improvements in efficiency and 
productivity needed to place the NHS on a secure and sustainable financial footing 
throughout the Parliament.6 As part of this, we want NHS England, with NHS 
Improvement, to ensure the NHS balances its budget, and for commissioners to work 
collaboratively with local authorities to make the most efficient and effective use of 
health and social care funding. This means putting the right measures in place to help 
spend taxpayers’ money more efficiently and reduce waste – to help ensure we get 
maximum value for patients and service users from every pound spent. It must do so 
whilst continuing to deliver high quality care and delivering against the objectives set out 
in this mandate. 


 

 OBJECTIVE 4: To lead a step change in the NHS in preventing ill health and 
supporting people to live healthier lives.  

2.8. The escalating demands of ill health driven by our lifestyles also threaten the long-term 
sustainability of the NHS. Across the health and care system, we want the NHS to do 
more to tackle smoking, alcohol and physical inactivity. We fully support the focus in the 
Five Year Forward View on preventing avoidable ill health and premature mortality. We 
ask NHS England to lead a step-change in the NHS on helping people to live healthier 
lives by tackling obesity and preventable illness. In particular, this includes contributing 
to the Government’s goal to reduce child obesity and doing more to reach the five million 
people at high risk of diabetes and improve the management and care of people with 
diabetes. As part of the Prime Minister’s 2020 Dementia Challenge, we expect NHS 
England to make measurable improvement in the quality of care and support for people 
with dementia and to increase public awareness.  


 

 OBJECTIVE 5: To maintain and improve performance against core standards.  
2.9. Our NHS should always provide the best care for everyone – wherever they are and 

whenever they need it, in line with the NHS Constitution. The Government has 
committed to real terms growth in the NHS budget to ensure that the service can 
continue to perform well over the next five years, with the capacity to deal with rises in 
demand during the winter months, and to play its part in any national emergency. We 
expect NHS England to support the NHS to maintain and, where possible, improve 
access to timely, quality services for all patients. 


   

                                            
6 NHS Improvement is a new working arrangement bringing together the Trust Development Authority and Monitor 




The Government’s mandate to NHS England for 2016-17 


  10 


 OBJECTIVE 6: To improve out-of-hospital care.  
2.10. We want to see more services provided out of hospitals, a larger primary care workforce 

and greater integration with social care, so that care is more joined up to meet people’s 
physical health, mental health and social care needs. We expect NHS England to 
ensure everyone has easier and more convenient access to GP services, including 
appointments at evenings and weekends where this is more convenient for them, and 
effective access to urgent care 24 hours a day, seven days a week.  

2.11. We want to see more power and control devolved to more areas, enabling communities 
to design and develop new models of care tailored to meet the needs of their local 
populations. NHS England should support the NHS to achieve the Government’s aim 
that health and social care are integrated across the country by 2020, including through 
the Better Care Fund.  

2.12. We expect NHS England to strive to reduce the health gap between people with mental 
health problems, learning disabilities and autism and the population as a whole, and 
support them to live full, healthy and independent lives. This will require great strides in 
improving care and outcomes through prevention, early intervention and improved 
access to integrated services to ensure physical health needs are addressed too. In 
particular, vulnerable children, homeless people, veterans and people in places of 
detention should receive high quality, integrated services that meet their health needs. 
To close the health gap for people of all ages, we want to see a system-wide 
transformation in children and young people’s mental health,7 with a greater focus on 
prevention and early intervention, as well as improvements to perinatal mental health. 
Overall there should be measurable progress towards the parity of esteem for mental 
health enshrined in the NHS Constitution. 


 

 OBJECTIVE 7: To support research, innovation and growth.  
2.13. Just as a strong NHS depends on a strong economy, so a strong NHS can contribute to 

the growth of a strong economy, especially in health and life sciences. We ask NHS 
England to promote and support participation by NHS organisations and patients in 
research funded both by commercial and non-commercial organisations. We expect to 
see NHS England help the NHS contribute to economic growth, to support the NHS to 
reduce the impact of ill health and disability, and to support and harness research and 
innovation to enable cost effective, affordable, transformative new treatments to reach 
patients more quickly. Linked to this, NHS England should support the NHS to make 
better use of digital services and technology to transform patients’ access to and use of 
health and care, including online access to their personal health records. 

                                            
7  https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/improving-mental-health-services-for-young-people 

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/improving-mental-health-services-for-young-people




The Government’s mandate to NHS England for 2016-17 


  11 


3. NHS England’s budget 
3.1. Details of NHS England’s revenue and capital budgets for 2016-17 (which equates to a 

3.7% real terms growth to the 2015-16 combined revenue and capital budget, excluding 
depreciation and impairments) and the indicative budgets for the remaining years of this 
Parliament are set out in the table below. A further breakdown of these figures is 
provided in the financial directions.8  


 

  2016-17 
(Revised) 

2017-18 2018-19 
(Indicative 
budget) 

2019-20 
(Indicative 
budget) 

2020-21 
(Indicative 
budget) 

Total revenue budget 
(£m) 

106,528 109,960 112,461 115,506 119,606 

Capital budget (£m) 260 260 260 305 305 


 

3.2. NHS England will need to comply with the financial directions made under the NHS Act 
2006, which set out further technical limits, including spending on administration.  

3.3. NHS England is responsible for allocating the budgets for commissioning NHS services. 
This prevents any perception of political interference in the way that money is distributed 
between different parts of the country. The Government expects the principle of ensuring 
equal access for equal need to be at the heart of NHS England’s approach to allocating 
budgets. This process must be transparent, and must ensure that changes in allocations 
do not result in the destabilising of local health economies. 

3.4. NHS England, with NHS Improvement, will ensure the NHS balances its budget, 
including commissioners and providers living within their budgets. To support this, 
£1.8bn of NHS England’s budget for 2016-17 will be allocated through the Sustainability 
and Transformation Fund to support providers, in particular of emergency services, 
payable through commissioning or as other support. 

                                            
8 See section 223D of the NHS Act 2006 (financial duties of the Board); the revenue and capital budgets are the 
amounts specified as the limits on total resource use under subsections (2) and (3) 




The Government’s mandate to NHS England for 2016-17 


  12 


Annex: How we will assess NHS England’s 
performance 

The table below shows NHS England’s objectives with an overall measurable goal for this 
Parliament and clear priority deliverables for 2016-17.  The majority of these goals will be 
achieved in partnership with the Department of Health, NHS Improvement and other health 
bodies such as Public Health England, Health Education England and the Care Quality 
Commission. It also sets out requirements for NHS England to comply with in paragraph 6.2. 


 

1.  Through better commissioning, improve local and national health outcomes, 
particularly by addressing poor outcomes and inequalities. 

1.1 CCG 
performance 

Overall 2020 goals:  
 Consistent improvement in performance of CCGs against new CCG 

assessment framework.  
2016-17 deliverables: 
 By June, publish results of the CCG assessment framework for 2015-16, 

which provides CCGs with an aggregated Ofsted style assessment of 
performance and allows them to benchmark against other CCGs and 
informs whether NHS England intervention is needed.  

 Ensure new Ofsted-style CCG framework for 2016-17 includes health 
economy metrics to measure progress on priorities set out in the 
mandate and the NHS planning guidance including overall Ofsted-style 
assessment for each of cancer, dementia, maternity, mental health, 
learning disabilities and diabetes, as well as metrics on efficiency, core 
performance, technology and prevention. 

 By the end of Q1 of 2016-17, publish the first overall assessment for 
each of the six clinical areas above.  

2.  To help create the safest, highest quality health and care service. 

2.1 Avoidable 
deaths and 
seven-day 
services 

Overall 2020 goals: 
 Roll out of seven-day services in hospital to 100% of the population (four 

priority clinical standards in all relevant specialities, with progress also 
made on the other six standards), so that patients receive the same 
standards of care, seven days a week. 

 Achieve a significant reduction in avoidable deaths, with all trusts to have 
seen measurable reduction from their baseline on the basis of annual 
measurements. 

 Support NHS Improvement to significantly increase the number of trusts 
rated outstanding or good, including significantly reducing the length of 
time trusts remain in special measures.  

 Measurable progress towards reducing the rate of stillbirths, neonatal 
and maternal deaths and brain injuries that are caused during or soon 




The Government’s mandate to NHS England for 2016-17 


  13 


after birth by 50% by 2030 with a measurable reduction by 2020. 
 Support the NHS to be the world’s largest learning organisation with a 

new culture of learning from clinical mistakes, including improving the 
number of staff who feel their organisation acts on concerns raised by 
clinical staff or patients. 

 Measurable improvement in antimicrobial prescribing and resistance 
rates.  

2016-17 deliverables: 
 Publish avoidable deaths per trust annually and support NHS 

Improvement to help trusts to implement programme to improve from 
March 2016 baseline. 

 Rollout of four clinical priority standards in all relevant specialties to 25% 
of population. 

 Implement agreed recommendations of the National Maternity Review in 
relation to safety, and support progress on delivering Sign up to Safety.  

 Support the Government’s goal to establish global and UK baseline and 
ambition for antimicrobial prescribing and resistance rates. 



2.2 


Patient 
experience 

Overall 2020 goals: 
 Maintain and increase the number of people recommending services in 

the Friends and Family Test (FFT) (currently 88-96%), and ensure its 
effectiveness, alongside other sources of feedback to improve services. 

 50-100,000 people to have a personal health budget or integrated 
personal budget (up from current estimate of 4,000).  

 Significantly improve patient choice, including in maternity, end-of-life 
care and for people with long-term conditions, including ensuring an 
increase in the number of people able to die in the place of their choice, 
including at home. 

2016-17 deliverables: 
 Produce a plan with specific milestones for improving patient choice by 

2020, particularly in maternity, end-of-life care (including to ensure more 
people are able to achieve their preferred place of care and death), and 
personal health budgets. 

 Building on the FFT, develop proposals about how feedback, particularly 
in maternity services, could be enhanced to drive improvements to 
services at clinical and ward levels. 

2.3 Cancer Overall 2020 goals: 
 Deliver recommendations of the Independent Cancer Taskforce, 

including: 
o significantly improving one-year survival to achieve 75% by 2020 

for all cancers combined (up from 69% currently); and 
o patients given definitive cancer diagnosis, or all clear, within 28 

days of being referred by a GP. 




The Government’s mandate to NHS England for 2016-17 


  14 


2016-17 deliverables: 
 Achieve 62-day cancer waiting time standard. 
 Support NHS Improvement to achieve measurable progress towards the 

national diagnostic standard of patients waiting no more than 6 weeks 
from referral to test.  

 Agree trajectory for increases in diagnostic capacity required to 2020 and 
achieve it for year one. 

 Invest £340m in providing cancer treatments not routinely provided on 
the NHS through the Cancer Drugs Fund, and ensure effective transition 
to the agreed operating model to improve its effectiveness within its 
existing budget. 

3.  To balance the NHS budget and improve efficiency and productivity. 

3.1 Balancing the 
NHS budget  

Overall 2020 goals: 
 With NHS Improvement, ensure the NHS balances its budget in each 

financial year.  
 With the Department of Health and NHS Improvement, achieve year on 

year improvements in NHS efficiency and productivity (2-3% each year), 
including from reducing growth in activity and maximising cost recovery.   

2016-17 deliverables: 
 With NHS Improvement ensure the NHS balances its budget, with 

commissioners and providers living within their budgets, and support 
NHS Improvement in: 

o securing £1.3bn of efficiency savings through implementing Lord 
Carter’s recommendations and collaborating with local authorities 
on continuing healthcare spending; 

o delivering year one of trust deficit reduction plans and ensuring a 
balanced financial position across the trust sector, supported by 
effective deployment of the Sustainability and Transformation 
Fund; and 

o reducing spend on agency staff by at least £0.8bn on a path to 
further reductions over the Parliament. 

 Roll-out of second cohort of RightCare methodology to a further 60 
CCGs.  

 Measurable improvement in primary care productivity, including through 
supporting community pharmacy reform. 

 Work with CCGs to support Government’s goal to increase NHS cost 
recovery up to £500m by 2017-18 from overseas patients. 

 Ensure CCGs’ local estates strategies support the overall goal of 
releasing £2bn and land for 26,000 homes by 2020. 




The Government’s mandate to NHS England for 2016-17 


  15 


4.  To lead a step change in the NHS in preventing ill health and supporting 
people to live healthier lives. 

4.1 Obesity and 
Diabetes 

Overall 2020 goals:  
 Measurable reduction in child obesity as part of the Government’s 

childhood obesity strategy.  
 100,000 people supported to reduce their risk of diabetes through the 

Diabetes Prevention Programme.  
 Measurable reduction in variation in management and care for people 

with diabetes. 

2016-17 deliverables: 
 Contribute to the agreed child obesity implementation plan, including 

wider action to achieve year on year improvement trajectory for the 
percentage of children who are overweight or obese. 

 10,000 people referred to the Diabetes Prevention Programme. 

4.2 Dementia Overall 2020 goals:  
 Measurable improvement on all areas of Prime Minister’s challenge on 

dementia 2020, including: 
o maintain a diagnosis rate of at least two thirds;  
o increase the numbers of people receiving a dementia diagnosis 

within six weeks of a GP referral; and 
o improve quality of post-diagnosis treatment and support for people 

with dementia and their carers.  
2016-17 deliverables: 
 Maintain a minimum of two thirds diagnosis rates for people with 

dementia. 
 Work with National Institute for Health Research on location of Dementia 

Institute. 
 Agree an affordable implementation plan for the Prime Minister’s 

challenge on dementia 2020, including to improve the quality of post-
diagnosis treatment and support. 

5.  To maintain and improve performance against core standards  

5.1 A&E, 
Ambulances and 
Referral to 
Treatment (RTT)  

Overall 2020 goals: 
 95% of people attending A&E seen within four hours; Urgent and 

Emergency Care Networks rolled out to 100% of the population. 
 75% of Category A ambulance calls responded to within eight minutes. 
 At least 92% of patients on incomplete non-emergency pathways to have 

been waiting no more than 18 weeks from referral; no-one waits more 
than 52 weeks. 




The Government’s mandate to NHS England for 2016-17 


  16 


2016-17 deliverables: 
 With NHS Improvement, agree improvement trajectory and deliver the 

plan for year one for A&E. 
 Implement Urgent and Emergency Care Networks in 20% of the country 

designated as transformation areas, including clear steps towards a 
single point of contact. 

 With NHS Improvement, agree improvement trajectory and deliver the 
plan for year one for ambulance responses; complete Red 2 pilots and 
decide on full roll-out. 

 With NHS Improvement, meet the 18-week referral-to-treatment 
standard, including implementing patient choice in line with the NHS 
Constitution; and reduce unwarranted variation between CCG referral 
rates to better manage demand. 

6.  To improve out-of-hospital care. 

6.1 New models 
of care and 
General Practice 

Overall 2020 goals: 
 100% of population has access to weekend/evening routine GP 

appointments.  
 Measurable reduction in age standardised emergency admission rates 

and emergency inpatient bed-day rates; more significant reductions 
through the New Care Model programme covering at least 50% of 
population. 

 Significant measurable progress in health and social care integration, 
urgent and emergency care (including ensuring a single point of contact), 
and electronic health record sharing, in areas covered by the New Care 
Model programme. 

 5,000 extra doctors in general practice.  

2016-17 deliverables: 
 New models of care covering the 20% of the population designated as 

being in a transformation area to: 
o provide access to enhanced GP services, including evening and 

weekend access and same-day GP appointments for all over 75s 
who need them; and 

o make progress on integration of health and social care, integrated 
urgent and emergency care, and electronic record sharing. 

 Publish practice-level metrics on quality of and access to GP services 
and, with the Health and Social Care Information Centre, provide GPs 
with benchmarking information for named patient lists. 

 Develop new voluntary contract for GPs (Multidisciplinary Community 
Provider contract) ready for implementation in 2017-18. 

6.2 Health and 
social care 
integration 

Overall 2020 goals: 
 Achieve better integration of health and social care in every area of the 

country, with significant improvements in performance against integration 




The Government’s mandate to NHS England for 2016-17 


  17 


metrics within the new CCG assessment framework. Areas will graduate 
from the Better Care Fund programme management once they can 
demonstrate they have moved beyond its requirements, meeting the 
government’s key criteria for devolution. 

 Ensure the NHS plays its part in significantly reducing delayed transfers 
of care, including through developing and applying new incentives.  

2016-17 deliverables: 
 Implement the Better Care Fund (BCF) in line with the BCF Policy 

Framework for 2016-17.9 
 Every area to have an agreed plan by March 2017 for better integrating 

health and social care.  
 Working with partners, achieve accelerated implementation of health and 

social care integration in the 20% of the country designated as 
transformation areas, by sharing electronic health records and making 
measurable progress towards integrated assessment and provision. 

 Work with the Department of Health, other national partners and local 
areas to agree and support implementation of local devolution deals. 

 Agree a system-wide plan for reducing delayed transfers of care with 
overall goal and trajectory for improvement, and with local government 
and NHS partners implement year one of this plan. 

2016-17 requirements: 
 NHS England is required to: 

o ring-fence £3.519bn within its allocation to CCGs to establish the 
Better Care Fund, to be used for the purposes of integrated care; 

o consult the Department of Health and the Department for 
Communities and Local Government before approving spending 
plans drawn up by each local area; and 

o consult the Department of Health and the Department for 
Communities and Local Government before exercising its powers 
in relation to failure to meet specified conditions attached to the 
Better Care Fund as set out in the BCF Policy Framework. 

6.3 Mental health, 
learning 
disabilities and 
autism 

Overall 2020 goal: 
 To close the health gap between people with mental health problems, 

learning disabilities and autism and the population as a whole (defined 
ambitions to be agreed based on report by Mental Health Taskforce). 

 Access and waiting time standards for mental health services embedded, 
including: 

o 50% of people experiencing first episode of psychosis to access 
treatment within two weeks; and 

o 75% of people with relevant conditions to access talking therapies 
in six weeks; 95% in 18 weeks.  

                                            
9 The BCF Policy Framework is to be published shortly. 




The Government’s mandate to NHS England for 2016-17 


  18 


2016-17 deliverables: 
 50% of people experiencing first episode of psychosis to access 

treatment within two weeks. 
 75% of people with relevant conditions to access talking therapies in six 

weeks; 95% in 18 weeks.  
 Increase in people with learning disabilities/autism being cared for by 

community not inpatient services, including implementing the 2016-17 
actions for Transforming Care. 

 Agree and implement a plan to improve crisis care for all ages, including 
investing in places of safety. 

 Oversee the implementation of locally led transformation plans for 
children and young people’s mental health, which improve prevention 
and early intervention activity, and be on track to deliver national 
coverage of the children and young people’s Improving Access to 
Psychological Therapies (IAPT) programme by 2018. 

 Implement agreed actions from the Mental Health Taskforce. 

7.  To support research, innovation and growth. 

7.1 Research and 
growth 

Overall 2020 goals: 
 Support the Department of Health and the Health Research Authority in 

their ambition to improve the UK’s international ranking for health 
research. 

 Implement research proposals and initiatives in the NHS England 
research plan. 

 Measurable improvement in NHS uptake of affordable and cost-effective 
new innovations.  

 To assure and monitor NHS Genomic Medicine Centre performance to 
deliver the 100,000 genomes commitment.  

2016-17 deliverables: 
 Implement the agreed recommendations of the Accelerated Access 

Review including developing ambition and trajectory on NHS uptake of 
affordable and cost-effective new innovations. 

7.2 Technology Overall 2020 goals:  
 Support delivery of the National Information Board Framework 

‘Personalised Health and Care 2020’ including local digital roadmaps, 
leading to measurable improvement on the new digital maturity index and 
achievement of an NHS which is paper-free at the point of care.  

 95% of GP patients to be offered e-consultation and other digital 
services; and 95% of tests to be digitally transferred between 
organisations. 

2016-17 deliverables: 
 Minimum of 10% of patients actively accessing primary care services 




The Government’s mandate to NHS England for 2016-17 


  19 


online or through apps, and set trajectory and plan for achieving a 
significant increase by 2020. 

 Ensure high quality appointment booking app with access to full medical 
record and agreed data sharing opt-out available from April 2016. 

 Robust data security standards in place and being enforced for patient 
confidential data. 

 Make progress in delivering new consent-based data services to enable 
effective data sharing for commissioning and other purposes for the 
benefit of health and care. 

 Significant increase in patient access to and use of the electronic health 
record. 

7.3 Health and 
work 

Overall 2020 goal: 
 Contribute to reducing the disability employment gap. 
 Contribute to the Government’s goal of increasing the use of Fit for Work. 
2016-17 deliverables: 
 Continue to deliver and evaluate NHS England’s plan to improve the 

health and wellbeing of the NHS workforce. 
 Work with Government to develop proposals to expand and trial 

promising interventions to support people with long-term health 
conditions and disabilities back into employment. 


  

