



ES417479_CCS207_CCS0817843722-1_Cm_9493_Post_Implementation.pdf




Cm 9493


   


Post Implementation Review 
of the Supply of Machinery 
(Safety) Regulations 2008 

(S.I. 2008/1597) as amended

Presented to Parliament
by the Secretary of State for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

by Command of Her Majesty

August 2017




Cm 9493


   


Post Implementation Review 
of the Supply of Machinery 
(Safety) Regulations 2008 

(S.I. 2008/1597) as amended

Presented to Parliament
by the Secretary of State for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy

by Command of Her Majesty

August 2017




Cm 9493

© Crown copyright 2017

This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except 
where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-
government-licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, 
Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.

Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain 
permission from the copyright holders concerned.

This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/publications 

Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at parly.unit@beis.gov.uk

ISBN 978-1-5286-0015-6 

CCS0817843722  08/17

Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum

Printed in the UK by the APS Group on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery 
Office




Cm 9493

Post Implementation Review of the Supply of Machinery (Safety) 
Regulations 2008 (S.I. 2008/1597) as amended

Introduction

1. This document provides an overview of the Post Implementation Review (PIR) of the Supply 

of Machinery (Safety) Regulations 2008 (S.I. 2008/1597) as amended (the Regulations). These 

Regulations, as amended, implement Directive 2006/42/EC on machinery (as amended by 

Directive 2009/127/EC) (the Directive) into UK law. 

2. This Command Paper and the associated PIR (Annex 1) set out the Government’s views on 

the effectiveness of the Regulations. It considers:

• the extent to which the Regulations are working;

• whether Government intervention is still required;

• whether the Regulations and the way they are implemented are the most appropriate 

approach to meeting the policy aim.

Background 

3. The Machinery Directive is one of many that support the single market for goods across the 

EEA while providing a common level of safety.  

4. The Directive is implemented by the Supply of Machinery (Safety) Regulations 2008.   

5. The Regulations were amended by the Supply of Machinery (Safety) (Amendment) 

Regulations 2011 to extend the scope to include certain pesticides equipment.       

6. The Regulations support the Single Market for goods by ensuring that products within the 

scope are safe to be placed on the EEA market and meet the relevant essential health and

safety requirements set out in the Regulations.

7. The Regulations apply to machinery that is placed on the market or put into service. They 

impose duties on manufacturers and authorised representatives that are involved in placing 

machinery on the market or putting it into service. 

8. The Regulations also set out the enforcement powers which draw heavily on the Health and 

Safety at Work Act. The enforcement authorities for the Regulations are the Health & Safety 

Executive for business products, and local authority trading standards for consumer products.

9. On 23 June, the EU referendum took place and the people of the United Kingdom voted to 

leave the European Union. Until exit negotiations are concluded, the UK remains a full member 

of the European Union and all the rights and obligations of EU membership remain in force. 

During this period the Government will continue to negotiate, implement and apply EU 

legislation. The outcome of these negotiations will determine what arrangements apply in 

relation to EU legislation in future once the UK has left the EU. The assumptions used in this 

post-implementation review have been chosen accordingly.


3


Cm 9493

Scope of the Post Implementation Review (PIR)

10. The PIR considers the impact of the Supply of Machinery (Safety) Regulations 2008 as 

amended. 

11. The Government does not consider the Regulations to be particularly high profile or 

contentious.  Therefore, in line with PIR guidance a light touch PIR has been applied to the 

analysis.   

12. As the PIR was carried out prior to the Referendum and covers the period 2009 to 2014 it 

did not take into account the effect of Referendum result. However, our analysts have reviewed 

the evidence and consider the analysis in the PIR would not be different had it been carried out 

since the Referendum result.  The PIR was reviewed by the Regulatory Policy Committee 

(RPC) and cleared as fit for purpose.

Research and Analysis

13. Guidance for conducting PIRs provides that three questions should be addressed in a PIR: 

• To what extent are the Regulations working?

• Is Government intervention still required?

• Are the Regulations and the way they are implemented the most appropriate approach?

14. In order to answer these questions, questionnaires were sent to manufacturers, notified 

bodies and enforcement authorities. The questionnaire sought comment on:

• the impact of the Regulations; 

• assessment of costs; 

• identification of benefits; 

• the challenges faced by business to meet the requirements; 

• the impact on SMEs and microbusinesses.  

15. As the Regulations are derived from an EU Directive questions were also sent to other EU 

Member States in order to gauge the impact of the Directive in their territories. 

16. Information was also gleaned from our experience of dealing with stakeholders on a range 

of issues on a day to day basis. While the number of responses to the questionnaire was small, 

they generally provided a clear indication that the Regulations are working well. 

To What Extent are the Regulations Working?

17. The answers to questionnaires suggested that the Regulations provided a good robust 

framework for promoting safety for a wide range of machinery. However, there was concern 

about a lack of knowledge of the technical requirements for machinery to meet the safety 

requirements and that this may lead to the availability of products that are non-compliant with 

the requirements of the Regulations. This has led to concerns from some respondents that 

more enforcement is required.


4


Cm 9493

Is Government Intervention Still Required? 

18. The UK has an obligation to implement Directive 2006/42/EC on machinery as amended 

into UK law. A legislative approach through the Regulations is an effective way of achieving this.  

Other Issues Identified

19. The cost of standards that are used to support the Regulations is regarded by some in the 

industry as prohibitive especially for small and medium enterprises. Standards are voluntary but 

most manufacturers chose to follow the requirements as they provide a presumption of 

conformity with the requirements of the Regulations.   

20. Manufacturers are concerned with enforcement. They report that they spend time and 

money in complying whilst others gain competitive advantage by placing unsafe products on the 

market and they are keen to ensure a level playing field. 

Conclusions and Next Steps

21. The PIR analysis informed the Government’s view that the Regulations should remain as in 

force, for the following reasons: 

- The Regulations are meeting their stated objectives;

- There is anecdotal evidence that the Regulations have helped to improve; safety, and 

to help provide access to the Single Market; 

- The benefits to manufacturers continue to outweigh the costs; 

- The main concern raised by the PIR was a perceived lack of enforcement;

 - Enforcement would not be improved by changing the Regulations which would risk 

gold plating the EU directive.   

22. There is further work to be done, however, to increase the effectiveness of the Regulations. 

The Government will work with HSE and other stakeholders on the following:   

- to improve awareness of the Regulations amongst manufacturers and consumers and 

recent initiatives to develop improved guidance will help to address this.

- to impress on manufacturers the need to address conformity of their product during the 

design phase and to properly consider the essential health and safety requirements to 

encourage good engineering practice to reduce development and production costs.  

- to continue to work with other EU members states to improve market surveillance and 

understanding of the requirements of the Machinery Directive.


5


Cm 9493

Annex 1 

Title: The Supply of Machinery (Safety) Regulations 
as amended

Post Implementation Review 

PIR No: BEIS031(PIR)-16-RD Date: 03/02/2017 

RPC No:  RPC-3094(1)-BIS  Type of regulation:  EU 

Lead department or agency: BEIS Type of review:  Statutory 

Other departments or agencies:   Date measure came into force:   

 29/12/2009

Recommendation:  Keep

Contact for enquiries:  Kevin Lane 020 7215 1774 RPC Opinion: Green

Questions

1. What were the policy objectives of the measure? 

The Regulations as amended implement European Directive 2006/42/EC as amended by 
Directive 2009/127/EC on Safety of Machinery into UK law. The Directive is one of many that 
support the Single Market for goods across the EEA while providing a common level of safety for 
machinery within scope. It was also necessary to revise the previous directive to improve and 
clarify the regulatory regime applying to machinery in the light of experience gained by industry 
and by European market surveillance.

The intended effects are that only machinery that is compliant with the relevant essential health 
and safety requirements set out in the Regulations are placed on the market or put into service 
and that industry has a single regulatory framework for the EEA.

The Regulations were further amended in 2011 to address specific problems with pesticide 
equipment.

On 23 June, the EU referendum took place and the people of the United Kingdom voted to leave 
the European Union. Until exit negotiations are concluded, the UK remains a full member of the 
European Union and the rights and obligations of EU membership remain in force. During this 
period the Government will continue to negotiate, implement and apply EU legislation. The 
outcome of these negotiations will determine what arrangements apply in relation to EU legislation 
in future once the UK has left the EU. The assumptions used in this post implementation review 
have been chosen accordingly.

2. What evidence has informed the PIR? 

The Department was unaware of any major issues of concern with the Regulations. As such a 
light touch questionnaire to minimise burdens on stakeholders and other interested parties was 
considered appropriate. 

There have been some issues regarding interpretation of the Directive usually relating to whether 
a specific product is in or out of scope These issues are resolved amicably by discussions 
between Member States Market Surveillance authorities and the European Commission.

To determine views of other interested parties a questionnaire was sent to industry, the UK 
Government appointed test houses; other member states and the European Commission to seek 
their views. The details of the questions asked are in Annex 2. 


6.

Cm 9493

Sign-off for Post Implementation Review: Minister

I have read the PIR and I am satisfied that it represents a fair and proportionate 
assessment of the impact of the measure.

Signed:      Date: 3 February 2017

The questions were intended to provide insight into both those aspects that are outside of the UK 
to amend other than via the European process; we understand the European Commission are 
intending to commence gathering evidence in 2017 as to whether a revision is required; and also 
to seek insight into those aspects that are within the direct control of the UK these being aspects of 
Market Surveillance regime and penalties.

3. To what extent have the policy objectives been achieved? 

The Regulations are considered to meet the Policy objectives; they do provide both a well 
understood regulatory framework for common requirement across the EEA and well understood 
routes for co-operation between Member States and Market Surveillance Authorities to resolve 
any issues that may arise. 


7


Cm 9493

Further information sheet  

Questions

4. What were the original assumptions?

For the Supply of Machinery (Safety) Regulations 2008 IA: The one-off familiarisation cost was £4million; 
this assumed that there was already a good understanding of the previous legislation and that only 
changes to the legislation needed to be understood. This is a reasonable assumption as the Regulations 
implement a European Directive that replaced a previous Directive and that replaced previous National 
Legislation that required machinery to be safe.

The annual average cost of the regulations was estimated to be £1 million. The average annual benefit 
was estimated to £2-11 million.  The NPV was £45 million.  The impact to business was not set out in the 
impact assessment.

In the updated assessment of this regulation taking into account the information obtained in response to 
the questionnaire the average annual internal market benefit was estimated to be £3-7m. The one off 
transition cost for adapting to the requirements of the Regulations was estimated to be £4m.

For the Final Impact Assessment for the Amendment to introduce Pesticides equipment to the Machinery 
Directive: The one-off transition cost was £0.03million. The average annual cost of the regulation was 
estimated to be £0.002-0.8million. The average annual benefit was estimated to be £0.4million.  The 
NPV was £3.3million. The direct impact to business was a cost of £0.003million.

5. Were there any unintended consequences? 

Examples of issues are differences in understanding of requirements of standards; concerns that 
standards are inadequate; whether certain products are in or out of scope. The Directive requires 
Member States and authorities to cooperate with each other to try and resolve issues as they arise and 
develop a common understanding. The Machinery Directive Administrative Cooperation (Adco) Group 
which consists of EU market surveillance authorities meets regularly to facilitate this understanding. As 
well as this, the European Commission chairs a Working Group (WG) to discuss issues of concern 
regarding the Machinery Directive. As well as MS, industry and trade associations are invited to attend 
the WG which provides an opportunity for these stakeholders to put forward their views on how the 
Directive is working. These meetings can also be used by industry and trade associations to enlist the 
assistance of their home MS authority to raise issue of concerns that they have with other MS and the 
Commission.

As entrepreneurs are now easily able to supply products globally e.g. online; the requirement for close 
co-operation and exchange of information between market surveillance authorities is essential in rapidly 
addressing issues at source rather than a traditional approach at UK borders. 

The one key implication of evidence collected during the review also indicates that the process of 
familiarisation with the requirements of the Regulations by economic operators is much more complex 
than the model assumed in the initial impact assessment. Factors such as the type of firm, whether small 
or large, have an influence on the training process. Furthermore, qualitative evidence on enforcement 
indicates that not all stakeholders are fully aware of the measures and in reality familiarisation is not 
taking place as uniformly or consistently as we had assumed in the model.


8he y 

Cm 9493

In common with all sectors Conformity Assessment Bodies and some manufacturers are concerned that 
not enough enforcement of the Regulations has led to some manufacturers placing non-compliant 
machinery on the market. 

Enforcement authorities had difficulties in enforcing regulatory measures when products are placed on 
market by manufacturers from other Member States or from countries outside the EU. This is because
they have no jurisdiction in those territories. The Directive brings co-operation between Member States 
Authorities to better deal with any problems that arise. The UK takes an active role in these discussions 
and in reaching solutions. 

The European Commission provides funding for market surveillance projects to improve co-operation 
between member States authorities and to allow specific and targeted enforcement on particular 
products for which market surveillance have concerns; often industry will provide suggestions for 
products that they would wish to see targeted by the authorities.  

6. Has the evidence identified any opportunities for reducing the burden on business? 

Alternatives that are less burdensome to business have not been identified. 

7. For EU measures, how does the UK’s implementation compare with that in other EU member 

states in terms of costs to business? 

We do not have information on this aspect as none of the member states (MS) that responded 

provided anything on costs to business. Neither had any carried out a review of the implementation of 

the Directive in their country.   


9


Cm 9493

Post-Implementation Review of ‘The Supply of Machinery (Safety) 
Regulations 2008 as amended by the Supply of Machinery (Safety) 
(Amendment) Regulations 2011’ 

1) Scope of this review

This post-implementation review (‘PIR’) of the Supply of Machinery (Safety) 
Regulations 2008 as amended by the Supply of Machinery (Safety) (Amendment) 
Regulations 2011 (‘the Regulations’) is a statutory requirement, set out in 
regulation 29 of the Regulations. The review was due on 1st December 2014. 
Unfortunately the process to conduct a review was only started in December 
2014.  This PIR reviews both the Supply of Machinery (Safety) Regulations and 
its subsequent amendment. 

This report is required to:

• Set out the objectives of the Regulations,

• Assess the extent to which those objectives are achieved,

• Assess whether those objectives remain appropriate and, if so, the extent 
to which they could be achieved with a system that imposes less 
regulation, and

• Consider how the Directive is implemented in other member states.

Following the approach outlined in ‘Guide for Conducting PIRs’, this PIR will 
answer the following questions:

• To what extent is the existing regulation working?

• Is government intervention still required?

• Is the existing form of government regulation still the most appropriate 
approach?

As this is a PIR of the Implementing Regulations of an EU Directive, the following 
additional issues are considered:

• The impacts on UK based businesses relative to other European 
competitors, to ensure UK businesses are not put at a competitive 
disadvantage.

• Improving transposition in the UK.

2) The objective and intended outcomes of the Regulations

The objective of the Regulations is to transpose Directive 2006/42/EC (as 
amended by Directive 2009/127/EC) (‘the EU Machinery Directive’). The EU 
Directive has the following main objectives:

1. To ensure the free movement of machinery falling within its scope across 
the Member States (an ‘internal market’ objective);

2. To provide for the appropriate level of health and safety for persons in the 
EU using and coming into contact with machinery (a ‘health and safety’ 
objective);

3. To provide for the appropriate level of environmental protection, and 
protection of domestic animals, in situations where machinery is involved 
(an ‘environmental and animal protection objective’)


10

Cm 9493

In 2011, the Regulations were amended to cover pesticide application 
equipment, transposing Directive 2009/127/EC. The overall objectives of the 
amended European Machinery Directive were broadly unchanged. 

The UK Regulations (and the EU Machinery Directive) aimed to achieve its 
objectives by requiring that machinery conform to the ‘essential health and 
safety requirements’ before being first placed on the market or first put into 
service in the EEA. Since 1993 (when these requirements, set out in The 
Supply of Machinery (Safety) Regulations 1992, came into force) all new 
machinery in scope of the then Machinery Directive (Directive 1989/392/EEC, 
as amended by Directive 1991/368/EEC) has to be designed and constructed 
to meet common minimum EEA requirements for safety. It should be said that 
there was a transitional period which meant that products in conformity the 
previous UK Regulations could be placed on the market until 31st December 
1995, after which the requirements of the 1992 regulations became 
mandatory.

To achieve compliance the Responsible Person (normally the manufacturer) 
who placed the machinery on the market or put it into service must undertake 
a conformity assessment process meeting all relevant essential health and 
safety requirements, producing user instructions, and producing a technical 
file to show how compliance has been achieved and a Declaration of 
Conformity. For certain specified higher risk products the conformity 
assessment process will require the use of an independent Notified Body. 

The current Regulations build on prior existing EEA legislation regulating 
machinery safety. The 2008 Regulations and 2011 amendment implement the 
latest changes in a series of updates to the earlier EU Directive on machinery 

3) Assessment of proportionality for level of evidence sought

As set out in the ‘Guide for Conducting PIRs’, the need for evidence sought 
should be balanced against other priorities to ensure value for money for 
taxpayers. The primary consideration for proportionality should be based on 
the legislation’s expected impact on business and the wider economy. 
Secondary considerations include whether the impacts are contentious or 
uncertain, and the availability of established data sources. 

Expected impact on business and the wider economy, based on the estimates 
in the Impact Assessments for the 2008 and 2011 Regulations

(i) Impact Assessment of the 2008 Regulations
The Impact Assessment of the 2008 Regulations estimates the following:

Table 1: Costs and Benefits for 2008 Regulations IA

Average Annual Benefit £2 to £13m (£3-£7m)1

1 Bracketed numbers indicated updated cost and benefits assessed in this 
PIR (p 11)


11

Cm 9493

One off transition cost £4m (£3m)

Average Annual Cost £1.2m (n/a)

NPV (Net Benefit) £45m

The main affected groups are manufacturers and professional importers of 
machinery in the EU, UK businesses and consumers and UK users of 
machinery. The main costs are familiarisation and training costs, with some 
design and build costs. The main benefits are protection of life and property 
and enhancement of the ‘internal market’.

Annual Benefit

The Single Market benefits are estimated to be between £2m to £12m per 
year. This estimate is based on estimates of the impact of the Internal Market 
programme (and the Services Directive in particular) on European GDP, data 
on machinery in UK manufacturing as a proportion of European GDP, and 
many assumptions about the extent to which the gains can be attributed to the 
Machinery Directive (MD). (Paragraphs 48 to 61 of the IA outline 3 separate 
methods to estimate this internal market benefit). This would include possible 
benefits from the reduction in trade barriers that could be attributed to the 
single market in machinery.

The Health and Safety benefits are estimated to be between £0.3 and £1m 
per year. This estimate is based on Health and Safety Executive (HSE) data 
on accidents, Department for Transport and HSE estimates of the economic 
cost of fatalities and injuries, and assumptions about the extent to which the 
reduction can be attributed to the MD and its improvements.

Transition Cost

The familiarisation and training costs are estimated to be £4m one-off and 
between £0.2m to £0.4m ongoing per year. This is based on estimates of the 
time required, valuing the time using wage costs (uplifted to include non-wage 
labour costs), and an estimate of the number of businesses and employees 
affected.

The costs of providing information on machinery and marking of machinery, 
providing Technical Files, and conformity assessments were not additional to 
existing requirements or deemed to be negligible, so no estimates were 
provided.

Annual Cost

The cost of meeting essential requirements was estimated to be £1m per 
year. Most of the requirements were not expected to result in significant costs 
because much modern machinery already meets many of the requirements, 
with the sole exception of guard fixings.

(ii) Impact Assessment of the 2011 Amendment Regulations 

Table 2: Costs and Benefits for Amendment IA


12

Cm 9493

Average Annual Benefit £0.002m- £0.8m (£0.0003-£0.00045m)2

One off transition cost £0.03 m (n/a)

NPV (Net Benefit) £3m

Transition Cost
The Impact Assessment of the 2011 amendment to the Regulations estimates 
that there is a one-off transition cost of £0.03m for re-design and construction 
to manufacturers of pesticide application equipment that are not already 
compliant with the new legislation. 

Annual Benefit
The average annual benefit of the 2011 amendment to the Regulations is 
estimated to be £0.002m- £0.8m, in reduced costs to users from more 
efficient use of pesticides in better designed equipment, and reduced rates of 
human injuries from lower pesticide exposure. Environmental benefits and 
Internal Market benefits are not estimated. The NPV is estimated to be £3.3m. 
The Direct Impact on Business (EANCB) was estimated to be 0.003m per 
annum.

Secondary considerations
The Regulations are not high profile or contentious. The need for essential 
health and safety requirements for machinery is well-accepted by 
stakeholders and the general public. Although businesses have often 
approached BIS with certain concerns with the Regulations these are 
generally with regard to unfair competition from non-compliant products and 
issues of interpretation of supporting standards. Nor are the Regulations 
particularly novel, risky or based on untested assumptions. The manufacturing 
industry has always looked to place safe products on the market due to the 
financial impact of civil damages should a product cause injury. Most of the 
requirements of the Regulations were not new in that they followed existing 
best practice, and for that reason much of the machinery placed on the 
market would have been able to meet the requirements before the 
Regulations came into force. The Directive has provided a continuous and 
comprehensive legislative framework for machinery product design and 
construction for health and safety and free movement since 1992. The UK has 
imposed obligations for safety of machinery prior to the current European 
legislation.

Finally, although a rerun of the IA was conducted (see section 5B), it must be 
noted that there were limitations in this analysis. There is a lack of established 
and consistent data sources to provide evidence of the impact of the 
Regulations, and substantial additional BIS resources would be required to 
make an appreciable difference to the quality of evidence collected. The 
nature and scope of the Regulations makes it difficult to go beyond high level 
assumptions about the counterfactual and the extent to which observed 
benefits could be causally attributed to the Regulations and the MD. This is 
particularly the case for estimates of the benefits, for example: 

2 Bracketed numbers indicated updated cost and benefits assessed in this 
PIR (p 9)


13

Cm 9493

• In attempting to estimate the Internal Market benefits, the observed 
changes to European and UK GDP were almost certainly impacted by 
factors aside from the Regulations. It is almost impossible (without 
making crude assumptions) to separate out the impacts of these 
myriad factors and to isolate the impact of the Regulations only.

• Similarly, for the Health and Safety benefits, the Regulations are 
comprehensive, apply to wide categories of machinery and came into 
force across the whole UK. Therefore, it is difficult to identify a relevant 
comparison (either a category of machinery or a geographical area for 
which the Regulations did not apply) which we could use to estimate 
what would have happened otherwise. 

• Moreover, evidence suggests that familiarisation is more complex than 
the model assumed in the initial impact assessment. Factors such as 
the size of the firm have an influence on the training process. 
Furthermore, qualitative evidence on enforcement indicates that not all 
stakeholders are fully aware of the need for familiarisation. 

In future iterations of appraisal and evaluation in policy making, it would worth 
factoring in some of the issues raised, including the size of the firm carrying 
out familiarisation training, or ways of separating out impacts on the internal 
market. However it is not the purpose of product safety legislation to educate 
and train industry in what should be good engineering practice; the Regulator 
should be able to assume that those placing products onto the market are 
technically competent to undertake the design, manufacture and conformity 
assessment of products,

Assessment of proportionality
In view of the considerations above, particularly the low estimated cost to 
business and the overall impact of the Regulations (combined NPV below 
£50m), a low level of evidence, as described in Section 2.2 of ‘Guide to 
Conducting PIRs’, is appropriate and proportionate for this PIR.

4) Evidence collection and methodology

BIS conducted a light-touch consultation of the principal affected 
stakeholders, collating evidence of known views and experiences in a time-
efficient way. The full set of questions is in Annex A.

We contacted the following groups of UK stakeholders:

• HSE, the enforcement authority for the Regulations in workplaces,

• The East of England Group of Association of Chief Trading Standards 
Officers (ACTSO), the enforcement authorities for the Regulations for 
consumers and non-workplaces, 

• The Machinery Directive Industry Forum, an informal group of larger 
manufacturers and trade associations affected by the Regulations, and 

• The UK Group of Machinery Notified Bodies, who assess the 
conformity of machinery with the requirements of the Regulations.


14

Cm 9493

We received written two responses from enforcement authorities, from four 
Notified Bodies3, and one verbal response from a manufacturer. Although we 
only received this one response, the comments made matched those that had
been made by other manufacturers and by correspondence over the last few 
years.  

As these are UK Regulations implementing the EU Machinery Directive, it was 
also necessary to gather some evidence of how other Member States have 
implemented the Directive and their experience with it. See section 8 below 
on the ‘Views of Member States’.    

5a) Are the existing regulations working?

This section sets out BIS’s assessment of the extent to which the Regulations 
have achieved and are achieving their objectives. It also considers whether there 
have been any unintended consequences of the Regulations.

Overall, two Notified Bodies agreed that the Regulations generally meet their 
objectives well. One Notified Body stated that the Regulations provide a fairly 
well-defined mechanism for businesses to consider safety in their design and 
manufacturing processes, and demonstrate that they have done so. One 
enforcement authority considers that the Regulations provide a comprehensive 
framework whilst permitting innovation and choice in the route to compliance.

On the internal market objective in particular, three Notified Bodies considered 
that the free movement of goods has been facilitated by the Regulations; they 
considered the Regulations provide a good framework for UK businesses to 
produce machinery which will be acceptable in other EU countries.

On the health and safety objective, one enforcement authority considers that the 
existing framework is robust, with enforcement tools available, including the triable 
either way option on prosecution for the significant health and safety issues. Over 
recent years a number of successful prosecutions have taken place on 
manufacturers that had placed non-compliant products on the market, although 
the penalties available to enforcement authorities may not always be considered 
a deterrent to manufacturers, especially the larger enterprises, reputational 
damage is just as likely to act as a deterrent. Companies will want therefore to 
avoid court cases if at all possible. Although some stakeholders consider that not 
enough enforcement is taking place, UK enforcement authorities can and do take 
action where enough evidence is provided to justify this. The UK co-operates with 
other Member States (MS) to share information regarding enforcement action 
taken in the UK. This helps to alert other MS to potential problems in their 
territories. In turn MS will raise issues with the UK.   

Some problems experienced by UK manufacturers when placing products on the 
market can be down to local differences in interpretation of the Machinery 

3     The two responses from enforcement authorities included one from an 
umbrella representational body.  The four Notified Bodies represent around 
18% of the Machinery Notified Bodies in the UK 


15

Cm 9493

Directive. The requirement for MS authorities to work together in working out 
these differences and developing guidance for market surveillance authorities and 
businesses helps to try and ensure that enforcement is carried out in a consistent 
manner. 

On the environmental and animal safety objectives, two Notified Bodies stated 
that any improvement in the environment as a result of the regulations is difficult 
to assess. None of the other stakeholders commented on this aspect of the 
Regulations.   

5b) Assessment of the actual costs and benefits of the Regulations

Overall, as with the original IAs, the coverage and quality of the available 
evidence and data collection for this PIR provided by stakeholders is relatively 
low. With the low level of available evidence, it is not possible to quantify the 
actual costs and benefits of the Regulations business have been asked for data 
but are unable to provide it which suggests the cost burden is small.  

All stakeholders agree that it is difficult to estimate the costs and benefits to 
business of complying with the Regulations. The Regulations do not require 
manufacturers to provide any data to BIS or anyone else on the costs and 
benefits of complying with the regulations. Obtaining additional information as 
part of this exercise on costs and benefits could only be done where 
manufacturers were prepared to provide this on a voluntary basis. 

Costs

On costs to businesses of compliance, two Notified Bodies consider that the 
additional costs of compliance (above what should be normal parts of the 
design process and maintaining technical files) are not large, especially once 
businesses are aware of how to ensure conformity with the requirements. 

Benefits

On benefits to businesses of compliance, one Notified Body states that most 
responsible manufacturers are keen to apply the regulations correctly and 
welcome the guidance given by the regulations, because it gives assurance 
that they are doing things correctly and can be considered to have applied 
due diligence to the safety-related aspects of the equipment they sell. 
Businesses benefit from selling compliant products which are safe and do not 
cause harm, which have a right to free movement throughout the European 
market.  The manufacturers surveyed did not comment on this issue. 

There have been are some unintended consequences not considered in the 
IAs which is some cases may have increased costs to businesses and these 
are considered in the following section.

As part of conducting the Post Implementation Review, a reassessment of the 
cost and benefits using the original impact assessments were made using 
updated information. Qualitative evidence collected in the Post 
Implementation Review was not used in this update as the evidence could not 


16

Cm 9493

be extrapolated to a macro level, although some of the insights gathered have 
been included to caveat the assessment.

Monetised costs and benefits updated from the original impact assessments 

(i) Updated Cost and Benefit assessment of the 2008 Regulations (see Table 


1)

Transitional
Familiarisation and training costs:- 
Using newly updated ASHE Data: we find that in 2009, Manufacture of 
machinery and equipment n.e.c. industry (SIC Code 28) employed 
approximately 228,000 people. The mean hourly wage for managers is 
£22.17, this increased to £26.80 with the non-wage labour cost uplift 
(Eurostat, 2009). We assume, as in the original impact assessment, that the 
new legislation affects only 10% of the employees, and that approximately 5
hours are required to familiarise with the legislation. This derives an estimated 
one off transition cost of £3 million. 

The original IA also suggested that ongoing annual refresh training on the 
legislation might be required, and this was estimated to be approximately 5-
10% of the original one off cost £0.15-£0.3million. The original IA also 
suggested a £1million cost of meeting essential requirement of the MD, this 
information has not been updated by the HSE and it was not deemed 
proportionate to collect this information for this PIR. 

Recurring
Internal Market Benefits
The European Commission has estimated EU GDP was more than 2 per cent, 
or £170 billion (2009 prices), higher in 2008 than it would have been if the 
Single Market had not been launched in 1992. Using the most recent data, UK 
GDP is approximately 13% of the EU economy (nominal GDP 2014, IMF) and 
that manufacturing represents 15% of total GDP (ONS, 2015), and machinery 
and equipment represents 6% of manufacturing (ONS, 2015). The internal 
market can be assumed to have had an impact of £200 million. There was no 
proxy which we could use to find how much of this could be attributed directly 
to the directive. In light of this limitation, we have followed the methodology 
used in the original IA, we assume that 0.5-2 percent of the impact can be 
attributed to the improvement in the directive, this leads to a benefit of 
approximately £1- £4 million per annum. 
Health and Safety Benefits

Health and Safety benefits were discussed both in the original IA and the 
amendment IA. HSE data for fatal injuries from coming in contact from moving 
machinery, across all sectors of the economy has fallen from approximately 
19 per annum in the 1995/6 to 2005/6 period to an average of 10 per annum 
in 2009/10 to 2013/14 period. Although, it is not possible from this evidence to 
determine the extent to which the MD contributed to this reduction given the 
range of factors that could impact on the number of injuries, if we follow the 
assumption that was made in the Supply of Machinery (Safety) Regulations 


17

Cm 9493

impact assessment that the directive contributed in the region of 10 to 20 
percent reduction in average number of fatalities, then this would imply a 
reduction in the average number of fatalities of just under 1-2 per annum. The 
economic cost of fatalities is given at £1.6million4: this leads to an overall 
benefit of between £1.6- £3.2million per annum. 

For non-fatal accidents, Labour Force Survey data indicate that accidents 
caused by contact with moving machinery averaged 13,000 for the 2006/07 - 
2008/09 period, the most recent indicator indicate this figure has fallen to 
11,000 (for 2011/12-2013/14), this implies an estimated reduction of up to 
200- 400 accidents per annum attributed to the directive:  using the HSE 
estimation of cost of accidents to be £300, this derives an economic benefit of 
£60,000-£120,000 per annum.

(ii) Updated assessment of the 2011 Amendment Regulations (see Table 2)

Transition  
The Pesticide Amendment IA calculated that the transition cost of adaption in 
design or production cost is approximately £0.03m to £0.3m (para 27). 
However, the data needed to estimate this cost is no longer available. 
Furthermore, it is worth noting that this is a sunk cost, and therefore not 
relevant for assessing the best option going forward for this particular 
regulation: therefore, it is viewed as disproportionate, to collect the evidence 
necessary to update this information in this particular case.

Recurring
For the 2011 Pesticide Amendment, a further health and safety benefit was 
estimated. Looking at the data on illness linked to pesticide exposure in the 
published Pesticide Impact Report5: to assess the benefits of the measure, we 
analysed the step change between the data prior to 2009 and post 2009.

Mild injury Moderate injury

2008/09 5 3

2009/10 15 2

2010/11 6 0

2011/12 5.5 0

2012/13 6 0

As in the original IA, if we make the assumption that half the reduction in 
incidents reported can be attributed to the measure, then the step change can 
be estimated to be 1-1.5 for moderate incidents and up to 4.5 for mild 
incidents. If the estimation £300 cost to injuries is used again, this leads to an 
economic benefit of £300-450 per year6. This leads to an economic benefit of 
£300-£450 per year. 

4 http://www.hse.gov.uk/risk/theory/alarpcheck.htm#footnotes (up 
weighted to 2009 prices)
5 http://www.hse.gov.uk/agriculture/resources/pesticides
6 http://www.hse.gov.uk/risk/theory/alarpcheck.htm#footnotes


18

Cm 9493

Other benefits

Due to lack of availability of data, we were unable to measure that reduction in 
cost to users in inefficient use due to the introduction of the Pesticide 
amendment. This was assessed to be £400,000 per year in the original IA.  

6) What if any have been the unintended consequences? What are the 
areas for improvement?

One Notified Body notes that a lack of enforcement means that compliant 
manufacturers may be put at a financial or competitive disadvantage to less 
scrupulous manufacturers.

Both an enforcement authority and one Notified Body noted the very high cost 
of accessing harmonised standards as a significant cost to business. The 
enforcement authority notes that the cost is often cited as prohibitive to all but 
the larger businesses. The Notified Body states that there are cheaper ways 
to buy or view standards in the international market, rather than via the British 
Standards Institute, but these are not widely known. This limits business 
access to the vast amount of useful design information available in standards. 
Though the use of standards is voluntary their use does simplify confidence of 
compliance; currently this issue is receiving a lot of attention from the 
European Commission and the Member States to investigate simplifying 
access, particularly from SMEs.

There is also a significant cost in understanding and using standards, and 
both an enforcement authority and one Notified Body focused on one example 
in particular. The Notified Body stated that safety-related control system 
requirements based on EN 13849/62061 in particular are very complex and 
widely misunderstood and misapplied. It notes that ineffective equipment is 
often added to machines, increasing cost but not actually improving safety 
performance. In the respondent’s opinion, this particular standard is not 
achieving its objectives because it is too complex and badly written. Similarly, 
the respondent from the enforcement authority also cites EN ISO 13849-1 on 
control systems as an example of a particularly difficult standard to 
understand and requires significant expertise to implement, despite the fact 
that it is a basic fundamental standard for almost all machines and essential 
for any with complex control and safety systems. Though these comments are 
not relevant to the regulatory framework these comments demonstrate the 
lack of technical competence in industry in relation to the incorporation of high 
and innovative technology; also the lack of interconnect through BSI from the 
technical committee comprising usually manufacturers and users of products 
with those likely to use the standard who are of less than average 
competence. This is confirmed by the observation by two Notified Bodies that 
many businesses are not aware of the state of the art and standards that are 
applicable to their equipment. One of the Notified Bodies considers that many 
manufacturers choose to use a harmonised standard as a way to comply with 
the Directive, and that the use of standards often inhibits innovation by giving 
a proscribed route to design. Best standards drafting requires the setting of 


19

Cm 9493

objectives and testing for the compliance with the objectives; poor drafting 
sets constructional requirements while much work has been done in pressing 
standardisers to improve drafting more work is clearly needed. BIS along with 
the European Commission, other Member States and the European 
Standards Bodies, including BSI, are actively encouraging better drafting from 
standardization technical committees. 

Enforcement

All four Notified Bodies and the one manufacturer that responded stated that 
enforcement of the Regulations could be strengthened, particularly 
enforcement activity focused on manufacturers and distributors who place 
unsafe equipment on the market, rather than only on users who have 
accidents. It seems there is a lack of awareness of the activity of the 
enforcement authorities in relation to investigations of products on the 
markets BIS and they need to do more to publicise their successes and 
interventions.

One Notified Body expressed concern that the system of declaring 
compliance is open to abuse. Without proactive enforcement of the 
Regulations, safety is only improved by those manufacturers that bother to 
observe the requirements. As the NB was of the view that no checks are 
made to ensure that machinery being placed on the market is compliant, the 
interpretation of the requirements is left to manufacturers, who may choose to 
ignore or flexibly interpret the minimum requirements. As an example of this, 
one Notified Body alleged that in some cases, manufacturers are applying 
standards that do not relate to the equipment they make. This view from NBs 
may be biased as they have a vested interest in mandatory 3rd party testing. 
Self-assessment is used in other product safety areas and is now considered 
appropriate for this type of equipment. HSE do undertake a number of 
investigations on manufacturers to determine compliance; they are currently 
trialling a new system whereby the cost of investigations and any follow up 
action is chargeable where there is non-compliance.

One Notified Body went further and stated that, even when reactive 
enforcement occurs after an accident or prosecution, the fines are too low to 
deter manufacturers from breaching the Regulations. The HSE have also 
expressed concerns at the fines imposed by the Courts. The Ministry of 
Justice have also amended all penalties for England Wales to remove the 
maximum limits for all Courts. While this provides the Courts with the 
possibility to impose penalties that stakeholders consider to be more 
appropriate it will down to the Courts to decide what penalty they actually 
impose.

In the view of enforcement authorities, the main challenges facing them are 
the limited resources and scarce expertise to conduct proactive enforcement 
and market surveillance activity. Compliance testing is difficult and time-
consuming, even with access to expertise. Proactive market surveillance 
activity, including at the borders, is not easy as many industrial products are 
not amenable to examination and sampling at that point (may need 
assembling and putting into use first to be able to evaluate). 


20

Cm 9493

Another enforcement authority notes that typically Trading Standards Officers 
lack experience and knowledge of the technical aspects of the Regulations to 
proactively enforce the Regulations. As a result of this, it is difficult for 
enforcement authorities to assess the overall level of compliance to the 
Regulations. In many cases, the authorities only get involved if there has been 
an incident. However, one enforcement authority notes that the level of 
compliance varies greatly across manufacturers, and that the overall level of 
compliance has probably not changed much since 1992. It further noted that 
enforcement authorities continue to encourage compliance through education 
and enforcement, but this may have been counteracted by the increase in 
products from non-EU sources, which may be less aware of the EU system. 
These issues are likely to be at least partly addressed by HSE charging for 
investigations where non-conformity is identified and by the recent removal of 
maximum limits for fines enabling stronger fines to be imposed by the Courts 
which may now become persuasive. There is also a review of Trading 
Standards Services in progress that may address some of the concerns 
raised here.

Importers and distributors
Three Notified Bodies noted that there needs to be a stronger emphasis on 
the responsibilities of importers and distributors. In the view of one Notified 
Body, direct purchase of machinery from outside the EU, which often does not 
meet EU safety requirements, is increasing, and where an importer/distributor 
is involved, they often have no idea of the safety requirements. Similarly, one 
enforcement authority states that one of the main challenges it faces is that 
many fundamental duty holders are outside legal jurisdiction. 

7) Is government intervention still required? Is the existing form of 
government regulation still the most appropriate approach?

This section sets out BIS’s assessment of whether the Regulation’s objectives 
remain appropriate and, if so, the extent to which they could be achieved with a 
system that imposes less regulation.

From our updated assessment of the costs and benefits, the ongoing benefits still 
exceeds the ongoing cost (see Section 5B); the Regulations’ objectives therefore 
remain appropriate. The UK remains committed to improving health and safety 
and environmental and animal protection.

The objectives of the Regulations could not be achieved with a system that 
imposes less regulation; the current Regulations are still considered to set a light 
touch and impose minimal requirements over and above good engineering 
practice. The concerns with the Regulations raised by all responding stakeholders 
consider that more enforcement of the existing regulations is required rather than 
a change being needed in the Regulations. The IA for the 2008 Regulations did 
not consider alternatives to regulation. There is a role for Government and 
enforcement authorities to improve awareness of the requirements of the 
regulations which could help reduce incidents of non-compliance by 
manufacturers.  


21

Cm 9493

The IA of the 2011 amendment considered an alternative to regulation, by 
providing guidance to manufacturers to allow them to pursue voluntary 
agreements to comply with EU standards. The IA considered that, although it is 
likely that companies will adopt EU standards regardless of UK enforcement, not 
regulating may leave some UK companies at a competitive disadvantage in the 
internal market if they do not adopt EU standards. Furthermore, the UK would 
face reputational risks and risk of infraction proceedings for not implementing the 
EU Directive.  It was also considered that there would be higher non-monetised 
costs to users of pesticides application equipment (PAE) due to less efficient use 
of pesticides.    

At present the changes the UK can make to improve the Regulations are primarily 
limited to penalties and the enforcement regime. The technical and administrative 
requirements are set out in an EU Directive that will not be revised for several 
years. Overall BIS does not consider there is a need to amend the Regulations. 
Issues highlighted by the PIR as needing attention are related to the need for 
better enforcement of the UK Regulations which is a performance issue of the 
existing enforcement bodies (HSE & Trading Standards) who remain the most 
appropriate bodies in the UK. As noted previously both the HSE initiative with 
charging for investigations where non-conformity is identified and the review of 
Trading Standards may assist in improving compliance and in undertaking 
increased proactive inspections.

7) EU-derived regulations

This section considers how the Directive is implemented in other member states; 
the impacts on UK based businesses relative to other European competitors and 
whether UK businesses are put at a competitive disadvantage by the Regulations; 
and improving transposition in the UK.

One Notified Body reported that they were aware of some rare cases where 
national interpretations and practice vary, and a few problems with differing 
interpretations or incorrect application of the Directive by enforcement offices 
outside the UK.

The UK is convinced that there is no gold-plating in the implementing 
Regulations; industry and enforcement authorities in their EU activities use 
the Directive text and therefore any anomalies would have been identified. 
Unintentional gold-plating was identified in the 2008 Regulations but was 
subsequently removed in the 2011 amendment. This removed a provision in 
relation to the duties of those putting machinery into service, which duplicated 
obligations imposed under other health and safety legislation 

UK authorities have received occasional complaints from UK businesses (not 
as part of this review) about difficulties in placing products they consider to be 
compliant on the market in other MS. These problems tend to be differing 
interpretations of the requirements by MS. These problems have been 
resolved by the UK working with other MS through co-operation facilitated by 
the European Commission and via the independent SOLVIT initiative. 


22

Cm 9493

8) Views of Member States

We received comments from four MS regarding the implementation of the 
Machinery Directive in their country. 

Implementation
There is no common approach to implementation some, like the UK, use a 
single implementing piece of legislation; while others use two or more pieces. 
The approach being what works best for them.

Objectives of Directive
There were differing views as to whether the objectives of the MD were being 
fully met. The general consensus is that the MD is achieving its objectives but 
should be fully aligned to the New Legislative Framework.  Views were 
expressed that while the health and safety aspects were good enough and the 
single market was functioning well the protection of the Union required all 
Member States to provide adequate resources for market surveillance and 
publicity. Some concerns were expressed with the marketing of products 
being poorly covered by the MD, however this is to be expected as marketing 
is fully dealt with in other Union legislation. It was a concern that due to a lack 
of information exchange between authorities the necessary levels of safety 
and health protection are not always achieved. There were mixed views as to 
whether machines are more environmentally friendly. 

Enforcement in other Member States
Operational procedures and resources vary between Member States and as 
such expectations with regard to co-operation differ leaving some Member 
States considering co-operation is not always as good as could be hoped but 
at least there are channels for co-operation which are improved with 
experience. Of particular note being the ICSMS secure internet system 
allowing the passing of information between Member States enforcement 
authorities electronically.

Particular concerns highlighted are e-commerce and a need to tighten control 
at ports. The UK does have an initiative with Trading Standards working 
closely with HM Customs which is proving very successful. 

One MS said that it had been difficult to convince market players to accept 
that the changes introduced by the Directive were designed to improve safety 
while at the same time promoting the single market for goods.

Review     
None of the MS had carried out a review of the implementation of the MD in 
their country.   

Views of stakeholders in other Member States 
One MS said that stakeholders had not made any complaints to them about 
the Directive. Another said that stakeholders are generally happy with the
Directive and see advantages to it for trading products. Complaints about 


23

Cm 9493

other MS making extra requirements that are technical barriers to trade for 
products have fallen away since the Directive was introduced. One MS said 
that generally speaking manufacturers are aware of their obligations.   

9) Comments from the European Commission

No assessment of the transposition of the Directive by MS has been carried 
out. Neither has a review of the Machinery Directive been carried out. 
However, an evaluation study into the Machinery Directive was launched in 
2016. This is the start of the process to review the Directive and consider any 
possible revision.

10) Next Steps

The Regulations should remain as is (renewal), for the following reasons:

• They must remain in place to support our obligation to implement the 
EU Machinery Directive. 

• The policy is on course to achieve its objectives and key success 
criteria have been met.

• Compliance levels are sufficient to support achievement of objectives. 

• Government intervention is still required. If intervention was withdrawn, 
the UK would risk reputational damage and infraction proceedings. UK
companies may be placed at a competitive disadvantage in the internal 
market if they do not adopt EU standards. Withdrawing government 
intervention may lead to some deterioration in health and safety and 
environmental protection.

• As assessed by the IAs costs have been proportionate to benefits.

• An updated assessment of the IAs has shown that the ongoing benefits 
continue to exceed ongoing costs.

• Alternatives that are less burdensome to business have not been 
identified. Amending the existing UK Regulations to strengthen the 
penalties is not warranted now that Ministry of Justice have remove d 
the upper limit for penalties. 

• While more robust enforcement is called for HSE as principal enforcer 
with Trading Standards for consumer products remain the most 
appropriate UK enforcers. The evaluation of the HSE initiative to 
charge for investigations should be taken into consideration before any 
initiative to change HSE enforcement activity. 

• To consider how the Courts can be encouraged to apply penalties that 
are persuasive. 

• On completion of the review of the Trading Standards Services 
consider whether any review of their enforcement activity is required.

There is a role for government to improve awareness of the Regulations 
among business and consumers. Two Notified Bodies state that 
manufacturers often address conformity with the Regulations after their 
machine has already been designed and built. By this time, it is too late and 
often expensive, difficult or impossible to correct the mistake. It is vital that 
conformity and especially risk assessment forms part of the design process, 


24

Cm 9493

and more education and improved awareness among manufacturers is 
needed.

A common concern raised by stakeholders was that there was not enough 
enforcement. Industry wants a level playing field and do expect robust 
enforcement to ensure all are following the same requirements. Government 
needs to consider ways to improve enforcement that minimise burdens on 
compliant manufacturers, but bites on non-compliant manufacturers, to 
ensure the cost of non-compliance exceeds the cost of compliance. The 
impact of the removal of maximum limits for fines and the HSE charging for 
investigations needs to be considered once these initiatives have been 
running sufficiently long to evaluate their impact.   

Other EU Member States raised concerns about enforcement of the MD 
similar to those experienced in the UK. It is therefore important that MS 
continue to work together to improve enforcement so that any difficulties can 
be promptly resolved to improve the operation of the single market for all 
stakeholders.


25

Cm 9493

Annex 2 

Questions for Stakeholders 
1) To what extent have the Regulations met their policy objectives? (e.g. 

to improve safety; facilitate the free movement of goods and improve 
the environment)

2) What is your assessment of the costs and benefits to your business of 
complying with the Regulations on a yearly basis?

3) What are the main challenges faced by businesses in ensuring their 
products meet the requirements of the Regulations?

4) If you are a Smaller business (up to 50 employees) or Micro business 
(up to 10 employees) please let us have your assessment as to 
whether the burden of the Regulations falls disproportionately on your 
business compared to larger organisations?

5) If there is anything else you like to mention in connection with the 
Regulations not covered above please let us know. 

Questions for Notified Bodies 
1) To what extent have the Regulations met their policy objectives? (e.g. 

to improve safety; facilitate the free movement of goods and improve 
the environment)

2) What is your assessment of the costs and benefits to business of 
complying with the Regulations on a yearly basis? 

3) What are the main challenges faced by businesses in ensuring their 
products meet the requirements of the Regulations?

4) As a Notified Body what are the main challenges you are faced with in 
helping manufacturers to comply with the Regulations? 

5) If there is anything else you would like to mention in connection with 
the Regulations not covered above please let us know.

Questions for Enforcement Authorities 
1) To what extent have the Regulations met their policy objectives? (e.g. 

to improve safety; facilitate the free movement of goods and improve 
the environment)

2) What is your assessment of the costs and benefits to business of 
complying with the Regulations on a yearly basis?

3) What are the main challenges faced by you as an enforcement 
authority in ensuring that products meet the requirements of the 
Regulations?

4) a) As an enforcement authority what is your assessment of level of 
compliance of products under the Regulations? b) Has this level of 
compliance changed since the Regulations were introduced?

5) If there is anything else you would like to mention in connection with 
the Regulations not covered above please let us know.

Questions were sent to Member States covering: 
1. Implementation, 
2. Whether objectives of the Directive have been achieved
3. Any enforcement concerns
4. Whether a review had been carried out 


26

Cm 9493

5. Views of stakeholders

Questions were sent to the European Commission covering:
1. Implementation of the Directive by MS 
2. Whether the objectives of the Directive have been achieved  
3. Implementation and enforcement  
4. Future plans for the Directive
5. Possible gold plating by MS
6. Compliance of manufacturers


27

