



Education and employment strategy




Education and Employment Strategy 


              

May 2018 

Cm 9621 


  

Education and Employment Strategy 
Presented to Parliament  
by the Lord Chancellor and Secretary of State for Justice  
by Command of Her Majesty 


 

May 2018 


               

Cm 9621 


 


© Crown copyright 2018 

This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where 
otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-
licence/version/3 

Where we have identified any third-party copyright information you will need to obtain permission 
from the copyright holders concerned. 

This publication is available at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications 

Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at  
orcgcorporateteam1@justice.gov.uk. 

ISBN 978-1-5286-0392-8 

CCS0518628748 05/18 

Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum 

Printed in the UK by the APS Group on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office 


  

http://nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3/
http://nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3/
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications
mailto:orcgcorporateteam1@justice.gov.uk




Education and Employment Strategy 

Contents 

Foreword 3 

Introduction 5 

Chapter 1: Education and training in prison 9 

Chapter 2: Prison work 18 

Chapter 3: Employment on release 24 

Conclusion 33 


    1 


Education and Employment Strategy 


   2 


Education and Employment Strategy 

Foreword 

I have seen the power of work to transform lives. It’s not just the financial security of 
having a pay packet, but everything else that comes with being in work: purpose, 
structure, networks, having a stake in something. 

As a government, we have made sure it always pays to work. As a result, we’ve seen 
record-breaking levels of employment and millions more people move into work over the 
last few years. This has pulled people out of poverty and opened up new prospects and 
possibilities for them and their families.  

The benefits of work should touch and transform the lives of everyone in the country. In 
particular, I want ex-offenders to share in this country’s remarkable jobs story.  

A prison sentence rightly serves as a punishment, depriving someone of their liberty. 
However, for those offenders who are committed to change and who want to turn their 
backs on crime, prison should also serve as an impetus to help set them on a path to a 
better life.  

Following that path is good for them. It is also good for society as a whole: moving ex-
offenders off benefits and into work reduces the financial burden on taxpayers and the 
welfare state, reduces reoffending and, therefore, reduces the number of future victims of 
crime. 

Although prison cannot help those who are not willing to help themselves, for those 
offenders who are, this education and employment strategy aims to ensure prison can 
prove to be a pivotal, positive and permanent turning-point in their lives.  

Underpinning that turning-point is work. We know that when an offender is released from 
prison, they are much less likely to continue committing crime if they have a job. Yet only 
17% of ex-offenders are in PAYE work a year after coming out of prison and only half of 
employers say they would even consider employing an ex-offender.  

The vision at the heart of this strategy is to put offenders on a path to employment as soon 
as they step foot in prison. That involves focusing efforts both inside and outside of prison. 

Within the prison walls, it starts with education. We must ensure that more offenders leave 
prison with the basic skills that are essential to entering the workplace and with the skills 
employers need. That’s why we are putting governors in full control of the education 
provided in their prisons so they can tailor it to their specific prison populations and for the 
local jobs market. We will also continue to look at how in-cell technology could support 
prisoner learning. 

Alongside education work experience is also important. A third of prisoners have some 
kind of job in prison. Whether that is cooking in the kitchens, cleaning on the wings or 
cutting hair in the barbers, prison work delivers purposeful activity for thousands of 
prisoners and helps prisons run effectively.  

However, prison jobs are not currently geared towards properly preparing prisoners for the 
workplace or providing a route into a real job with an employer. The evidence shows 


3 

Education and Employment Strategy 

release on temporary licence – or workplace ROTL – is an effective rehabilitation tool. 
However, it is currently not being used to its potential to help prisoners along the path to 
employment.  

That’s why this strategy expands the use of workplace ROTL to get prisoners who have 
earned it, and who have been properly risk-assessed, out of their cells and into real 
workplaces. This will allow prisoners to build trust and prove themselves with an employer. 

It is also a powerful incentive to promote good behaviour in prison. If you do not cause 
trouble, if you take the right path and play by the rules, that behaviour will be recognised 
and you will be rewarded with a more liberal prison regime. Incentives like workplace 
ROTL can play an important role alongside the other measures we are taking to reduce 
the levels of violence and disorder in prisons. 

Beyond the prison walls, we need to change the mind-set of many employers and 
highlight the benefits of recruiting ex-offenders and of working more closely with prisons.  

When an employer sees an ex-offender, I want them to see future potential, not just a 
former prisoner. The New Futures Network will be an important new force in persuading 
employers to take on ex-prisoners, as well acting as a broker between prisons and 
employers to create opportunities for prisoners.  

We also recognise the argument in favour of financial incentives and will balance this 
against wider government objectives. We will consider how to take forward a national 
insurance contributions holiday alongside wider work on employer obligations and 
incentives.  

The fact is, prisons have the potential to provide many loyal and hard-working recruits. 
Some employers see that, but others still need to change their thinking. The dynamics of 
the labour market should focus the minds of employers. We have a thriving jobs market 
and demand for workers in some sectors is very high. Leaving the European Union is also 
likely to have an impact on the workforce in sectors such as catering, construction and 
agriculture.  

These are among the first-priority sectors for the New Futures Network. By forging closer 
relationships between employers and prisons and by expanding the use of workplace 
ROTL, prisoners will get a foot through the door to sectors like these and employers will 
able to fill short-term skills gaps whilst developing potential permanent employees for the 
longer term.  

For those prisoners who want to work and are prepared to change, this strategy will help 
to break down the barriers and prejudices offenders often face in trying to find a job.  

I want prisons to be places of hope and aspiration that can propel prisoners into 
employment when they are released. In doing so, they will be able to start a new chapter in 
their lives, contribute to society and become part of this country’s extraordinary jobs story. 


  

Rt. Hon David Gauke MP 
Secretary of State for Justice 


4 

Education and Employment Strategy 

Introduction 

Our vision 
1. Reoffending by those released from custody costs society around £15 billion per year 

– and the overwhelming majority of prisoners will be released from custody at some 
stage in their lives. Through effective rehabilitation we can reduce the number of 
victims of crime in the future.  

2. Many ex-offenders have multiple problems in their lives, including troubled family 
relationships, drug and mental health problems, lack of suitable accommodation, low 
educational achievement and poor employment records. These different problems 
can compound one another and require a comprehensive response.  

3. This strategy focuses on work, which we know is central to prisoners turning their 
lives around. People leaving prison who find a job are between 6 and 9 percentage 
points less likely to reoffend than those who do not, even when a range of other 
factors are taken into account. Work can provide a foundation for a different kind 
of life.  

4. This must start with offenders themselves. Effective rehabilitation needs prisoners to 
engage with the opportunities in front of them, to build a different kind of life. They 
must be willing to commit to change, take advice, learn new skills and take 
opportunities to work – both during their sentence and after. Prisons cannot help 
people who are not willing to help themselves – but they can sharpen the incentives 
to help set prisoners on the right path. This means:  

a. A sentencing plan for each prisoner that sets direction and provides something 
positive to aim for.  

b. An Offender Management system that gives each prisoner a key worker to 
encourage and hold them to account. 

c. Tough enforcement when prisoners engage in violence and disruption, affecting 
their own futures and those of others.  

d. Proportionate rewards and opportunities for those making choices that will 
prepare them to lead crime-free lives on release, from positive engagement in 
prison education to prison work. 

5. For those willing to engage, the system must deliver. Our vision is that when an 
offender enters prison they should be put, immediately, on the path to employment on 
release. This means: 

a. Rigorous assessment of each prisoner’s education level at the beginning of – and 
at key points during – their sentence, to understand each individual’s starting 
point and measure progress.  

b. Education and training which is responsive to individuals’ needs, is properly 
integrated into prison regimes and delivers what employers are looking for. 

c. Prison work, provided by employers with easy access to prisons, and work 
placements on day release which help prisoners build towards employment 
opportunities on release. 


5 

Education and Employment Strategy 

d. Links with local and national employers ready to offer ex-prisoners jobs on 
release.  

e. Effective supervision and support when ex-offenders leave prison, so that they 
make the most of job opportunities. 

Progress to date 
6. Progress has been made in some important aspects of this. The number of prisoners 

working in prison industries (prison jobs provided by private sector employers or 
government departments) at any one time has increased significantly, from 7,500 in 
2010/11 to over 11,000 in 2016. This has boosted the number of prisoners engaged 
in purposeful activity and helped many more acquire key skills to prepare them for 
employment on release. In addition to this, there are over 13,000 prisoners working to 
provide prison services at any one time, such as cleaning prison wings or cooking in 
the kitchens. 

7. Meanwhile, prison education has been improving, with an increase in the number of 
prisons in England rated as good or outstanding by Ofsted. In Wales ESTYN, the 
office of Her Majesty's Inspectorate for Education and Training in Wales, inspect 
prison education and the majority of prisons are rated as good. It is our ambition to 
see the number of prisons rated as good or outstanding for education continue to 
grow until that level of quality is embedded across the system. 

Challenges ahead 
8. The proportion of offenders in P45 employment one year after release is just 17%. 

The evidence indicates that there are not large differences in employment rates for 
male and female ex-offenders. This low employment rate contributes to higher levels 
of reoffending and comes at a direct cost to the welfare system.  

9. Too many prisoners are still engaged in violence and disruption, rather than turning 
their own lives around. There were 28,000 violent incidents recorded in our prisons 
last year alone. Rates of violence are lower in the female estate than the male estate 
but are still unacceptable. We have not made sufficient use of all the tools available – 
to map out a path to a better future for each prisoner, bear down on bad behaviour 
and reward the good. A fresh look is needed at all the tools available for this.  

10. Nor has the system delivered everything it should for those prisoners who do engage. 
Prisons have not been sufficiently geared towards getting prisoners into work on 
release. In particular:  

a. Prison education has delivered qualifications but not been tailored closely enough 
to the requirements of employers or the needs of different cohorts of prisoners. 
With large-scale contracts, governors in England have lacked the levers to 
manage performance and integrate education properly into prison regimes. At 
times in the past, training for female prisoners has been driven by stereotypes 
about ‘suitable’ employment rather than market intelligence about employment 
opportunities.  

b. Prison work has delivered purposeful activity and helped prisons function 
efficiently, but has not been linked sufficiently to employment opportunities on 
release. Workplace on Release on Temporary Licence (ROTL) has also been 
under-used for both men and women 


6 

Education and Employment Strategy 

c. On release, ex-prisoners have benefited from initiatives like Ban the Box, but 
many employers remain sceptical about employing ex-offenders. Employers need 
further encouragement and easy access to prisons to change this. Meanwhile, the 
supervision of, and support for, ex-prisoners on release has often been piecemeal 
and insufficiently coordinated.  

Our approach  
11. In the coming months we will set out, in more detail, how we intend to sharpen the 

incentives and punishments for all prisoners in custody, so that many more choose 
cooperation and rehabilitation over violence and disruption. We will consider: 

a. How we categorise prisoners, including how we separate the ringleaders of 
trouble and violence from others.  

b. The punishment of unacceptable and illegal behaviour in prisons, including the 
best use of the new protocol between the Ministry of Justice and the Crown 
Prosecution Service.  

c. The role of the Incentives and Earned Privileges (IEP) system in punishing bad 
behaviour and rewarding the good – including positive engagement in education 
and training.  

d. The ability of prisoners to earn income in the later part of their sentences, 
including through Release on Temporary Licence. 

e. The role of the key worker in the new Offender Management system in supporting 
prisoners and holding them to account.  

12. We will also set out our approach to managing and rehabilitating female offenders, 
including how best to support women into employment when they leave custody. For 
example, this will include how women can manage childcare responsibilities 
alongside rehabilitation programmes and working commitments.  

13. The following chapters of this document focus on how we will match these measures 
with a prison and probation system geared towards employment on release.  

14. Chapter 1 sets out our approach to prison education. In Wales, this is the 
responsibility of the Welsh Government and this paper includes developments in 
Welsh prisons where relevant. In England we will:  

a. Establish consistency and minimum standards in a few key areas across the 
prison estate.  

b. Empower governors in England to commission the education provision most likely 
to meet employers’ requirements and prisoners’ needs.  

c. Provide the right tools and support to governors to make the best use of these 
powers.  

d. Establish a new vocational training route for governors to make use of in England 
and Wales called the Prisoner Apprenticeship Pathway.  

e. Couple greater powers for governors with greater accountability for performance.  


7 

Education and Employment Strategy 

15. Chapter 2 concerns work in prison and workplace ROTL. It sets out how we will: 

a. Develop a new approach, through a partnership with The Clink, to tie work 
already being done by prisoners in prison services, such as cooking in prison 
kitchens, with employment on release.  

b. Consult governors and employers on proposals to increase the opportunities 
available to prisoners to gain experience in real workplaces through ROTL. 

16. Chapter 3 focuses on employment on release. It sets out how we will:  

a. Launch the New Futures Network (NFN) to engage and persuade employers to 
take on ex-prisoners, with experts placed in every geographical prison group in a 
phased roll-out across England and Wales. 

b. Consider how to take forward a National Insurance Contributions (NIC) holiday 
alongside wider work on employer obligations and incentives. 

c. Recruit ex-prisoners directly into the civil service, providing jobs and acting as a 
role model for other employers. 

d. Work with DWP to explore ways to deliver enhancements to the current benefit 
claim process so that ex-prisoners have easier access to financial support on the 
day of release where needed. 

e. Ensure that prisons and NPS/CRCs work together more seamlessly, by 
sharpening and aligning accountability for ex-prisoners’ employment on release. 

17. Together, these measures are designed to produce a system in which each prisoner 
is set on a path to employment, with prison education and work geared towards 
employment on release. To deliver this, governors will be given the levers to make a 
difference and the support to make the most of new powers. They will then be 
accountable for delivering results. 


 8 


Education and Employment Strategy 

Chapter 1: Education and training in prison 

Chapter Summary 
The first step on a prisoner’s path to employment on release is acquiring the right skills. 
Many prisoners enter prison educated only to a low level. Over half were assessed on 
reception as having the English and maths abilities expected of an 11-year-old. This 
makes effective and relevant training in prison vital.  

In England, we have taken steps to raise the standard and consistency of education 
and training across the prison estate. These include introducing maths and English 
assessments on entry into and release from prison. In Wales improvements include 
piloting the Wales Essential Skills Toolkit. We have also appointed common awarding 
organisations for each of the seven most popular (by volume of learners) subjects in 
prison education in England. These reforms are designed to prevent education being 
disrupted when a prisoner moves from one prison to another, whilst allowing new data 
to be collected to track performance.  

Thanks to ongoing reform and the hard work of those working in the system, education 
in prisons has improved year on year. But too many prisoners are reaching the end of 
their sentence without securing basic skills in English and maths. Often, prison 
education has not been properly integrated into prison regimes. In addition, education 
has not been closely tailored to the requirements of employers or the needs of different 
cohorts of prisoners, with governors lacking the levers to manage performance.  

Consistency across the prison estate is necessary in some areas so that prisoners can 
move from one prison to another without disrupting their education. There is also a role 
for the centre in setting minimum standards and expectations. However, governors 
know their own prisoners best and, given the right tools, are in the best position to 
ensure that training is relevant to the requirements of employers. In Wales HMPPS 
delivers education on behalf of the Welsh Government and governors have 
responsibility for arrangements in their prison.  

We want to see prison education that complements prison work, is oriented towards 
employment on release and is integrated both into prisoners’ sentence plans and prison 
regimes. To deliver this in England we will: 

a. Establish consistency and minimum standards in a few key areas across the prison 
estate.  

b. Empower governors to commission the education provision most likely to meet 
employers’ requirements and prisoners’ needs.  

c. Provide the right tools and support to governors to make best use of these powers.  

d. Establish the Prisoner Apprenticeship Pathway as a new vocational route for 
governors to make use of.  

e. Couple greater powers for governors with greater accountability for performance. 


 9 


Education and Employment Strategy 

Prison education 
18. For a prisoner, the first step on the path to employment on release is acquiring the 

right skills during their sentence. We know that, for the population as a whole, skills 
have a clear link with employment. For example, in July to September 2017, the 
employment rate for those educated to A* to C grade GCSE standard was 72% 
compared with 43% for those with no qualifications. 

19. Many prisoners enter prison with low skills. Over half of prisoners were assessed on 
reception as having the English and maths abilities of a primary school pupil. A 
survey of prisoners sentenced in 2005/06 found that only 53% had any qualifications 
at all, compared with 85% of the general population and 42% have been permanently 
excluded from school-age education. Meanwhile, more recent estimates show that 
one third self-identify as having a learning difficulty.  

20. This makes effective and relevant training vital for prisoner rehabilitation. The 
evidence shows that prison learners were significantly more likely to be in P45 
employment than non-learners one year from release. Evidence suggests that 
engaging in education in prison may reduce the likelihood of reoffending. Ipsos MORI 
research commissioned by the Ministry of Justice (MoJ) and Department for 
Education (DfE) in 2015 showed that offenders who participate in education are 
significantly less likely to reoffend within 12 months of release – 7.5 percentage 
points less likely. 

21. In Wales, prison education is a devolved matter, delivered by HMPPS Wales on 
behalf of the Welsh government. This chapter therefore focuses principally on 
England.  

Progress to date 
22. In England, we have taken steps to raise the standard and consistency of education 

and training across the prison estate.  

23. Since 2014 there have been mandatory reception assessments in maths and English 
for all prisoners, providing a baseline for their literacy and numeracy levels.  

24. In May 2016, Dame Sally Coates published an important review of prison education 
in England, commissioned by the Ministry of Justice. Since then we have made 
significant progress in taking forward her recommendations including implementing 
basic skills assessments of every prisoner at the beginning and end of their sentence 
to measure the progress they make, a common curriculum and awarding bodies for 
the most popular subjects across the whole prison estate and a commitment to 
devolve education budgets to local governors from April 2019, with the procurement 
process to deliver this now launched. The review did not cover prison education in 
Wales but the findings have informed developments.  

25. In August 2017, these assessments were also introduced for prisoners when 
transferring between prisons and when released from prison. The data resulting from 
these assessments will be considered when developing performance indicators that 
will demonstrate the progress made by prisoners in these key subject areas and help 
to drive improvements in prisons’ education strategies.  


10 

Education and Employment Strategy 

26. To further prevent disruption to prisoners’ education following prison transfers, we 
have also appointed common awarding organisations for each of the seven most 
popular subjects in prison education. These subjects include the core curriculum 
areas of maths, English, Information and Communications Technology (ICT) and 
English for Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL) as well as catering and hospitality, 
construction, planning and the built environment, and cleaning and facilities 
management. This means a prisoner who starts a qualification in one prison will be 
able to complete it at another rather than starting again as they move across the 
prison estate.  

27. Individual prisons have also built some highly effective partnerships with employers to 
deliver vocational training. The Halfords employment academies at Drake Hall and 
Onley are great examples of offenders being trained in skills that can lead to full-time 
employment on release.  

28. To enable prison governors to innovate further, they were given the chance to spend 
up to 10% of their education budget to commission provision locally in July 2017 and 
this has proved a successful precursor to greater governor empowerment. 

29. Digital delivery and support for education can reap dividends in prison. For example, 
digitally delivered in-cell learning can help engage and educate hard-to-reach and 
vulnerable prisoners. Remote access to education and training material from the 
wings of a prison could help all prisoners continue to learn during difficult regime 
periods, when it might prove hard to get them to education spaces.  

30. In the future we want to see all prisoners have the chance to access increased 
education opportunities through digital technology. Dame Sally Coates stated, as part 
of her prison education review recommendations; 

‘There should… be work carried out to accelerate the testing and use of ‘in-cell’ or 
tablet learning technology (including the capability to provide teaching via video 
links).’ 

31. Pursuing greater availability and use of technology in-cell and on wings is also of 
benefit to wider areas of prison life. Lord Farmer’s review on ‘The Importance of 
Strengthening Prisoners' Family Ties’ recommended that virtual visits (using video 
calling technology) should be available for the small percentage of families or 
individual family members who cannot visit frequently or at all due to infirmity, 
distance or other factors. Technology introduced to support education could be used 
to deliver against this recommendation and other important areas such as allowing 
prisoners greater access to pastoral resources and support from their cells and such 
like. 

32. We will continue to support projects that are testing the use of laptop and tablet 
technology, as we look forward to a system which takes full advantage of digital 
technology and uses it to improve not just a prisoner’s rehabilitation journey but also 
their wider wellbeing whilst in custody. 

33. We are also encouraging greater digital innovation from new education suppliers in 
how they deliver their services, and each has been specifically asked to detail their 
plans as part of the new education framework procurement. 

34. All digital technology development and innovation in prisons will need to adhere to 
strict security standards and testing, but we will not let this be a barrier to progress. 


11 

Education and Employment Strategy 

35. Thanks to ongoing reform and the hard work of those in the system, education in 
prisons has improved year on year. Based on inspection reports published in the 
year, Ofsted's judgement on the quality of education delivered by OLASS providers 
has improved from 51% good or outstanding in [FY] 2014–15 to 70% in 2017–18.  

36. The Ofsted Chief Inspector's annual report for [AY] 2016/17 reported the overall 
effectiveness of learning and skills and work activities (i.e. a broader judgement 
incorporating the effectiveness of the prison's leadership and management) at 56% 
good or outstanding, 16 percentage points higher than the previous year. 

37. In Wales initial assessments are delivered by the providers of education and we are 
piloting the Welsh Government’s Wales Essential Skills Toolkit at HMP Cardiff which 
assesses literacy, numeracy and digital literacy and provides resources to improve 
skills. We will consider the roll out of the online system to other prisons in Wales 
which will reduce the need to duplicate assessments when offenders transfer 
between prisons in Wales. Further developments include a strategic review to 
improve provision and links with employers working with the Regional Skills 
Partnerships in Wales.  

Challenges ahead 
38. However, whilst provision is improving, education in custody remains by far the 

lowest performer in the Further Education sector. Ofsted rated 44% of prisons as 
‘requires improvement’ or ‘inadequate’ in 2016/17.  

39. Too many prisoners are reaching the end of their sentence without securing basic 
skills in English and maths that are so vital in securing lasting employment on 
release. Importantly, education has also not been closely tailored to the requirements 
of employers or the needs of different cohorts of prisoners. As a consequence, there 
are too many low-level qualifications being delivered that reap little to no reward for 
ex-offenders when trying to secure a job. We need a prison education system that 
puts people on the path to employment on release, rather than one producing 
qualifications that lack currency in the labour market. There is more we can do to 
make sure education and training in prison lives up to this vision.  

Our approach  
40. To reform prison education in England we will: 

a. Establish consistency and minimum standards in a few key areas across the 
prison estate.  

b. Empower governors to commission the education provision most likely to meet 
employers’ requirements and prisoners’ needs.  

c. Provide the right tools and support to governors to make the best use of these 
powers.  

d. Establish a new vocational training route – the Prisoner Apprenticeship Pathway – 
for governors to make use of.  

e. Couple greater powers for governors with greater accountability for performance.  


12 

Education and Employment Strategy 

Consistency and minimum standards 
41. Consistency across the prison estate is necessary in some areas, such as 

assessment/awarding bodies, so that prisoners can move from one prison to another 
without disrupting their education.  

42. There is also a role for the centre in setting minimum standards and expectations. 
That is why we will be rolling out new mandated personal learning plans, offering a 
consistent digital format across the prison estate from which data can be collected 
and monitored to understand prisoners’ progress. Learning plans should be 
integrated where possible with other prisoner plans – notably sentence plans – to 
ensure that this is part of a coherent overall approach to the way they are managed in 
custody. 

43. Our vision is that learning plans will act as the link between aspirations, training, work 
in prisons and a job on release. They will also contribute to smooth transitions for 
prisoners between prisons, so that prisoners are not asked the same questions 
repeatedly.  

44. But there is only so much that can and should be coordinated from Whitehall. 
Governors know their own prisoners best and, given the right tools, are in the best 
position to ensure that training is relevant to the needs of employers. Giving 
governors control over education contracts also provides an opportunity to integrate 
prison education more effectively into prison regimes.  

Governor empowerment 
45. Governors in England will be fully in charge of their education provision from April 

2019. They will set the strategy, commission the providers and manage its delivery. 
Devolution of education budgets to governors will be supported by a reviewed 
funding formula which will take into account the number, type and needs of different 
prison populations. 

46. To deliver this, we launched the procurement for the new Prison Education 
Framework in England in February 2018. Once in place, groups of governors will 
choose the provider that best meets their needs and expectations in providing the 
core curriculum and those other elements of their education requirement that benefit 
from consistent delivery over a number of years. In doing so, we will ensure a tailored 
approach in each area whilst securing quality and consistent provision for their 
shared prisoners, and achieving value for money for the taxpayer. 

47. To complement the Prison Education Framework, we are developing a Dynamic 
Purchasing System (DPS) in England. This will enable governors to commission 
bespoke education in their own establishments quickly and with minimal bureaucracy. 
The DPS is a more flexible system, meaning it is highly suited to smaller suppliers, 
local and third sector organisations. This will enhance governors’ ability to find the 
training most responsive to employers’ requirements and most appropriate for 
prisoners’ learning needs.  

48. A governor will not always have to use the DPS for their specialist provision needs. If 
their main education provider can supply the required service, then they can secure it 
through them if they wish, but there will be no obligation to do so. 


13 

Education and Employment Strategy 

49. We will also significantly reduce the regulation from the centre regarding how and 
where education budgets are spent. We are in the process of reviewing the five 
education-related Prison Service Instructions (PSIs). We will strip out the proliferation 
of orders and instructions that have built up over the years. There will be a policy 
framework that replaces the PSIs for England and a separate one for Wales. They 
will be brief and state clearly the elements of service delivery that governors are duty 
bound to follow. All other suggestions and further non-mandatory requirements will 
either be deleted entirely or placed in guidance. This will give governors further 
freedom to deliver education that is focused not on compliance with rules and 
processes, but rather on getting prisoners into employment on release. 

50. The Coates Review acknowledged that the National Careers Service in England was 
delivering its services in a crowded environment, with multiple employment advice 
and support services operating in our prisons and Through the Gate. This has led to 
duplication and wasted resource.  

51. That is why we have taken the decision not to extend the current National Careers 
Service contract. By extending the National Careers Service contract further, we 
would have incurred significant costs and continued the duplication of effort in this 
area.  

52. In partnership with front line staff, we are developing a new approach which will allow 
individual governors to commission the right information, advice and guidance for 
their establishment. They will be able to consider the particular needs of their cohorts, 
the services already delivered and areas where gaps exist, and to commission 
support that plugs those gaps and joins up elements of support into a coherent 
whole.  

Tools and support 
53. We understand that governors in England will need the right tools and support to 

make the most of these new powers over education, information, advice and 
guidance.  

54. We will build the capability and capacity of governors and their teams to design their 
curriculums, navigate provider markets and manage quality services in their prisons.  

55. This will be a new way of working for governors and in a specialist area with which 
many may not be familiar. We will make sure they have the support and training they 
need to make the most of this new empowered approach, focusing especially on 
giving access to the expertise needed to guide them through the commissioning 
process. Expert commercial advice will be available centrally to enable governors to 
assess options and then decide which commissioning model best suits their needs. 
This means governors will be supported as they plan and then commission their 
education provision. 

56. We will also do more to help governors understand what employers are looking for 
from prison education.  

57. The New Futures Network (NFN), described in Chapter 3, will be a key source of 
intelligence for governors about the requirements of employers in different sectors. 
NFN experts, placed in every geographical prison group across England and Wales, 
will be responsible for engaging employers and brokering partnerships with prisons. 


14 

Education and Employment Strategy 

They will feed back key messages about the skills and qualifications that particular 
employers are looking for.  

58. NFN will also make use of EMSI, a labour market data tool. EMSI draws together a 
range of government data sets to produce labour market information and trends 
which can be broken down by sector and geographical area. For example, it can 
identify which sectors provide the most employment in a particular area, how 
employment in those sectors breaks down by occupational code and what the typical 
wages and qualifications for those jobs are. All this will help governors develop a 
clear picture of employers’ requirements, ensuring that they commission the training 
best suited to meeting those needs.  

Prisoner Apprenticeship Pathway 
59. A further tool available to governors in England and Wales, to help them link training 

with employment opportunities, will be the Prisoner Apprenticeship Pathway (PAP). 
The PAP will be an alternative means of getting a qualification and work experience 
while in custody. The formal 12-month apprenticeship on release will give the 
prisoner the chance to have a long period of resettlement in the community with a 
guaranteed job and a guaranteed income.  

60. The Pathway will be targeted at specific sectors, where there are staff and skills 
shortages, such as the construction industry. The greater powers being devolved to 
prison governors will help ensure that training is sufficiently tailored to the 
requirements of employers in these sectors.  

61. In Wales governors are required to work with the Regional Skills Partnerships who 
have employer links and develop annual partnership plans with labour market 
information which can inform the curriculum and employment on release. 

62. The development of the Pathway has been met with enthusiasm and support from 
prisoners, governors, employers, industry bodies and third sector organisations. We 
are also working with HMPPS Wales to build on the opportunities presented by the 
Welsh Government’s wider strategy for Apprenticeships in Wales. 

63. The first Pathway began at HMP Feltham in July 2017. Pathways in Wales based on 
construction and logistics are being developed where the nature of the funding 
regime provides different opportunities. 

64. The Prisoner Apprenticeship Pathway will be another option available to empowered 
governors to offer opportunities to prisoners and employers to have high-quality jobs 
and high-quality employees.  


15 

Education and Employment Strategy 

Case study: Prisoner Apprenticeship Pathway at Feltham 
The Prisoner Apprenticeship Pathway at Feltham was previously run by Carillion and 
has since been adopted by Gov Facility Services Limited (GFSL), the new government-
owned facilities management company. The Pathway is based on progression from 
vocational training into work placements with the facilities management team at 
Feltham. This allows prisoners to apply the skills that they are learning at the same time 
as contributing to decent, well-functioning prisons – for example by playing a role in 
maintenance and repair work in the prison. As a result, the Pathway is already 
delivering a number of benefits, including: 

a. Improving decency in prisons with better decorated and cleaner living environments 
with potential to reduce levels of vandalism. 

b. Increasing purposeful activity and time out of cell with prisoners engaged within a 
real working environment. 

c. Supporting prisoners’ rehabilitation through enhancing their employability and 
self-esteem. 


 

Accountability 
65. To match the greater powers and support being provided to governors in England, 

there will be greater accountability.  

66. We are working on a system to intervene if education in individual prisons is not 
meeting expected standards.  

67. The triggers for intervention will be performance data and indicators (both national 
and contractual), and external scrutiny by the inspectorates. The new system will 
offer different interventions based upon local intelligence and the severity of the 
issue. This approach will differentiate between long-term problems and shorter-term 
performance dips.  

68. We expect intervention to range from simple conversations to understand local 
issues, (such as governors who are new in post inheriting poorly performing 
provision) to requiring and monitoring formal improvement and rectification plans or 
more hands-on approaches such as embedding temporary educational support staff 
in prisons.  

69. Performance management of individual prisons will be supplemented by national 
leadership, coordination and guidance. This will manage risk, recognise and respond 
swiftly to any developing national trends, and make links between patterns in different 
prisons. 

70. We will set out more detail on this approach in due course.  


16 

Education and Employment Strategy 

Conclusion 
71. This chapter has set out our approach to ensuring that prison education reflects the 

requirements of employers and the needs of prisoners, so that it can best contribute 
to employment outcomes on release.  

72. The next chapter addresses the role of work during prisoners’ sentences in setting 
them on a pathway to employment on release. 


 17 

Education and Employment Strategy 

Chapter 2: Prison work 

Chapter summary 
Work is a key part of a successful prison. It provides purposeful activity, giving structure 
and meaning to prisoners’ days, which contributes to more stable prison environments. 
The work done by prisoners also helps prisons function efficiently.  

At best, work done by prisoners during their sentences also helps develop many of the 
skills and attributes needed on release, from a work ethic to vocational skills. 

Work within the prison walls can and should be complimented by placements in real 
workplaces, including through Release on Temporary Licence (ROTL) where appropriate 
Workplace ROTL gives prisoners a chance to prove they are skilled, hardworking and 
trustworthy.  

New research just published by the Ministry of Justice strongly suggests that there is a 
beneficial impact from prisoners going out to work on ROTL and supports what previous 
evidence had long suggested about the benefits of temporary release in terms of reducing 
reoffending and improving employment outcomes. 

We have taken steps to increase the number of prisoners working during their sentences. 
In 2016, over 11,000 prisoners at one time worked in ‘prison industries’ within the walls of 
prisons. They deliver on contracts for commercial companies and other government 
departments. A further 13,000 worked to provide ‘prison services’, such as cleaning prison 
wings or cooking in prison kitchens.  

This work has provided purposeful activity and helped prisons run efficiently. However, 
more needs to be done to ensure that work done in prison contributes directly to 
employment on release. Prisoners need to gain the kind of experience that employers are 
looking for. This requires a clear link between prison work and employment opportunities 
on release.  

Meanwhile, the number of ROTL placements has fallen in recent years, limiting the ability 
of prisoners – when properly risk assessed – to gain experience in real workplaces during 
their sentence. Our vision is that when an offender enters prison they are immediately put 
on a path to employment on release.  

To ensure prison work contributes as effectively as possible to this we will:  

a. Develop a new approach, through a partnership with The Clink, to link work done in 
prison services, such as cooking in prison kitchens, with employment on release.  

b. Consult governors and employers on proposals to increase the opportunities available 
to prisoners to gain experience in real workplaces through ROTL.  


 

Prison work 
73. Work is a key part of a successful prison, serving a number of important functions. At 

the most basic level, work provides prisoners with purposeful activity. Whether it is 
work in ‘prison industries’ (delivering contracts for commercial companies or 


18 

Education and Employment Strategy 

government departments) or ‘prison services’ (helping prisons themselves function), it 
gives structure and meaning to prisoners’ days.  

74. Getting prisoners out of their cells to work in prison is therefore an important element 
of our drive to improve prisoners’ mental and physical health, reduce drug use and 
cut violence in prisons.  

75. The work done by prisoners also helps prisons function efficiently. In providing prison 
services, prisoners have roles in everything from cleaning wings and fixing windows 
to cooking meals and working as prison barbers.  

76. This work in prison services limits the cost of prison to the taxpayer. It also allows 
funding to be spent on other priorities in individual prisons, such as security 
measures or offender behaviour programmes, which tackle the root causes of 
offending.  

77. The most important role of prison work is to prepare prisoners for employment on 
release. Around two thirds of prisoners were unemployed before entering custody 
and therefore may not have good employment records to recommend them to 
employers on release.  

78. As a result, prison has an important role to play in developing the skills and work 
ethic that employers are looking for. Employers expect people to be reliable, 
cooperative and disciplined in a workplace setting, as well as equipped with the 
vocational skills required in their industry. Work in prison, either through prison 
industries or prison services, can help prisoners build these capabilities.  

79. Work placements with employers outside the prison walls, through ROTL, take this a 
stage further. Workplace ROTL – subject to proper risk assessment – gives prisoners 
the chance to apply their skills and prove they are hardworking and trustworthy.  

80. In some instances, workplace ROTL can encourage employers to recruit ex-prisoners 
on release, having got to know them during their sentences. In other instances, they 
help prisoners without much experience acquire essential references to take to other 
employers.  

81. Research just published by the Ministry of Justice indicates that, for prisoners given 
at least one ROTL, additional releases were associated with small but significant 
reductions in rates of reoffending and frequency of re-offences. This research is the 
first large scale study of the impact of temporary release in England and Wales. The 
analysis included data on over 1.5 million temporary releases involving over 23,000 
offenders.  

82. These findings strongly suggest that there is a beneficial impact from workplace 
ROTL. They support what previous evidence had suggested about the benefits of 
temporary release in reducing reoffending and improving employment outcomes. 


19 

Education and Employment Strategy 

Progress to date 
83. Over the last two parliaments there has been a renewed emphasis on getting 

prisoners working during their sentence.  

84. In 2012, ONE3ONE Solutions was created as a part of Her Majesty’s Prison and 
Probation Service (HMPPS), to increase the commercial work done by prisoners in 
prison industries. It has made important strides – in 2010/11 just 7,500 prisoners 
were employed in workshops, compared with over 11,000 employed in workshops 
today. These prisoners work for businesses in a range of industries, from call centres 
to manufacturing workshops.  

85. In addition to the work done nationally by ONE3ONE solutions, prisons also build 
their own links with local employers, providing work for prison industries in their 
establishments or workplace ROTL. In total, a third of prisoners now work in either 
prison industries or prison services.  

86. Many prisons also now run peer support schemes where designated prisoners deliver 
activity-based support either part-time or full-time to their peers, for example to 
support education and learning. We recognise the potential value of this work and so 
have equipped prison staff with a practical toolkit to help them make the most of this 
approach. The toolkit highlights the need for thorough peer worker training and 
details how staff can better link schemes, and any skills acquired, to work on release. 

87. We also recognise that getting prisoners working requires a well-functioning prison 
regime, with prisoners moved safely between cells and workshops – and being 
properly supervised while they are there. This process places demands on governors’ 
resources.  

88. The recruitment of 2,500 new prison staff across England and Wales will provide 
governors with greater capacity to deliver this. We are now nine months ahead of 
target on appointing those prison officers. The new officers will help deliver prison 
regimes that get prisoners working during their sentences.  

Challenges ahead 
89. Work in prisons has played an important role both in providing purposeful activity and 

in helping prisons function efficiently, but much more can be done to link work done 
during prison sentences with employment opportunities on release. 

90. For example, around 300 businesses already work with prisons to provide work in 
prison industries through ONE3ONE Solutions. However, ONE3ONE was established 
primarily to get prisoners working in prison, rather than to focus on employment on 
release. The work brought into prisons needs to be linked with a strategy to get 
prisoners into sustained employment at the end of custodial sentences.  

91. In particular, there is untapped potential in the work that thousands of prisoners do to 
deliver prison services. These prisoners are gaining daily experience, doing work like 
cooking, cleaning or working as prison barbers, but not enough has been done to 
supplement this with the specific training that employers in those industries are 
looking for. Nor have prisoners working in these roles been steered towards 
workplace ROTL that broaden their experience and enhance their CVs in those 
industries. 


20 

Education and Employment Strategy 

92. ROTL numbers have fallen by over a third between 2013 and 2017, producing nearly 
200,000 fewer releases involving 4,000 fewer prisoners, preventing prisoners from 
gaining vital work experience with employers beyond the prison walls. We need to 
make sure that, where the risk to the public is low, more prisoners are gaining work 
experience through workplace ROTL.  

93. Women remain almost twice as likely to be allowed ROTL than men but have also 
found it difficult to access ROTL recently. We want to see more women taking ROTL 
to the workplace and to maintain family ties.  

Our approach  
94. To ensure prison work contributes as effectively as possible to this we will:  

a. Develop a new approach, through a partnership with The Clink, to link work done 
in prison services, such as cooking in prison kitchens, with employment on 
release.  

b. Consult governors and employers on proposals to increase the opportunities 
available to prisoners to gain experience in real workplaces through ROTL.  

The Clink partnership 
95. Linking the work that prisoners do in prison services to employment opportunities on 

release will require experimentation and learning. To support this process of 
innovation, we are adopting a new approach at HMP Bristol, HMP Styal and HMP 
Risley, in partnership with The Clink.  

96. The Clink is a charity which supports prisoners into employment on release by 
training them in catering whilst in custody. Four public Clink restaurants already 
operate in prisons across the UK at HMP High Down, HMP Styal, HMP Brixton and 
HMP Cardiff. Prisoners staff the restaurants, including working in the kitchens and 
serving paying customers. Each prisoner works and trains for 40 hours per week. In 
February 2018 The Clink restaurant at Brixton was rated as the twelfth best 
restaurant in London on Trip Advisor and the Clink is rated as the number one 
restaurant in Cardiff.  

97. The Clink trains up to 160 offenders a day, with more than 800 offenders having gone 
through its programme. It operates a five-step rehabilitation model: 

a. Training, verified by the Clink.  

b. Work experience, facilitated in the prison kitchen.  

c. A workplace ROTL placement at one of the 300 Clink partners in the catering 
industry.  

d. Employment on release, brokered by the Clink.  

e. Mentoring support, delivered by the Clink and supported financially by the 
Community Rehabilitation Company (CRC).   

Analysis suggests its model reduces the likelihood of reoffending by between 3 and 
15 percentage points.  

98. The partnership at HMP Bristol, HMP Styal and HMP Risley seeks to apply key 
elements of this approach to the work that prisoners do working in prison kitchens.  


21 

Education and Employment Strategy 

99. These prisons have applied the Clink model within prison kitchens (the biggest 
employment area in prisons – 2,000 people a day in work) to provide a direct route 
into the contract catering industry for ex-prisoners on release.  

100. In the partnership, instructors are placed in prison kitchens. The instructors train 
prisoners while they work, adding supplementary training at the end of the day and 
then accrediting learning. The Clink then arrange for a workplace ROTL placement in 
the catering industry and, where possible, employment on release. Prisoners will be 
supported through this process by a mentor.  

101. If successful, this model may be replicable for other roles and sectors. In particular, 
there is an opportunity for many more prisoners to receive training while they work in 
prison services, coupled with proper accreditation and opportunities to gain further 
experience through workplace ROTL. The model has the potential to build clear 
pathways from the work that prisoners are doing during custodial sentences to 
opportunities in the job market on release. 

Work on ROTL 
102. The Clink partnership exemplifies the value of workplace ROTL, as do some of the 

individual stories below. We have considered the impact of the changes made to 
ROTL since 2013 and concluded that some of the unintended consequences they 
produced must be addressed in order to make the most of the benefits ROTL brings. 

ROTL Case studies 
Yasmin used workplace ROTL to start work at an Engineering firm in the West Midlands 
and since release has successfully applied for an apprenticeship and started full time 
work. She is currently studying for a BTEC level 3 in Engineering and hoping to study 
for a degree.  Yasmin feels that finding work on release has given her a positive 
attitude, leading to positive outcomes. 

Mikey works for Balfour Beatty and started out on workplace ROTL meaning he had 
three months under his belt before being released, so could hit the ground running His 
advice to others given the opportunity to work on ROTL is to “Grab it with both hands”. 

Lauren started working with Greggs on ROTL and, following release is now aiming to 
become a senior manager and start to save for herself and her daughter. She said that 
without this opportunity, she would have struggled to find a job. As well as the skills 
Greggs gave her in food preparation, baking, stock management and cash handling, 
she gained confidence to interact positively with the public. 


 

103. Alongside this strategy we are consulting governors and employers on making 

changes to ROTL practice. We are clear that no changes will be made to operational 
policy that undermine the quality of risk assessment and suitability processes that 
protect the public. Instead, the aim of the proposals is to enhance governors’ 
discretion – in line with the rest of this strategy – and to improve access to ROTL 
within a robust risk assessment framework. 


22 

Education and Employment Strategy 

Opportunities in priority sectors 
Workplace ROTL will be an important tool for building ‘win-win’ partnerships with 
employers in priority sectors such as catering, construction and agriculture/horticulture. 
For prisoners, workplace ROTL is a chance to develop their skills, boost their CV and 
make an impression on potential employers. As such, it is a key tool for prisoner 
rehabilitation. For employers, these placements provide an opportunity to evaluate the 
skills and work ethic of the prisoners involved. When successful, this can help fill skills 
gaps, or labour shortages in the short-term, while developing potential employees in the 
longer term.  

The benefits of workplace ROTL are magnified when they are linked to work and 
training already being done by prisoners within prison walls. For example, there are 
already around 2,000 prisoners working daily in prison kitchens. A number of prisons 
are also investing in equipment to train prisoners as baristas. Many of the prisoners 
involved have skills that could be put to use and developed further through workplace 
ROTL placements in the catering industry. ROTL placements then have the potential to 
develop into job opportunities where individuals can demonstrate they have the skills 
and aptitudes that employers are looking for.  

Similarly, the prison estate retains commercial horticulture work in over 30 prisons 
across the country, so many prisoners already have skills useful for horticultural work. 
The core work for commercial horticulture in the estate is the production of salad crops 
using polythene tunnels or greenhouses, vegetables in open ground, annual bedding 
plants or nursery stock production. This also provides scope for win-win partnerships 
with employers in the sector, starting with ROTL placements, which may contribute to 
filling skills gaps for employers, whilst contributing to prisoners’ rehabilitation into 
society.  

The proposed reforms to ROTL, outlined in this chapter, would be of benefit to this 
initiative, once implemented, as will the greater flexibility for governors to tailor 
education provision in their establishments.  


 

Conclusion 
104. This chapter has focused on work done by prisoners during their sentences. It has 

set out how we will ensure that work in prisons does not just help prisons function 
efficiently, or provide prisoners with purposeful activity, but actively contribute 
towards employment on release.  

105. The next chapter turns to how we create those opportunities on release and ensure 
that ex-prisoners are in the best position possible to take them.  


 23 

Education and Employment Strategy 

Chapter 3: Employment on release 

Chapter summary 
At the heart of this strategy is the recognition that employment on release is a key 
component of a prisoner’s rehabilitation. We also recognise that the job of delivering this 
does not stop at the prison gate. Ex-prisoners need supervision and support that is 
coherent and effective, particularly when they face multiple problems in their lives. 
Working with ex-prisoners is also only half the job. Employers in all sectors are also key 
partners – and must be persuaded that employing ex-prisoners will benefit their 
businesses.  

We have taken important steps to engage businesses and ensure that ex-prisoners 
receive the right supervision on release.  

We already work closely with business-led organisations such as the Employers Forum 
for Reducing Reoffending (EFFRR), which supports businesses considering employing 
offenders. We have also supported the Ban the Box initiative, including adopting it across 
the civil service.  

Alongside our efforts to engage and persuade businesses to employ ex-offenders, we 
have also reformed the way we manage prisoners when they are released from custody. 
This includes mandating a minimum of 12 months supervision for all ex-prisoners on their 
release and establishing the Through the Gate model of resettlement support, provided by 
Community Rehabilitation Companies during the last 12 weeks of a custodial sentence.  

However, many employers are still sceptical, at best, about recruiting ex-prisoners to work 
for them at the end of their sentences. There are also challenges in the way we support 
and supervise ex-offenders themselves on release, which affect the chances of an 
individual desisting from crime and holding down a job. Despite the recent focus on 
Through the Gate provision, there is still too much fragmentation between prisons, 
probation services and other services.  

This strategy marks a step change in our engagement with employers and a renewed 
focus on effective, coherent supervision of prisoners on release. We will: 

a. Recruit ex-prisoners directly into the civil service, providing jobs and leading by 
example to other employers. 

b. Consider how to take forward a NICs holiday alongside wider work on employer 
obligations and incentives.  

c. Launch the New Futures Network (NFN) to engage and persuade employers to take 
on ex-prisoners, with experts placed in every geographical prison group in a phased 
roll-out across England and Wales. 

d. Work with DWP to explore ways to deliver enhancements to the current benefit claim 
process so that ex-prisoners have easier access to financial support on the day of 
release where needed. 

e. Provide incentives for prisons and NPS/CRCs to work together more effectively in the 
future on employment on release.  


24 

Education and Employment Strategy 

Employment on release 
106. At the heart of this strategy is the recognition that employment on release is a key 

component of a prisoner’s rehabilitation. Work provides people with an income, but it 
reaps more benefit than just that. It also establishes a daily routine, boosts self-
esteem, and gives people a stake in society. It is no surprise that those ex-prisoners 
who find work on release are less likely to reoffend than those who do not. 

107. We also recognise that the job of delivering this does not stop at the prison gate. 
Ex-prisoners need supervision and support that is coherent and effective, particularly 
when they face multiple problems in their lives. Finding and keeping hold of a job is 
far easier if probation services and others can help ex-prisoners stay off drugs, 
manage mental health problems or find suitable accommodation.  

108. Working with ex-prisoners is only half the job. Employers in all sectors are also key 
partners, and must be persuaded that employing prisoners will make a contribution 
not just to society but to their own bottom line. This requires advocacy and 
persuasion in some cases, as well as the infrastructure to make sure that prisoners 
leave prison with the skills that employers are looking for. The NFN lead for Wales 
will be able to use the Regional Skills Partnerships to support engagement with 
employers.  

Progress to date 

Business-to-business advice 
109. Businesses say that advice from other businesses is vital in helping them understand 

both the challenges and opportunities that come with employing ex-offenders. These 
business-to-business relationships can be a key source of impartial advice, allowing 
organisations to learn from the experiences of others. They can help put perceived 
risks in context and provide reassurance where necessary.  

110. To reflect this, MoJ and HMPPS have long-standing relationships with non-statutory 
partners, including the Employers Forum for Reducing Reoffending (EFFRR) and 
Business in the Community (BITC).  

111. As an independent, business-led organisation, EFFRR pairs businesses considering 
employing ex-offenders with those who already do so. Its members include DHL, 
Halfords, Sodexo, Marks & Spencer and Greggs. BITC also provides a peer support 
structure for businesses, through its Reducing Reoffending Network.  

Ban the Box 
112. BITC has also led the national campaign to Ban the Box. This campaign, supported 

by the Government, encourages employers to remove the tick box from application 
forms which ask about criminal convictions, instead addressing this later in the 
recruitment process. This approach gives ex-offenders the chance to demonstrate 
relevant skills and experience ahead of formally disclosing any convictions. 

113. The Government recognises the importance of leading by example in this area. The 
Ban the Box campaign was formally launched across the Civil Service on the 17th 
October 2016, with 380,000 roles (97%) identified as suitable for the removal of the 


25 

Education and Employment Strategy 

'box' that asks about criminal convictions at the initial stages of the recruitment 
process. The MoJ has already banned the box. 

114. The Civil Service Jobs system, which is used for approximately 70% of recruitment in 
the Civil Service, has been designed to remove the box asking about criminal 
convictions from application forms as standard. The Civil Service is now 
implementing this initiative to ensure its roles attract the widest possible range of 
applicants.  

115. We are also seeing progress on Ban the Box with local authorities. Bristol City 
Council has recently decided to Ban the Box. We will work with the Ministry of 
Housing, Communities & Local Government to encourage all local authorities to do 
the same. 

116. In addition, Cabinet Office will launch a Call for Evidence about employing people 
with a criminal record. The Call for Evidence will invite other employers, organisations 
and individuals to detail how they support people with a criminal conviction to find 
work. The purpose of the Call for Evidence will be to map the range of initiatives 
already undertaken by employers and identify those having evidence of a significant 
impact.  

117. In total, more than 90 employers across the public and private sectors, covering more 
than 720,000 roles, have committed to creating fair employment opportunities for ex-
offenders. This includes Boots, Interserve and Ricoh.  

118. Signing up to Ban the Box has given many employers access to diverse, untapped 
talent that they may not have considered previously. Over 10 million people in the UK 
have a criminal record and the Lammy Review of the treatment of, and outcomes for, 
Black and Ethnic Minority (BAME) Individuals, argued that criminal records checks 
may provide additional stigma for that cohort.  

Managing ex-offenders 
119. Alongside our efforts to engage and persuade businesses to employ ex-offenders, we 

have also reformed the way we manage prisoners when they are released from 
custody.  

120. Until 2014, probation services in England and Wales were delivered by local 
Probation Trusts. Under this system, although prisoners serving sentences of a year 
or more received supervision from probation officers on release, those serving 
sentences of less than a year did not.  

121. Given the high reoffending rates of ex-prisoners serving short sentences, the 2014 
Offender Rehabilitation Act altered the Government’s approach. It mandated a 
minimum of 12 months supervision for all ex-prisoners on release from prison, no 
matter the length of their sentence. The reform reflected the fact that many 
ex-prisoners who have served short sentences also face multiple problems in their 
lives, which need to be managed closely with the right supervision and support.  

122. At the same time, prison and probation services were reorganised. 89 prisons were 
designated resettlement prisons, with a target that 80% of prisoners would spend the 
final three months of their prison sentences in them. CRCs are now expected to 


26 

Education and Employment Strategy 

provide resettlement services to these prisoners in the final 12 weeks of their 
sentences, as part of a Through the Gate model.  

123. For example, Kent, Surrey and Sussex have secured a number of partnerships with 
employers willing to provide opportunities to ex-offenders. To support these 
partnerships, the Kent, Surrey and Sussex CRC has agreed to support a job club, 
running for 10 sessions. This Through the Gate service will be facilitated by 
Education, Training and Employment Coaches, provided by the CRC. At the job club, 
prisoners will benefit from supervised e-access to job sites, space for CV writing, 
disclosure advice, interview preparation and training in skills for work such as 
communication, time-keeping and relationship management.  

124. The Through the Gate model includes working with ex-offenders to develop a 
resettlement plan which seeks to address accommodation, education, training and 
employment, as well as finance, debt and benefits. On release, the NPS supervises 
high risk ex-offenders, while CRCs manage those classified as lower risk.  

125. Finding and keeping a job is far easier if an ex-prisoner is in suitable accommodation. 
The Government has committed to ending rough sleeping by 2027 and will be 
publishing a strategy in July 2018 setting out how it will achieve this ambitious target. 
As part of the strategy we will also be working with the Ministry of Housing, 
Communities, and Local Government to explore how best to support ex-offenders 
with their accommodation needs as they are released from prison. 

Challenges ahead 
126. However, despite these efforts we recognise that significant challenges remain. Many 

employers are still sceptical, at best, about recruiting ex-prisoners to work for them at 
the end of their sentences. A YouGov study revealed that 50% of employers would 
not even consider employing an ex-offender.  

127. The YouGov study found that employers were concerned about ex-offenders’ social 
skills, their work and capability skills and the reputational risk to their businesses. Yet, 
we know from employers such as Timpson that the ex-offenders they have employed 
are some of their most loyal and committed employees. There is more we must do to 
promote ex-offenders as a reliable workforce and make the process of hiring ex-
offenders more straightforward. 

128. There are also challenges in the way we support and supervise ex-offenders 
themselves on release, which affect the chances of an individual desisting from crime 
and holding down a job. Despite the recent focus on Through the Gate provision, 
there is still too much fragmentation between prisons, probation services and other 
services. In some cases, CRCs themselves need to improve, with Through-the-Gate 
services not meeting our expectations. 

129. This strategy marks a step change in our engagement with employers – and a 
renewed focus on effective, coherent supervision of ex-prisoners on release. We will: 

a. Recruit ex-prisoners directly into the civil service, providing jobs and acting as a 
role model for other employers. 

b. We will consider how to take forward a NICs holiday alongside wider work on 
employer obligations and incentives.  


27 

Education and Employment Strategy 

c. Use the national infrastructure of the New Futures Network (NFN) to engage and 
persuade employers to take on ex-prisoners across England and Wales. 

d. Work with DWP to explore ways to deliver enhancements to the current benefit 
claim process so that ex-prisoners have easier access to financial support on the 
day of release where needed.  

e. Ensure that prisons and NPS/CRCs work together more seamlessly, by 
sharpening and aligning accountability for ex-prisoners’ employment on release.  

Our approach 

Civil service recruitment 
130. The Civil Service has led by example on Ban the Box and will continue to do so 

through ‘Going Forward Into Employment’, an ex-offender recruitment pilot. Under 
this pilot scheme, which was introduced this year, government departments will place 
ex-offenders into fixed-term office-based roles. Ex-offenders will be matched to jobs 
by prison staff, Civil Service local and the Going Forward Into Employment board. 
The job matches will be based on the skills and experience of the ex-offenders for 
each available role. 

131. Where ex-offenders are brought into the Civil Service under a specific exception to 
the standard approach of fair and open recruitment, it is proposed that temporary 
roles could be converted to permanent positions 12 months after the original 
appointment. This would need to be done on the basis of a fair and merit-based 
process, approved in advance by the Civil Service Commission.  

132. The pilot is being launched on a small scale in the North West, before the model is 
rolled out to other regions throughout 2018. We will formally review the pilot and, if it 
is successful and the decision is taken to proceed, we propose to take a staggered 
approach to this initiative – starting relatively small and building up in the same 
manner as the government apprenticeship scheme which posted 100 apprentices 
across the civil service in its first year, before increasing to larger numbers in 
subsequent years.  

133. Ten Government departments or agencies have agreed to support the pilot initiative 
including MoJ, Cabinet Office and HMRC.  

134. During the pilot, ex-offenders will be placed into jobs at a variety of grades, 
dependent on their skills and experience. A variety of roles have been proposed by 
departments. We will also examine what more can be done to encourage similar 
practice in government supply chains. 

Financial incentives 
135. One approach used in other countries to encourage more ex-offenders into 

employment is to offer financial incentives to employers. In the United States (US) for 
example, The Work Opportunity Tax Credit is a Federal tax credit available to 
employers who hire individuals from particular groups that face significant barriers to 
employment, including ex-felons. Evidence from the US indicates that this kind of 
financial incentive can have positive effects on the probability of individuals finding 
jobs, the length of employment once in work and the wages.  


28 

Education and Employment Strategy 

136. Also in the US, there are state-backed insurance policies designed to promote the 
employment of key groups, including ex-offenders. The Federal Bonding Program, 
sponsored by the Department for Labor, issues fidelity bonds. These bonds provide 
insurance to protect employers against theft, forgery, larceny, or embezzlement by an 
employee covered by the bond. The insurance is designed to mitigate the perceived 
risk of employing people from the target groups. The bonds are free of charge to both 
the applicant and the employer for 6 months. They can be issued for jobs in all states.  

137. In the UK, the Work and Pensions select committee has recommended that the 
government should pilot incentives, using the tax system and public procurement for 
employers to take on ex-prisoners. This is a proposal that has been supported by 
leading employers. Meanwhile, the 2017 Conservative manifesto proposed a 
one-year holiday on Employer National Insurance Contributions for firms employing 
people who have committed a crime but repaid their debt to society. 

138. We recognise the argument in favour of financial incentives and will balance this 
against wider government objectives. We will consider how to take forward a NICs 
holiday alongside wider work on employer obligations and incentives.  

New Futures Network 
139. ONE3ONE Solutions was established in 2012 with ‘a mission to increase the 

productive, commercial work of prisoners.’ The New Futures Network (NFN) will 
replace ONE3ONE Solutions. It will have a broader remit, a new approach and 
different structure.  

140. NFN will have an explicit remit to broker partnerships between prisons and employers 
that create opportunities for ex-prisoners on release, in addition to delivering 
purposeful activity in prison. As such, it will be judged not just on whether more 
commercial companies provide work through prison industries, or whether more 
prisoners are engaged in a full working week – vital though those things are. In 
addition, it will be judged on the proportion of ex-prisoners entering employment on 
release and then staying in work.  

141. This change in remit will mean that partnerships with private sector employers, or 
other government departments, will now also be judged through the prism of whether 
they are doing something useful for ex-prisoners in the long-term.  

142. To support this approach, NFN will identify priority sectors to engage with. Priority 
sectors will be selected annually based on three factors: 

a. Labour market information, including the number of jobs in different sectors and 
the education level, or qualifications required, in those sectors.  

b. An analysis of prison infrastructure, focusing on the capacity of the prison estate 
to provide prison work and high-quality training in those same sectors.  

c. Consideration of the sectors likely to present the fewest legal or bureaucratic 
barriers to ex-prisoners’ employment, including those related to criminal record 
checks and safeguarding.  


29 

Education and Employment Strategy 

143. NFN’s priority sectors will be reviewed annually as the labour market changes and 
the prison estate and prison population evolve. In NFN’s first year, the five priority 
sectors will be: 

a. Retail  

b. Catering/hospitality 

c. Construction  

d. Manufacturing  

e. Agriculture/horticulture. 

144. We believe these sectors present ‘win-win’ opportunities to fill skills gaps and labour 
shortages for employers, whilst finding sustainable employment for ex-prisoners (see 
box below). NFN will be open to working with employers of all sizes and from all 
sectors but the focus on a few key sectors will ensure that employer outreach is 
targeted at those most likely to be disposed towards partnerships with prisons. This 
sector-driven approach will also provide a guide as to which workers guilds and trade 
unions to prioritise building relationships with. 

145. A key difference in the NFN approach is that it will seek to link employers with the 
work prisoners do to deliver prison services. For example, where prisoners are 
already spending a working week cooking or cleaning to keep the prison functioning – 
as is the case in virtually every adult prison – NFN will engage employers in the 
catering and cleaning industries. It will explore how the thousands of prisoners doing 
daily work in prison services could be supplemented with training, or work 
placements on ROTL in relevant industries. Where ONE3ONE focused specifically on 
securing commercial contracts from prison industries, NFN will build on all the work 
done within the prison walls, covering both prison industries and prison services. 

146. The way in which NFN will be structured will be vital in engaging and persuading 
enough employers to enter into those partnerships. 

147. To provide a credible voice within its five priority sectors, a champion will be 
appointed to act as an advisor and ambassador to the network. These champions will 
be drawn from leading employers in each of the five sectors. They will help spread 
NFN’s key messages and support the NFN to network effectively within the sector.  

148. NFN will be established as an England and Wales network rather than one 
commissioned by individual governors. This reflects the ‘network effect’ of the service 
it is providing – the wider the network, the more useful it is to individual prisons. For 
example, a prison in Norfolk releasing prisoners into Portsmouth will now be 
connected to employers in that area through the national network.  

149. To provide geographical reach, NFN will operate a ‘hub and spoke’ model. The hub 
will be a team operating nationally, contacting large employers and coordinating the 
work of the network as a whole.  

150. The spokes in the network will be placed in each of the new geographical prison 
groups, in a phased roll-out across England and Wales, beginning in three areas. 
Their role will be to contact local/regional employers and follow up on contacts 
generated by the national hub. They will broker partnerships between prisons and 
employers, having engaged employers and fully understood their requirements. In 


30 

Education and Employment Strategy 

Wales the lead will be able to use the Regional Skills Partnerships to support 
engagement with employers.  

151. NFN will make the case to employers that they should consider employing 
ex-prisoners on release. It will then work through the details of what a partnership 
with one or more prison could look like, based on the requirements of employers and 
the capacity of prisons to meet those requirements. 

152. NFN will make use of EMSI, a labour market data tool procured by HMPPS. EMSI 
draws together data from a range of government data sets to produce labour market 
information and trends which can be broken down by sector and geographical area. 
For example, it can identify which sectors provide the most employment in an area, 
how employment in those sectors breaks down by occupational code and what 
typical wages and qualifications required for those jobs are. The tool also identifies 
leading employers in each sector, broken down by geography. This data tool will 
provide key intelligence for both the national hub and regional spokes.  

153. Given the place-based role of the spokes – building relationships with employers in 
their areas – they will serve all adult prisons in those areas, including the long-
term/high security estate and the female estate. 

154. NFN will focus specifically on brokering partnerships between prisons and employers, 
but it will coordinate closely with other services. For example, it will provide feedback 
to prisons and training providers about the specific training that employers are looking 
for. It will ensure that DWP work coaches in prisons are aware of the opportunities 
likely to be available to prisoners so that they can link advice to likely opportunities 
and it will also work to ensure that CRCs and probation services are aware of job 
placements for ex-prisoners on release, so that they can best supervise and support 
the individuals involved.  

Welfare 
155. A key source of support for job seekers is the welfare system. A fundamental 

principle is that it must always pay to work – and Universal Credit (UC) is at the heart 
of the Government’s approach to this. UC marks a complete shift in the whole nature 
of Welfare by providing incentive and support to people to secure a better future for 
themselves and their families. 

156. UC enables people to lift themselves and their children out of poverty. UC claimants 
spend more time looking for work, move into work quicker, are more likely to be in 
work, spend more time in work and earn more than their counterparts on Jobseekers 
Allowance. 

157. At present DWP Prison Work Coaches provide support to prisoners prior to their 
release to make their claim to benefits. This includes support in gathering all the 
details and documentation needed to make their Universal Credit claim and booking 
an appointment at the local jobcentre on the day of release so they can complete 
their claim and access financial support immediately through advance payments. 
Recent changes to Universal Credit means all claimants, including prison leavers can 
apply for an advance payment of up to 100% of their expected monthly entitlement 
from day one of their claim. 


31 

Education and Employment Strategy 

158. Given prisoners cannot typically access the internet and as Universal Credit Full 
Service is a digital benefit, they currently cannot make an advance claim on the 
Universal Credit system prior to their release from prison.  

159. We are working closely with colleagues in DWP to explore ways to deliver 
enhancements to the current benefit claim service with the aim of ensuring prison 
leavers have easier access to financial support on the day of release where needed. 
This work sits within the context of a wider national partnership agreement that we 
will establish with the DWP, which sets out clear roles and responsibilities for the 
various bodies involved in getting more ex-prisoners into employment in the future 
across England and Wales. 

Probation 
160. Prison and probation services must work together effectively if they are to provide 

effective supervision of prisoners on release, particularly when those prisoners face 
multiple problems in their lives.  

161. Our aim is to ensure that prison and probation services, both NPS and CRCs, are 
more integrated in providing education and employment services to ex-offenders. 
Accountability for prisoners’ employment on release is an important aspect of this.  

162. We will collect data to track prisoners’ employment on release and consider how to 
use it to measure the performance of both prisons and probation services to provide 
incentives for them to work together more effectively in the future.  

Conclusion 
163. Despite the training and work experience that many prisoners benefit from in prison, 

only 17% of ex-prisoners find themselves in P45 employment a year after release. 
Progress depends on the willingness of employers to give opportunities to prisoners 
at the end of their sentences. Ex-offenders must also be able to take the 
opportunities available to them. This depends, in part, on having the right supervision 
and support structures around people when they leave prison. This chapter has set 
out how we intend to address these challenges as part of our overall vision to set 
each prisoner on a path to employment from the moment they enter a prison.  


 32 

Education and Employment Strategy 

Conclusion 

164. Ensuring that more ex-prisoners find work is a key aspect of reducing reoffending. 
Many have multiple and complex problems, but finding and keeping a job can be the 
foundation for a different kind of life. Work provides not just an income but also 
structure, direction and self-worth.  

165. We have made important progress in recent years, with improving standards in prison 
education and greater numbers of prisoners working in prison industries. Our 
objective is deliver more of this activity, not less in the future – but this document 
marks a step change in our efforts to link it to employment on release. Educational 
achievement and purposeful activity in prison are vital, but to capture their full value 
they must help ex-prisoners find and keep work.  

166. Our vision is that when an offender enters prison they should be put, immediately, on 
the path to employment. This starts with prisoners themselves, who must be willing to 
engage positively with learning and work during their sentences. Our reforms will 
create the conditions that encourage this, from key workers holding individual 
prisoners to account under the Offender Management system, to the use of 
mechanisms like IEP to reinforce positive behaviour. Our proposed ROTL reforms 
are also a key part of this picture, providing well-behaved prisoners – properly risk 
assessed – with opportunities to build credible work experience. 

167. Alongside prisoners willing to engage, we need a system set up to deliver. This must 
begin with rigorous, early assessment of each prisoner’s education level, so that they 
have a learning plan that reflects their needs and is properly integrated with their 
sentence plan. This path to employment should continue with work and learning in 
prison that equips prisoners with the skills employers are looking for. To deliver this, 
prisons will have better connections with employers, through the New Futures 
Network, alongside more flexibility to commission the training they need.  

168. The New Futures Network will also have a key role in opening up opportunities for 
ex-offenders when they are released from prison, though engaging and persuading 
sceptical employers that they can fill workforce gaps. Meanwhile, ex-offenders must 
be properly supervised and supported, so that they keep jobs when they find them. 
This requires better integration of prison and probation services. 

169. Taken together, this amounts to a much sharper focus not just on purposeful activity 
during prison sentences, but on sustained employment on release. We know this can 
make a difference not just to ex-prisoners themselves but to society as a whole. The 
prize is lower reoffending rates, savings to the tax payer and enhanced public safety. 


   33                              

CCS0518628748 

978-1-5286-0392-8 


 

	Contents
	Foreword
	Introduction
	Our vision
	Progress to date
	Challenges ahead
	Our approach 

	Chapter 1: Education and training in prison
	Chapter Summary
	Prison education
	Progress to date
	Challenges ahead
	Our approach 
	Case study: Prisoner Apprenticeship Pathway at Feltham
	Conclusion

	Chapter 2: Prison work
	Chapter summary
	Prison work
	Progress to date
	Challenges ahead
	Our approach 
	ROTL Case studies
	Opportunities in priority sectors
	Conclusion

	Chapter 3: Employment on release
	Chapter summary
	Employment on release
	Progress to date
	Challenges ahead
	Our approach
	Conclusion

	Conclusion




