




Industrial 
Strategy
Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal


  3

Industrial Strategy Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal



2  3


Foreword

Throughout history, there have been moments when the  
progress of technology has taken great steps forward, when  
a combination of the right tools, a capacity for innovation,  
and sparks of ingenuity lead to breakthroughs that transform  
how we live our lives.

How we produce and process 
information is critical to innovation 
– and our methods of recording and 
communicating information have 
themselves undergone great leaps. 
From the development of writing, to 
Gutenberg’s printing press – which 
advanced the spread of knowledge 
to the masses and ushered in the 
enlightenment and scientific revolution 
– to the first programmable digital 
computer Colossus, the cost of 
reproducing and communicating 
information, or data, has fallen again 
and again. At the same time, tools for 
processing and making sense of large 
quantities of data have developed 
exponentially – with artificial intelligence 
(AI) representing the latest leap. In 
the same way that Gutenberg’s press 
ushered in a new era of growth, data-
driven technologies such as AI will 
underpin our future prosperity.

There is no doubt that machine learning 
and AI is already improving peoples’ 
lives, from intelligent personal assistants 
that can prepare us for changes in the 
weather, to systems that protect our 
money from criminals, or devices that 

offer medical advice from the comfort 
of our own home. And this is only the 
start; the potential of AI is undeniable. 
Our next challenge will be to harness 
this technology to transform how 
we diagnose diseases, manufacture 
goods and build our homes.

Using advanced algorithmic techniques 
such as ‘deep learning’, AI has the 
potential to solve complex problems 
fast, and in so doing, free up time and 
raise productivity. But we also need 
to make sure AI benefits everyone in 
the UK, which is why – in addition to 
this Sector Deal – the government is 
establishing a Centre for Data Ethics 
and Innovation to advise on the 
ethical use of data, including for AI.

The huge global opportunity AI presents 
is why the Industrial Strategy White 
Paper identified AI and data as one of 
four Grand Challenges – in which the UK 
can lead the world for years to come.

The UK is well placed to do this. We 
are already home to some of the 
biggest names in the business such 
as Deepmind, Swiftkey and Babylon. 


  5

Industrial Strategy Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal



4  5


And it’s not just the established 
players – Kwiziq, Cleo and Mindtrace 
are examples of UK AI startups 
leading the way in areas as diverse 
as education, personal finance and 
autonomous vehicles. Major established 
companies in the tech sector, but also 
increasingly beyond, are using AI to 
tune up their operations and services.

To realise all the social and economic 
benefits, we will need a strong 
partnership between business, 
academia and government. This 
sector deal establishes the beginning 
of that partnership. It responds to 
the recommendations of the AI 
Review, Growing the AI Industry in the 
UK, led by Professor Dame Wendy 
Hall and Jérôme Pesenti, which 
articulated how the government and 
industry can work together on skills, 
infrastructure and implement a long-
term strategy for AI in the UK.

We need to be strategic and focused: 
recognising the increasing convergence 
of technologies and focusing on the 
areas where we can compete globally. 

While robotics, a complementary 
technology to AI, was outside the scope 
of the AI Review, recommendations 
on the robotics industry have been 
made in the Robotics Review RAS 
2020, and in Made Smarter, a review 
on digitising the manufacturing 
industry. Moving forwards, identifying 
and making the most of these 
synergies will be crucial for success.

A revolution in AI technology is already 
emerging. If we act now, we can lead 
it from the front. But if we ‘wait and 
see’ other countries will seize the 
advantage. Together, we can make the 
UK a global leader in this technology 
that will change all our lives.

 54  5

Rt Hon Matt Hancock

Secretary of State for Digital, 
Culture, Media and Sport

Professor Dame Wendy Hall

Regius Professor of Computer Science, 
the University of Southampton

Jérôme Pesenti

Vice President of AI, Facebook

Rt Hon Greg Clark MP

Secretary of State for Business,  
Energy and Industrial Strategy




Industrial Strategy Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal


6

Industrial Strategy at a glance

We will create an economy that boosts productivity and earning 
power throughout the UK

Industrial Strategy is built on 5 foundations


5

foundations of 
productivity

Ideas 
the world’s most innovative economy

People 
good jobs and greater earning power for all

Infrastructure 
a major upgrade to the UK’s infrastructure

Business environment  
the best place to start and grow a business

Places  
prosperous communities across the UK 

We will set Grand Challenges to put the United Kingdom 
at the forefront of the industries of the future:

AI & Data Economy

We will put the UK at the 
forefront of the artificial 
intelligence and data revolution

Clean Growth

We will maximise the advantages 
for UK industry from the 
global shift to clean growth

Future of Mobility
We will become a world  
leader in the way people, 
goods and services move

Ageing Society
We will harness the power of 
innovation to help meet the 
needs of an ageing society

Key policies include:

Ideas
``  Raise total research and 
development (R&D) investment to 
2.4 per cent of GDP by 2027

``  Increase the rate of R&D 
Expenditure Credit to 12 per cent

``  Invest £725m in new Industrial 
Strategy Challenge Fund programmes 
to capture the value of innovation

People
``  Establish a technical education 
system that rivals the best in the 
world to stand alongside our world-
class higher education system

``  Invest £406m in skills, including 
maths, digital and technical education, 
helping to address the shortage of 
science, technology, engineering 
and maths (STEM) skills

``  Create a new National Retraining 
Scheme that supports people to gain 
new skills as the economy changes, 
beginning with a £64m investment 
for digital and construction training.

Infrastructure
``  Increase the National Productivity 
Investment Fund to £31bn, supporting 
investments in transport, housing 
and digital infrastructure

``  Support electric vehicles through 
£400m charging infrastructure 
investment and an extra £100m 
to extend the plug-in car grant

``  Boost our digital infrastructure with 
over £1bn of public investment, 
including £176m for 5G and £200m 
for local areas to encourage roll 

out of full-fibre networks

Business Environment
``  Launch and roll out Sector Deals – 
partnerships between government 
and industry aiming to increase sector 
productivity. The first Sector Deals are 
in life sciences, construction, artificial 
intelligence and the automotive sector

``  Drive over £20bn of investment in 
innovative and high potential businesses, 
including through establishing a new 
£2.5bn Investment Fund, incubated 
in the British Business Bank

``  Launch a review of the actions that 
could be most effective in improving 
the productivity and growth of small 
and medium-sized businesses, including 
how to address what has been called the 
‘long tail’ of lower productivity firms

Places
``  Agree Local Industrial Strategies 
that build on local strengths and 
deliver on economic opportunities

``  Create a new Transforming Cities  
fund that will provide £1.7bn for  
intra-city transport. This will fund 
projects that drive productivity by 
improving connections within  
city regions

An independent Industrial Strategy Council will assess our progress  
and make recommendations to government.


  9

Industrial Strategy Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal



8  9


Executive summary

Creating an economy that harnesses artificial intelligence (AI) 
and big data is one of the great opportunities of our age. 
This Sector Deal is the first 
commitment from government and 
industry to realise this technology’s 
potential, outlining a package of 
up to £0.95bn of support for the 
sector, which includes government, 
industry and academic contributions 
up to £603m in newly allocated 
funding, and up to £342m from within 
existing budgets, alongside £250m 
for Connected and Autonomous 
Vehicles. This support complements 
and leverages some of the £1.7bn 
that has been announced under the 
cross-sectoral Industrial Strategy 
Challenge Fund so far, with five 
challenges having AI components 
that AI businesses will be able to bid 
into through future competitions.

This Sector Deal sets out actions 
to promote the adoption and use 
of AI in the UK, and delivers on the 
recommendations of the independent 
AI review, Growing the AI industry 
in the UK, led by Professor Dame 
Wendy Hall and Jérôme Pesenti1. 
Their review, published in October 
2017, engaged widely with businesses, 
academia, investors and other 
stakeholders on ways to boost the 
UK’s emerging AI sector at home 
and across the world. It sets out 
proposals to improve the institutions 
that support AI in the United Kingdom, 
to build a skilled workforce, and to 

stimulate access to data – collectively 
the lifeblood of any AI business.

This Sector Deal reinforces the five 
foundations of the Industrial Strategy: 
ideas, people, infrastructure, the 
business environment and places. It 
also draws on the government’s Digital 
Strategy, which focuses on reinforcing 
our strengths in telecoms, data and 
enterprise. A key ambition of the 
industrial strategy is for the UK to be 
the world’s most innovative economy 
– this Sector Deal aims to attract and 
retain both domestic and global AI 
talent; deliver major upgrades to our 
digital and data infrastructure; ensure 
that the UK is the best place to start 
and grow an AI business; and contribute 
to communities’ prosperity by spreading 
the benefits of AI across the country. 

People
The Industrial Strategy has people 
at its core: it is focused on creating 
good jobs and greater earning power 
for all people in the UK. To do this, we 
must equip citizens for jobs shaped by 
next generation technology. Growing 
the AI industry in the UK outlined the 
fast-growing demand for expertise to 
develop and apply AI technologies, 
and proposed ways to increase the 
supply of skills at different levels. 
Building on these recommendations 
and the commitments in the Industrial 

Strategy and Digital Strategy to grow 
science, technology, engineering and 
maths (STEM) and digital skills training, 
this Sector Deal sets out how the 
government, universities and industry 
will work together to greatly improve 
the supply of skills. It also sets out 
how we will attract the best, and most 
diverse, global AI talent to the UK. 

Infrastructure
Ensuring the UK has the right digital 
infrastructure – both physical and, 
crucially, data infrastructure – is critical 
to meeting our ambition of leading the 
world in AI. That is why, as part of our 
Industrial Strategy, we are investing 
over £1bn to create a country with 
world class digital capabilities: from 5G 
mobile networks to full-fibre broadband. 
Equally important is the availability of 
data, which is required on a vast scale 
to train machine learning systems. 
The government and public bodies 
are already leading the way in making 
public datasets open and available. But 
there remain significant challenges 
to sharing private sector datasets. 
Through this Sector Deal, we will tackle 
both the practical and cultural barriers 
to sharing both publicly and privately 
held data. As part of this we will explore 
data sharing frameworks such as Data 
Trusts – mechanisms where parties 
have defined rights and responsibilities 
with respect to shared data – in order to 
protect sensitive data, facilitate access 
to data, and ensure accountability. This 
will allow and ensure fair and equitable 
data sharing between organisations 
in the private sector, and between 
the private and public sectors.

Ideas
The government set out a vision in 
the Industrial Strategy to make the UK 
the world’s most innovative economy. 
To achieve this, we are committing to 
work with the private sector to boost 
research and development (R&D) 
spending to 2.4 per cent by 2027, 
and 3 per cent over the longer term. 
This begins with a £725m investment 
through the Industrial Strategy 
Challenge Fund competition, designed 
to capture the value of innovation by 
commercialising a great idea in the lab 
to a successful business. For example, 
one early commitment is our £210m 
Challenge on research into the early 
diagnosis of chronic illness – including a 
substantial investment in AI diagnostics 
techniques2. The use of AI is central to 
this work, which includes programmes 
applying AI to raise output in sectors 
of the economy that have struggled 
with productivity, from reducing crop 
disease in the agriculture sector, to 
delivering services digitally in the public 
sector. We are seeing industry respond 
to our commitment to AI innovation 
with investments in R&D in the UK, 
such as those from major players 
like Beyond Limits and Element AI. 

Business Environment
Our intention is to be the best place to 
start and grow a business in the world. 
With a new business starting up every 
75 seconds in the UK, and a massive 
increase in the finance available to 
knowledge-intensive and innovative 
firms – such as those developing AI 
– through the British Business Bank, 
we are in a strong starting position.


  11


Industrial Strategy Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal

10  11

Grand Challenge

Growing the UK’s AI & 
data-driven economy

We are at the cusp of one of the most exciting times in our lives, 
and if we get our strategy for AI right, then we will be able 
to reap the rewards for our economy for decades to come. 
The Industrial Strategy set out four 
Grand Challenges where the UK must 
act now to put itself at the forefront 
of the industries that will shape our 
futures and have a transformative 
impact on society. Through the 
Grand Challenges we are committed 
to taking advantage of major 
global trends, improving people’s 
lives and working in partnership 
with business and academia.

One of these is for the UK to maximise 
the economic and societal benefits 
of the current global technological 
revolution. We recognise that AI 
will transform the way we live and 
work, from the way we diagnose and 
treat cancer to the security of online 
transactions. It can realise the potential 
for higher productivity and new jobs in 
nearly every sector in every country. 

This Sector Deal will ensure we 
seize this global opportunity, and is 
focused on the recommendations 
put forward by Professor Dame 
Wendy Hall and Jérôme Pesenti to 
promote AI businesses in the UK. 

But we will go further, setting out a 
vision of how the UK can respond to the 
broader opportunities and challenges 
for society posed by AI, including by:

``  making the UK a global centre 
for AI and data-driven innovation 
by investing in R&D, skills and 
regulatory innovation; 

``  supporting sectors to boost 
their productivity through 
artificial intelligence and data 
analytics technologies;

``  leading the world in the safe and 
ethical use of data through a 
new Centre for Data Ethics and 
Innovation, and strengthening the 
UK’s cybersecurity capability; and

``  helping people develop the skills 
needed for the jobs of the future 
through investment in STEM skills 
and computer science teachers, as 
well as retraining and researching the 
impact of automation across sectors.

As at September 2017, over £350m3 
has been invested in 243 technology 
companies through the British Business 
Bank’s venture capital programmes.

AI is emerging in its own right as a 
nascent industry with the potential 
to raise the productivity of diverse 
sectors and create entirely new jobs. 
To maximise this potential, this deal 
will establish a new AI Council to 
bring together respected leaders in 
the field from across academia and 
industry; a new delivery body within the 
government – the Office for Artificial 
Intelligence – to support it; and a new 
Centre for Data Ethics and Innovation. 
The deal will also increase promotion of 
AI businesses globally and take steps to 
attract AI entrepreneurs to the UK. A 
recent report by Oxford Insights ranked 
the UK top for government readiness to 
implement AI, and these measures will 
allow us to capitalise on the UK’s world-
class R&D and tech entrepreneur base4. 

Places
The Industrial Strategy set out the 
goal of helping communities prosper 
throughout the UK. Growing the AI 
industry in the UK outlined the thriving 
AI ecosystem that already exists. 
London is the European capital of AI, 
while significant clusters exist in places 
such as Edinburgh, Belfast, Bristol 
and Cambridge. As important as the 
growth of these clusters of expertise 
is, our ambition is for AI to be adopted 
by businesses across the country. 

This deal will help businesses around 
the UK to grow using AI, and is 
supported by the government’s 
backing for the expansion of Tech 
City UK and Tech North into the 
national network Tech Nation, 
alongside its Scale Up campaign. At 
the same time, we are expanding the 
academic commitment to AI across 
the UK as universities partner with 
The Alan Turing Institute, the national 
institute for data science and AI. 

QuantumBlack is a British tech 
company using machine learning 
and artificial intelligence “in the wild” 
to help clients in the government, 
corporate, and third sectors increase 
their performance. The teams include 
data engineers, data scientists, and 
designers. Now a British “scale-up” 
story, QuantumBlack has grown from 

its early days in Formula One racing, 
where the three founders met, to 
350 technology experts in the UK 
head office and also in Boston, India 
and Australia. The thriving London 
tech and talent scene, as well as 
the UK’s leading universities, have 
been pivotal in this growth story.

Case Study: QuantumBlack – from startup to scale-up


  13


Industrial Strategy Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal

12  13

Artificial 
Intelligence 
Sector Deal
Key commitments

Ideas

To be the world’s most innovative economy.

Support AI innovation to 
raise productivity
``  Invest up to £20m in the application 
of AI in the services sector through 
the Next Generation Services 
Industrial Strategy Challenge. This 
will include a network of Innovation 
Research Centres and collaborative 
R&D to develop new applications of 
AI and data-driven technologies in 
sectors such as law and insurance5. 
``  Invest £93m from the Industrial 
Strategy Challenge Fund into 
the robotics and AI in extreme 
environments programme, towards 
the research and development of 
robotics and AI technologies for 
use in industries such as offshore 
and nuclear energy, space and deep 
mining, with the aim of supporting 
safer working practices for people 
in extreme environments that 
could prevent potential harm 
and increase productivity.
``  The government will work with 
academia, the broader research 
community, industry and end users 
to integrate AI into future Industrial 
Strategy Challenge Fund challenges.

Stimulate uptake of AI, including 
within the public sector
``  Create a £20m GovTech 
Fund, supported by a GovTech 
Catalyst, which will support 
tech businesses to provide the 
government with innovative 
solutions for more efficient 
public services and stimulate the 
UK’s growing GovTech sector. 
``  Raise overall UK R&D intensity 
by raising total R&D spending 
across public and private sectors 
to 2.4 per cent by 2027, and 3 
per cent over the longer term.
``  Increase in the rate of the R&D 
Expenditure Credit from 11 per cent 
to 12 per cent from January 2018.

Research support for AI
``  £300m has been allocated by the  
Engineering and Physical Sciences 
Research Council (EPSRC) to fund 
research related to ‘data science 
and AI’ complementing the new 
centres for doctoral training.
``  £83m EPSRC funding for 159 
AI grants listed under the 
EPSRC Research Area Artificial 
Intelligence Technologies. 
``  £42m EPSRC funding for 
the Alan Turing Institute.

Government action to support AI


  15


Industrial Strategy Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal


14

Investments in the UK from AI powerhouses

Google DeepMind and its parent, Alphabet’s Google, are global 
leaders in AI. Google currently has three offices in 
London, with a new HQ planned for King’s Cross that 
will house 7,000 staff when it opens in 2020.

Element AI Element AI is an artificial intelligence solutions provider 
that was co-founded in October 2016 by established 
entrepreneur Jean-François Gagné and leading AI 
researcher Yoshua Bengio. With deep domain expertise and 
access to cutting-edge technology, it focuses on turning 
AI research into transformative business applications 
and will open a new R&D centre in London in 2018.

Amazon Amazon has expanded its headcount in the UK to 
24,000, including the opening of a new head office and 
doubling the number of roles at its London Development 
Centre, bringing Amazon’s total corporate and R&D 
workforce in London to approximately 5,000 by the 
end of 2017. The company has also announced plans to 
open two further robotics enabled fulfilment centres.


 15


Investments in the UK from AI powerhouses

Beyond  
Limits

Beyond Limits is a private company based in Glendale 
California spun-out of JPL – part of NASA, and a leading 
software developer – to commercialise 20 years of 
investment in next generation cognitive reasoning AI. 
This software has been deployed successfully by NASA, 
the US military and other government agencies for fully 
autonomous systems that can ‘think outside the box’ and 
handle new situations, even where there is little or no data. 
Beyond Limits has chosen the UK for its international base 
for global expansion centred around the Cambridge area 
where there is a deep pool of AI and data science talent.

Ironfly 
Technologies

Ironfly Technologies is a rapidly growing startup  
headquartered in Hong Kong that uses AI and machine 
learning to interact with live market data to generate 
bespoke analytics for the financial sector. Having 
recently established a base in London, it is looking to 
expand its London team of product developers.

Astroscale Japanese company Astroscale will develop a world 
leading capability in AI technology for cleaning up space 
debris and in orbit satellite servicing in the UK, which is 
expected to generate over 100 high-value engineering 
jobs in the UK within five years. This will be backed with 
over $20m from Astroscale to build a supply chain with 
a significant amount of that investment in the UK, and is 
supported by £4m from the Robotics and AI in Extreme 
Environments Industrial Strategy Challenge Fund.

Chrysalix Top-ranking Vancouver based venture capital firm Chrysalix, 
is establishing its European HQ in the UK. A strong investor 
in AI and robotics, Chrysalix expects to invest 40-60% of 
its latest $250m fund through its European base. Chrysalix 
is also engaging UK universities and centres of excellence 
to bring business challenges to the academic world and 
to connect new inventions with the business world.

Invest in AI-related R&D to boost productivity
``  Industry will provide match 
funding for AI solutions across 
key sectors: services, life sciences, 
agriculture and the public sector.
``  Recognise the UK’s strengths 
in AI by backing it as a country 
to invest in, as seen through 
recent major investments.

``  Up to £12m of anticipated 
industry funding to support 
the Next Generation Services 
Industrial Strategy Challenge.
``  Commit to £69m of industry 
funding to support the 
development of robotics and 
AI in extreme environments.

Industry action to support AI

HPE, Arm, SUSE, and the universities of Bristol, 
Edinburgh and Leicester will invest into Catalyst 
UK, a three year programme to establish one of the 
largest Arm-based supercomputer deployments to 
accelerate deployment of artificial intelligence available 
to both academia and industry across the UK.


HPE  17


Industrial Strategy Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal


16

People

To generate good jobs and greater earning power for all.

Government action to support AI

Work with schools, universities 
and industry to ensure a 
highly-skilled workforce
``  Develop a prestigious global Turing 
Fellowship programme to both 
attract and retain the best research 
talent in AI from around the world 
to the UK, to include individuals 
already based here. This will put 
the infrastructure in place to train 
future generations of AI talent.
``  Build towards an additional 200 
doctoral studentships in AI and 
related disciplines a year by 
2020–21, raising numbers year-
on-year into the next decade. 
By 2025, we will have at least 
1,000 government supported 
PhD places at any one time.
``  The AI-relevant studentships will be 
distributed via the current EPSRC 
call for Centres in Doctoral Training, 
which will be supported with £100m 
investment from government.
``  Invest £406m in skills, with a focus 
on maths, digital, and technical 
education, including funding to 
upskill up to 8,000 computer 
science teachers and creating a 
National Centre for Computing. 
We have also committed to 
introduce a National Retraining 
Scheme this Parliament, with an 
initial investment in construction 
and digital skills while the 

scheme is being developed.
``  The government will refer to The 
Alan Turing Institute’s upcoming 
reviews on the application of AI to 
sectors in the UK to inform future 
strategic thinking on the adoption 
of AI in industry and government.

Enable access to high-skilled  
global talent
``   Doubled Tier 1 (Exceptional Talent) 
visas to 2,000 a year to attract 
the best and brightest talent in 
science, digital technology (including 
specialists in AI), engineering, 
arts and creative sectors.  
``  Work with Tech Nation to explore 
how to promote this and other 
visa routes to AI specialists.
``Changed immigration rules to         

 enable world-leading scientists and  
 researchers arriving under the Tier  
 1 (Exceptional Talent) route to apply  
 for settlement after three years.
``Made it quicker for                                   

 highly-skilled  students to apply            
 to work in the UK after finishing   
 their degrees, and reduce red tape  
 in hiring international researchers.
Take steps to promote diversity 
in the development of AI
``  The government will work with 
the AI Council to promote the 
importance of a diverse research 
base and workforce in AI. 

Industry action to support AI

Invest to increase the size 
of the AI workforce
``  Work with universities to develop 
industry-funded Masters 
programmes in AI, based at leading 
universities across the UK.
``  Work with government and 
universities to assess the 
potential role for new Masters 
conversion courses in AI-
related expertise, for skilled 
graduates in other disciplines.
``  Commit an estimated £60m 
funding towards the AI-relevant 
doctoral studentships, which will 
be distributed by the EPSRC call 
for Centres in Doctoral Training.
``  Support the Turing Fellowship 
scheme for AI, to keep and 
foster the best researchers in 
the UK and internationally.

``  Sage is running a pilot programme 
for 150 under-18s across the UK, to 
encourage them to think about a 
career in the AI sector. The ‘Sage 
FutureMakers Labs’ will teach a 
broad range of skills required to 
work in the field of AI - including 
machine learning, natural language 
processing, problem solving 
and other cognitive techniques, 
as well as an understanding of 
the ethical considerations that 
surround AI. The aim is to show 
the leaders of tomorrow that 
AI is a career choice open to all 
that can be accessed through 
classroom or on-the job learning.

Work to increase the diversity 
in the AI workforce.
``  Commit to increasing the 
diversity in the AI workforce 
and support efforts to address 
this, led by the AI Council.


 17  19


Industrial Strategy Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal

18  19

Infrastructure

To drive a major upgrade to the UK’s infrastructure.

Government action to support AI

Enhance the UK’s existing 
data infrastructure
``  Build on the UK’s strength in  
data infrastructure by taking 
steps to publish more high quality 
public data in an open, easily 
findable and reusable format 
suitable for machine learning.
``  Establish the Geospatial 
Commission to determine how  
best to improve access to geospatial 
data to a wider range of users, 
including businesses using and 
innovating with AI technologies. 
``  Provide legal certainty over 
the sharing and use of data 
in accordance with the UK’s 
strengthened Data Protection Bill.
``  The Alan Turing Institute and 
the Information Commissioner’s 
Office will work together to 
develop guidance to assist in 
explaining AI decisions.

Develop fair, equitable and secure 
data sharing frameworks 
``  Work with major data holders 
in both the private and public 
sectors, along with the data 
science community, to identify 
barriers to sharing data. 
``  Work with industry to explore 
frameworks and mechanisms for 
safe, secure and equitable data 
transfer such as Data Trusts.

Deliver a strong digital 
and telecommunications 
infrastructure across the UK
``  Reach 95 per cent superfast 
broadband coverage.
``  Invest over £1bn to develop 5G 
mobile networks and extend full 
fibre broadband to build the next 
generation digital infrastructure.

Industry action to support AI

Work towards interoperable 
and, where possible, open 
data standards
``  AI developers to enhance and 
define technical standards that 
allow interoperability between 
AI systems, and collaborate with 
the government on a framework 
of standards to underpin this. 
``  AI developers to engage with 
government on their digital and 
data infrastructure requirements.
``  Publish identified trends and 
findings from use and analysis of 
public data openly to strengthen 
our data infrastructure.

Partner in the development of 
data sharing frameworks 
``  Businesses, academia and other 
expert organisations as holders 
and users of data to participate 
in developing data sharing 
frameworks such as Data Trusts. 
``  Businesses to come forward with 
use cases for publicly held data 
that can be shared securely when 
the  frameworks are piloted.

Strengthen and deliver 
telecommunications and 
digital infrastructure
``  Telecommunications companies 
to offer competitive delivery 
of full fibre and 5G.
``  AI industry to work with 
telecommunications providers on 
specific needs for AI-supportive 
telecommunications infrastructure.


  21


Industrial Strategy Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal

20  21

Business environment

To be the best place to start and grow a business.

Government action to support AI

Develop policy to support 
AI in the UK
``  The government will use its 
convening power to establish 
an AI Council of leading figures 
from industry and academia 
with ministerial representation. 
The Council will drive action, 
oversee implementation of 
the deal, galvanise industry, 
and advise government. 
``  The government will establish 
a new Office for Artificial 
Intelligence to work with the AI 
Council to create and deliver 
the AI strategy, and collaborate 
with other relevant initiatives, 
such as the GovTech Catalyst.

Promote UK Artificial 
Intelligence globally
``  The government will work closely 
with the new AI Council to expand 
export and investment support 
for AI businesses in the UK 
including through promoting AI 
businesses at trade missions.

``  The government will increase its 
export support for innovative AI 
and data businesses, and the Global 
Entrepreneur Programme will look 
to increase its focus on attracting 
AI and data-led businesses to 
establish headquarters in the UK.

Improve the environment for high 
growth businesses, including in AI 
``  Establish a new £2.5bn Investment 
Fund incubated in the British 
Business Bank. By co-investing with 
the private sector, a total of £7.5bn 
of investment will be supported.
``  Expand significantly the 
support available to innovative 
knowledge-intensive businesses 
through reforming the Enterprise 
Investment Scheme (EIS) and 
Venture Capital Trusts (VCTs), 
realising over £7bn of new 
investment into high growth 
businesses over the next ten years.
``  Work with the Pensions Regulator 
to clarify investment guidance 
for trustees to give pension 
funds confidence that they 
can invest in assets supporting 
innovative businesses as part 
of a diverse portfolio.

Industry action to support AI

Leadership, policy setting 
and strategy
``  Senior figures from industry 
and academia will participate in 
the AI Council to provide high 
level leadership and momentum 
for the implementation of 
AI review recommendations 
and the Sector Deal.
``  Industry will work closely with 
the government, through the AI 
Council, on broader questions 
related to AI such as data ethics and 
the role of AI in the public sector.

Promotion of AI in the 
UK and globally
``  Industry will continue to develop 
the broader ecosystem that 
will drive trade and attract AI 
investment to the UK, including 
through participating in trade 
missions, AI exhibitions and 
international conferences.

Improve the environment 
for start-ups

``  Global Brain, one of the largest 
venture capital firms in Japan 
with $700m under management, 
is opening its first European HQ 
in the UK, with plans to deploy 
£35m over 5 years in UK deep-
tech startups, with a key focus 
on AI, Blockchain and Robotics, 
as well application areas such as 
Cybersecurity, Cloudtech, Fintech, 
Aerospace and Healthtech. They 
will support companies with 
investment as well as business 
development within Japan, for 
instance by connecting investees 
to large corporate customers.

``  Hewlett Packard Enterprise 
recently announced new offerings 
to help customers ramp up, 
optimise and scale AI usage 
across business functions to drive 
outcomes such as better demand 
forecasting, improved operational 
efficiency and increased sales.


  23


Industrial Strategy Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal

22  23

Places

To have prosperous communities throughout the United Kingdom.

Government action to support AI

Work closely with key clusters to provide the support needed for  
AI businesses to thrive
``  Invest £21m in Tech City UK 
over four years, to become Tech 
Nation and support regional 
tech companies and startups 
to fulfil their potential.
``  Invest over £1bn in next 
generation digital infrastructure 
to ensure the whole of the 
UK is digitally connected.
``  Support The Alan Turing 
Institute’s plans for expansion 
to become the national 
academic institute for artificial 
intelligence and data science.

``  Work with Digital Catapult centres 
across London, North East & Tees 
Valley, Northern Ireland, Brighton 
and Yorkshire to help implement 
digital policies and identify policy 
needs in emerging technologies.
``  Ensure that the views of the 
devolved administrations are 
represented in the AI community 
through engagement with 
the new Office for AI.

Industry action to support AI

Take action to expand AI clusters across the UK
``  BT is collaborating with Ulster 
University by investing in a 
new £29m AI R&D cluster 
that aims to attract and retain 
industrial engineers and 
university researchers.
``  Leading semiconductor specialist 
IQE is to invest £38m alongside 
Cardiff University to develop 
a compound semiconductor 
facility that will manufacture 
high performance components 
used in AI applications as part 
of the £1.2bn City Deal agreed 
between local authorities, and 
the Welsh and UK governments. 

``  Barclays has launched the bank’s 
first Scottish ‘Eagle Lab’ in 
Edinburgh in a new partnership 
with CodeBase, the UK’s largest 
tech incubator, to help businesses 
scale-up - including AI businesses.
``  Startups nationwide will make use 
of the Digital Catapult’s ‘Machine 
Intelligence Garage’ programme 
to access specialised hardware 
and expertise affordably, and drive 
adoption of AI across the UK.


  25


Industrial Strategy Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal

24  25

DeepMind – and a world leader in 
AI – is building a new headquarters 
in London that will be home to 7,000 
staff: a significant vote of confidence 
in the UK’s strength in R&D.

Amazon is similarly building its UK 
base, increasing its staff by almost 
a fifth in 2017 to 24,000, including a 
major expansion of its R&D workforce 
to around 1,500. This includes a new 
development centre in Cambridge 
(the company’s second in the city), 
to add to existing development 
centres in Edinburgh and London.

The UK has also produced other 
globally recognised AI firms such 
as Improbable, which specialises in 
using AI for virtual reality (VR), and 
has developed simulation technology 
with the potential to model the 
behaviour of millions of people. In 
2017, Japanese telecommunications 
corporation SoftBank invested $500m 
in Improbable, raising the value of the 

startup to over $1bn. Onfido, which 
was founded five years ago to make 
identity verification checks quicker and 
easier for businesses, has developed 
machine learning technology used by 
businesses all over the world to help 
hire staff more quickly and easily.

Most recently, we have also seen 
notable investments in the UK from 
global AI firms including Ironfly 
Technologies, a Hong Kong-based 
startup that uses machine learning 
in financial services and Element 
AI, an artificial intelligence solutions 
provider, which is opening a new 
R&D centre in London in 2018.

We are confident that the measures 
announced through this Sector Deal, 
alongside the government’s vision to 
be a leader in meeting the challenges 
posed by AI and data, will lead to 
further major investments in UK AI 
from businesses around the world.

Ideas

Support AI innovation 
to raise productivity
Our vision in the Industrial Strategy 
- for the UK to be the world’s most 
innovative economy - is supported 
by a very significant increase in R&D 
spending between the government and 
industry. This will boost R&D spending 
to 2.4 per cent of GDP by 2027, and 
3 per cent over the longer term, 
beginning with a £725m investment 
in new Industrial Strategy Challenge 
Fund programmes to capture the value 
of innovation. This is part of a broader 
commitment to raise total public 
investment in R&D from around £9.5bn 
in 2016/17 to £12.5bn in 2021/22. 

This Sector Deal positions the Artificial 
Intelligence sector to play a growing 
role in meeting this ambition – with a 
potential contribution of £200bn or 
10 per cent of UK GDP by 20306. The 
government, industry and academia will 
co-invest to drive R&D in AI including 
through the Industrial Strategy 
Challenge Fund. Industry recognises 
this commitment to innovation: already 
some of the most R&D intensive 
startups are basing themselves here 
such as Beyond Limits and Element AI.

It’s not just the startups who are 
investing. Rolls-Royce has signed 
a Memorandum of Understanding 
with the Alan Turing Institute to co-
design and deliver a programme of 
collaborative research in data science 
and AI. In particular, jointly-run 

research projects will explore: how 
data science can be applied at scale, 
the application of AI across supply 
chains, data-centric engineering and 
predictive maintenance, and the role 
of data analytics and AI in science. 

Stimulate uptake of AI 
within the public sector
As announced in the Industrial Strategy 
White Paper, the government will invest 
£20m in GovTech initiatives that will 
improve the delivery of public services, 
from transport and the environment, to 
education and health. We will also bring 
together existing work across central 
government and public bodies to share 
these technologies and understand how 
they are deployed most successfully.

Investments in the UK 
from AI powerhouses
Many of our most successful businesses 
started life as an idea in a university 
lab here in the UK. As the home 
of four of the top 10 universities in 
the world, we are a magnet for the 
highest calibre researchers in artificial 
intelligence and related disciplines. 

DeepMind, a prominent UK-based 
AI firm developed out of our leading 
universities, not only created AlphaGo, 
(the programme that defeated the 
world’s greatest player of Go, a fiendishly 
complex board game) but created a new 
version which taught itself to defeat 
the original programme. Alphabet, 
the parent company of Google and 

Case Study: STFC-IBM ideas for an intelligent future

Science and Technology Facilities 
Council (SFTC) and IBM Researchers, 
as part of the Hartree Centre, in 
Daresbury, are collaborating on 
projects with multiple industrial and 
government research organisations 
in the UK. Exploiting AI methods, 
they are creating reusable digital 
assets including: in machine learning 
and in uncertainty quantification to 
greatly increase productivity through 
mechanical and experimental 
design, intelligent control of complex 

systems, and to speed up modelling 
and simulation – which will lead to 
enhanced competitive advantage 
in a variety of areas ranging from 
fast moving consumer goods, 
advanced materials and molecular 
discovery, to even waste water 
treatment. The Hartree Centre is 
able to leverage the wider STFC 
and IBM Research organisations 
to provide additional capability for 
its clients including the Hursley 
and Rutherford Appleton Labs.


  27


Industrial Strategy Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal

26  27

ASI helps organisations develop 
capability in AI through a combination 
of expertise, technology and training. 
They run Europe’s most prestigious 
programme for helping top STEM 
PhDs to transition into real world 
data scientists. Nearly 10% of the 
UK’s STEM PhDs apply for their 
fellowship every year, and the 
programme has enabled British firms 
like easyJet, Babylon Health, Asos, 
Ovo Energy and Zopa to access the 
skills needed to build some of the 

most sophisticated AI capabilities in 
the world. ASI’s in-house data science 
team use cutting edge machine 
learning expertise to help clients 
solve problems ranging from making 
trains run on time to detecting 
terrorist propaganda online. And 
all of this is powered by their data 
science platform, SherlockML, which 
has been developed to be the world’s 
best environment for data scientists 
to efficiently develop and deploy 
artificial intelligence algorithms.

Enable access to high-
skilled global talent
The government has doubled the 
number of available Tier 1 visas 
for ‘Exceptional Talent’ – including 
specialists in AI – from 1000 to 
2000 per year. This presents a great 
opportunity to ensure the UK attracts 
the best and brightest talent in AI, 
alongside world leaders in science, 
digital technology, engineering, arts and 
creative sectors. We will work with Tech 
Nation to explore how to promote this 
and other visa routes to AI specialists 
to maximise the growth of AI in the UK.

Take steps to promote 
diversity in the AI workforce
Increasing diversity in the AI workforce 
is vital to ensure that everyone with 
the potential to participate has the 
opportunity to do so. It is essential 
that AI developed in the UK reflects 
the needs and make-up of society 
as a whole and that industry and the 
public sector are able to access the 
greatest supply of talent in terms 
of numbers. The government will 
work with the AI Council to promote 
diversity in the AI workforce.

People

Work with schools, universities and industry to ensure a  
highly-skilled workforce
Skilled experts are needed to develop 
AI, and they are in short supply. As 
a global leader, the UK needs a large 
workforce with deep AI expertise; a 
more diverse, AI research base and 
workforce; and better digital skills 
in the wider workforce to use AI. 

Demand for AI talent in AI techniques, 
such as machine learning, is increasing 
rapidly. Action is needed now to ensure 
the skills pipeline can meet the needs 
of industry now and in the future. By 
one estimate, the market value of AI 
technologies is expected to increase 
at a compound annual growth rate of 
over 60 per cent to 20227. We must 
take concerted action or risk other 
countries seizing the opportunity and 
causing a brain drain from the UK.

In 2017 there were 26 UK universities 
offering undergraduate courses 
in AI and more than 30 graduate 
programmes running across 20 
universities. Numbers of students 
have been rising modestly in recent 
years, driven predominantly by PhD 
level places (where the number of 
enrolments have almost doubled to just 
under 400 between 2013 and 20158). 
A recent government consultation 
with AI academics highlighted the 
gap between supply and demand for 
university places, with one institution 
turning down 13 viable candidates 
per available masters place. 

The government recognises that to 
provide the advanced skills needed 
for creating AI algorithms, the work 
begins in schools. That is why we 
have announced a major reform of 
technical education with the launch 
of T levels and investment in STEM 
subjects. We announced in the 2017 
Autumn Budget £84m of new funding 
to deliver a comprehensive four year 
programme to improve computing 
education and drive up participation in 
computer science, including upskilling 
up to 8,000 computer science teachers, 
to ensure there is a suitably qualified 
GCSE teacher in every school. The 
government has also supported the 
creation of Ada, the National College of 
Digital Skills, which will train up to 5,000 
students over the next seven years for 
a wide range of digital careers. At a 
higher level, industry will be investing 
to fund a Masters degree programme 
with an integrated internship, targeting 
an initial cohort of 200 students per 
year. The government will be funding 
450 new PhD places, and establishing 
a prestigious Turing Fellowship to 
support an initial cohort of 10 AI 
Fellows, to keep the best and brightest 
AI researchers in the UK. These are 
just the first steps that we are taking to 
ensure the growth of AI skills in the UK.

Case Study: ASI – Creating capability in tomorrow’s leading scientists


  29


Industrial Strategy Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal

28  29

Similarly, open environmental data has 
been used to create flood risk and water 
quality apps. To test the autonomous 
vehicles of the future we will need good 
quality 3D topographic data on road 
conditions and roadside obstacles.

The government is committed to 
opening up more data in a way that 
makes it reusable and easily accessible. 
A good example is geospatial data. The 
Geospatial Commission announced in 
the 2017 Autumn Budget will provide 
strategic oversight to the various 
public bodies who hold geospatial data, 
seeking to maximise the growth of 
the digital economy and consolidate 
the UK’s position as the best place to 
start and grow a digital business. To 

further boost the digital economy, 
the government is working with the 
Ordnance Survey (OS) and the new 
Commission to establish how to 
open up freely the OS MasterMap 
data to UK-based small businesses 
in particular. Geospatial data is a 
key enabler for AI technologies. 

In addition, the eInfrastructure 
Advisory Board (eAB) has recently 
been set up by UKRI with the purpose 
of advising the CEO of UKRI on High 
Performance Computing (HPC) 
Research infrastructure, and will 
be developing an eInfrastructure 
development roadmap, as well as other 
HPC related projects, going forward.

Infrastructure 

Enhance the UK’s existing data infrastructure 
Data is a critical part of our digital 
infrastructure – and fundamental 
to AI. It enables all kinds of services 
we use everyday from maps on our 
smartphones, to social media and 
payment processes. Without access 
to good quality data from a range of 
sources (whether privately or publicly 
held), AI technologies cannot deliver 
on their promise of better, more 
efficient and seamless services.

Open data published by organisations 
across a range of sectors have enabled 
other businesses to innovate and 
build new services, which in turn can 
make significant contributions to 
the economy. Transport apps such 
as CityMapper, for example, make 
journeys more efficient and have 
led to the creation of ‘pop-up’ bus 
routes for commonly made journeys 
that were previously unserved. 

Case study:  Ocado – Machine learning to build a smart broadband 
of grocery

Ocado are the world’s largest 
online-only grocery retailer, with 
over 600,000 active customers 
in the UK. As they are fully online, 
creating a robust data infrastructure 
and managing data effectively are 
both crucial to the success of the 
business. For example, in order 
to classify and prioritise the daily 
stream of emails into their call 
centre, Ocado has built a cloud-
based machine learning model, 
which was trained on a database 
of three million emails previously 
classified by call centre agents. 

Machine learning is also used to 
monitor the health of their robot 
swarms, which carry out the bulk 
of the work in their new automated 

warehouses. Here, data from the 
robots are streamed to a data lake 
where analytical systems oversee 
performance and identify servicing 
requirements. By programming 
machine learning into the robots 
themselves using technologies such 
as embedded Tensor Flow, this also 
creates opportunities for swarm 
learning, where the learnings of one 
robot can be shared with the rest 
of the swarm, a concept which will 
keep driverless vehicles responsive 
and agile when on the road.

These are just two examples of the 
many ways that AI and machine 
learning pervade Ocado’s end-
to-end e-commerce, fulfilment 
and logistics platform.


  31


Industrial Strategy Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal

30  31

Business environment

Develop policy to support AI in the UK
Effective leadership and partnerships 
will be vital to driving forward AI in 
the UK. As part of the Sector Deal, 
the government will use its convening 
power to establish an AI Council as a 
central forum where industry, academia 
and government leaders can come 
together to identify opportunities and 
issues and actions to address them. 

Similar partnerships have been 
successful in other sectors such as 
professional and business services, 
and the automotive industry. 

This council will be supported by the 
new Office for AI, a delivery body 
tasked with implementing the Sector 
Deal and the government’s overarching 
strategy for AI. Finally, a Centre for 
Data Ethics and Innovation will be 
tasked with ensuring safe, ethical 
and ground-breaking innovation in 
AI and data-driven technologies. 

Together, these new institutions 
will provide the governance and 
oversight of delivery of the Sector 
Deal and the wider Grand Challenge.

Develop fair, equitable and secure 
data sharing frameworks  
Some of the most valuable data –  
in terms of its potential for enabling 
innovation, improving services of 
realising public sector savings – 
cannot be made open because it 
contains nationally critical, personal 
or commercially sensitive information. 
This includes data which could be used 
to identify individuals. Organisations 
looking to access or share data 
can often face a range of barriers, 
from trust and cultural concerns 
to practical and legal obstacles. To 
address these issues, we are working 
with industry to pioneer mechanisms 
for data sharing such as Data Trusts. 
These frameworks will ensure that all 
parties involved have defined rights 
and responsibilities towards the data 
and individuals’ personal data, and 
other sensitive data, is protected. For 
example, the vision for Data Trusts is 
that they will allow two or more parties 
in any sector to partner in data sharing 
agreements, shape the agreements 
according to their needs and enable 
multiple organisations  to work 
together to solve a common problem.

In addition to Data Trusts, we will 
explore how to improve data sharing 
generally, through sharing frameworks 
and consideration of data portability.

Deliver a strong digital 
infrastructure across the UK
The government will work with 
the telecommunications industry 
to extend coverage of superfast 
broadband across the UK, achieving 

a baseline speed of 24 Megabits per 
second (Mbps). More than £1bn is 
being invested to develop 5G mobile 
networks and extend the full-fibre 
rollout, capable of providing a highly 
reliable connection and speeds 
exceeding 1 Gigabit per second.

In addition, the University of 
Cambridge Research Computing 
Service is making the UK’s fastest 
academic supercomputer available 
to AI technology companies. This 
new AI supercomputer is a £10m 
partnership between the Engineering 
and Physical Sciences Research 
Council (EPSRC), the Science and 
Technology Facilities Council (STFC) 
and the University. Capable of solving 
the largest scientific and industrial 
challenges at very high speeds, it is 
supported by advice and consultancy 
from the team at Cambridge. The 
aim is to help companies to create 
real business value from advanced 
computing infrastructures.

In the 2017 Autumn Budget, the 
government announced a range of 
initiatives to ensure the infrastructure 
of the UK is wholly digitally connected. 
This included funding from the National 
Productivity Investment Fund to launch 
the £190m Challenge Fund for Local Full 
Fibre Networks and provide a further 
£159m for the 5G Testbeds and Trials 
programme. This will close down digital 
coldspots, ensuring AI businesses 
can thrive anywhere in the UK.


  33


Industrial Strategy Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal

32  33

Improve the environment for high growth businesses, including in AI
The government is committed to 
making the UK the best place to start 
and grow a business. As an emerging 
sector, support for scaling up is 
particularly important for AI businesses 
where technology changes rapidly, 
funding rounds are frequent and the 
burn-rate high. The government is 
committed to improving the financing of 
growth in highly innovative businesses. 
To do this the government is:

``  establishing a new £2.5bn 
Investment Fund incubated in 
the British Business Bank;

``  investing in a series of private 
sector fund of funds of scale – the 
British Business Bank will seed 
the first wave of investment with 
up to £500m, unlocking double 
its investment in private capital;

``  doubling the annual allowance for 
people investing in knowledge-
intensive businesses through 
the Enterprise Investment 
Scheme (EIS) to £2m a year;

``  providing greater flexibility for 
knowledge-intensive businesses 
over when they can access a 
first investment through EIS and 
Venture Capital Trusts (VCT);

``  doubling the amount knowledge-
intensive businesses can receive 
in a single year through EIS or 
VCT investment to £10m;

``  backing first-time and emerging 
fund managers through the British 
Business Bank’s established 
Enterprise Capital Fund programme 
unlocking at least an additional 
£1.5bn of investment;

``  backing overseas investment in 
UK venture capital, expected to 
release £1bn of investment;

``  supporting long-term investment 
by giving pension funds confidence 
that they can invest in assets 
supporting innovative businesses 
as part of a diverse portfolio;

``  changing the qualifying rules in 
Entrepreneurs’ Relief to remove 
the disincentive to accept external 
investment and consulting on 
the detailed implementation 
of that change; and

``  increasing the rate of the 
R&D expenditure credit from 
11 per cent to 12 per cent. 

Promote UK Artificial Intelligence globally
The UK is a world leader in exporting 
innovation and technology. Our 
businesses serve customers all round 
the world in every sector. We have a 
fantastic opportunity to export our 
AI expertise too. The government is 
committed to helping our AI businesses 
succeed globally. It will increase its 
promotion of UK AI businesses through 
trade missions and take steps to attract 
AI entrepreneurs to the UK. It will look 
to increase its focus on attracting AI 
and data-led businesses to establish 
headquarters in the UK. And, as part of 
the government’s broader commitment 
to increasing investment and exports, 
AI will benefit from the nine new Trade 
Commissioners responsible for leading 

export promotion, inward and outward 
direct investment, and trade policy 
overseas. The fruits of this effort are 
already showing – as demonstrated 
through the commitments by Element 
AI and others to establish bases in the 
UK. In addition, government’s Venture 
Capital Unit has supported international 
companies – such as Global Brain, 
who committed to establishing their 
European HQ in London – and continue 
to work with venture capitalists looking 
to invest in the UK. Along with our 
commitments to a visa system that 
welcomes the best talent, we will 
establish the UK as the go-to place 
to headquarter an AI business.

Case study: DigitalGenius – A cutting-edge AI company  
on an export journey

DigitalGenius brings practical 
applications of artificial intelligence 
(AI) into the customer service 
operations of some major global 
businesses. Its customer service 
platform combines the best of human 
and machine intelligence, enabling 
businesses to live up to and exceed 
rising consumer expectations. The 
platform automates and increases 
the quality and efficiency of customer 

support across communication 
channels like email, chat, social 
media and mobile messaging. 

A focus on exports has been a key 
part of the company’s business 
plan from the start and – with the 
support of the government – has 
enabled DigitalGenius to grow from 
20 to 60 employees in one year. Its 
software is currently powering over 
30 contact centres around the world.


  35


Industrial Strategy Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal

34  35

These and other universities based in 
all four nations of the UK with strengths 
in AI, will host prestigious Turing 
Fellowships, whose holders will also be 
based at the Turing Institute. This will 
enable the Institute’s geographical span 
to grow and transform it into a truly 
national institute for AI and data science.

The actions we are taking to support 
the growth of AI ecosystems apply 
throughout the United Kingdom and the 
challenges we face are shared with our 
partners in the devolved administrations. 
As we deliver this Sector Deal we will 
look for opportunities to collaborate.

As the UK’s longest established AI 
research centre, the University of 
Edinburgh has been the home for many 
spin-out businesses, such as Skyscanner, 
while the Edinburgh Centre for Robotics 
recently won a £36m grant for research 
into offshore robotics. Additionally, data 
driven innovation and AI technologies 
underpin the £1.1bn Scottish & UK 

government funded Edinburgh City 
Region Deal. Meanwhile, BT is opening 
a £29m R&D facility in Belfast, and 
partnering with Ulster University to 
research future technologies such as 
the Internet of Things, AI, data analytics, 
cybersecurity and 5G. Welsh company 
IQE has been at the forefront of the 
compound semiconductor industry for 
more than 25 years, and has joined 
with Cardiff University to invest in 
developing a compound semiconductor 
cluster in the area as part of the 
£1.2bn City Deal agreed between local 
authorities, Welsh and UK governments. 
This builds on the existing cluster in 
the region, which is supported by the 
UK government’s investment in the 
Compound Semiconductor Applications 
Catapult. We want to support the 
growth of these clusters and the 
measures in the Industrial Strategy 
and Sector Deal will help achieve this.

Places

Work closely with key clusters to provide the support needed for  
AI businesses to thrive
The government is committed to 
helping prosperous communities to 
thrive across the UK. As highlighted 
in Growing the AI industry in 
the UK, while the majority of AI 
businesses are based in London 9, 
there are a number of other major 
technology clusters around the UK.

Yet many places are not realising their 
full potential. By introducing Local 
Industrial Strategies, and further 
strengthening local leadership through 
Local Enterprise Partnerships and 
Mayoral Combined Authorities, we will 
provide incentives to make regions 
across the UK attractive environments 
for AI businesses and research to 
flourish in. The huge potential for AI 
to transform sectors means action is 
needed now so that new and existing 
clusters are equipped to support 
the growing demand for AI, and to 
be able to offer services locally.

For example, we are investing £21m in 
Tech City UK over four years to expand 
into Tech Nation. Tech Nation will roll 
out dedicated sector programmes 
in tech specialisms, including AI. The 
AI programme will operate in two or 
three key clusters where there is AI 
expertise and potential to provide the 
mentoring and growth support needed 
for ambitious AI businesses to thrive. 
The aim is to link promising AI clusters 
into a powerful network of high growth 

AI businesses – part of Tech Nation’s 
strategy of linking regional tech clusters 
in London, Cambridge, Bristol and 
Bath, Manchester, Newcastle, Leeds 
and Sheffield, Reading, Birmingham, 
Edinburgh and Glasgow, Belfast, and 
Cardiff, to create a world leading 
national network of high growth 
tech entrepreneurs in the UK.

Key to the UK realising the full 
economic benefit of AI is ensuring 
the adoption, deployment and use 
of AI technologies by organisations 
of all size and sector. Following a 
recommendation made in the AI 
Review techUK, the Royal Academy of 
Engineering and the Digital Catapult 
are working together to provide 
practical guidance and tools to support 
the effective and responsible use of 
AI by businesses across the UK. We 
are also working with Digital Catapult 
centres across London, North East 
and Tees Valley, Northern Ireland, 
Brighton and Yorkshire to help 
businesses adopt AI effectively.

Alongside the five founding partner 
universities (Cambridge, Edinburgh, 
Oxford, Warwick and University College 
London) and the Engineering and 
Physical Sciences Research Council, 
The Alan Turing Institute has begun a 
programme of accepting new university 
partners. Eight new university partners 
have been announced in recent months. 

Case study: BT – Supporting national growth through regional  
R&D partnerships

BT is funding AI research at 15 
leading universities across the UK, 
and is the UK’s largest telecoms and 
ICT investor in R&D. In addition, BT is 
leading a five year, £5m partnership 
with the Universities of Lancaster, 
Cambridge, Surrey and Bristol, as 
part of EPSRC’s £78m Prosperity 
programme, creating an AI powered 
next generation data infrastructure 
for the UK. BT is expanding its global 
R&D centre and startup cluster 

at Adastral Park in East Anglia. 
Specifically, BT is committed to 
creating carrier scale and critical 
national infrastructure ready AI 
technology. This is an integral part 
of the evolving consortium of UK 
companies and institutions behind a 
proposed national Future Networks 
Research Centre with its hub at 
Adastral Park to drive AI into the 
global telecoms infrastructure.


  37


Industrial Strategy Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal

36  37

Implementation plan

Key deal activities

Date Milestone

Oct 2017 Publication of the AI Review

Nov 2017 Industrial Strategy White Paper published

Announcement of £20m Industrial Strategy Challenge Fund 
(ISCF) support for Next Generation Services using artificial 
intelligence, and £210m ISCF support for Data to early 
diagnostics and precision medicine which includes using  
AI to analyse medical images in digital pathology

Q2 2018 Sector Deal launched

Establishment of AI Council, interim Centre for Data Ethics 
and Innovation, and Office for AI

First meeting of the AI Council

First funded challenges are launched, including Next 
Generation Services

Q1 2019 Annual Review of the Sector Deal

Governance

Oversight of the implementation of the Sector Deal will be led  
by the Office for Artificial Intelligence, which will review progress 
against objectives regularly.
The new government Office for 
Artificial Intelligence will be established 
with responsibility for implementing 
this Sector Deal. It will support the AI 
Council which will oversee and drive 
the implementation of the deal.

An early role for the Office for AI 
will be to agree implementation 
plans for each section of the deal, 
including agreed success metrics. 

Membership of the AI Council will be 
announced ahead of the first meeting. 
The main aim of the AI Council will 
be to provide strategic leadership 
and momentum in delivery.

The Office for AI will report to the AI 
Council regularly and will be subject to 
challenge sessions from government 
ministers on progress in implementing 
the Sector Deal. The Industrial Strategy 
team will provide the challenge on 
delivery timetable, metrics and ambition 
on outcomes as well as providing 
updates and escalation to ministers 
across the suite of Sector Deals.


  39


Industrial Strategy Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal

38  39

References

1. Hall, W and Pesenti, J - Growing 
the Artificial Intelligence Industry 
in the UK (2017) - https://www.
gov.uk/government/uploads/
system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/652097/Growing_the_artificial_
intelligence_industry_in_the_UK.pdf

2. Industrial Strategy Challenge 
Fund challenges are subject to HM 
Treasury business case approval

3. This includes third party 
funding as well

4. Oxford Insights - Government AI 
Readiness Ranking Index (2017) - 
https://www.oxfordinsights.com/
government-ai-readiness-index/

5. Industrial Strategy Challenge 
Fund challenges are subject to HM 
Treasury business case approval

6. PWC - The Impact of Artificial 
Intelligence on the UK Economy 
(2017) - https://www.pwc.
co.uk/economic-services/
assets/ai-uk-report-v2.pdf

7. PR Newswire - Artificial Intelligence 
Market Report (2016) - http://www.
prnewswire.co.uk/news-releases/
artificial-intelligence-market-
report-2016---global-forecast-
to-2022-artificial-intelligence-ai-
market-is-expected-to-be-worth-
usd-1606-billion-by-2022-at-
a-cagr-of-629---research-and-
markets-606786556.html

8. Hall, W and Pesenti, J - Growing 
the Artificial Intelligence Industry 
in the UK (2017) - https://www.
gov.uk/government/uploads/
system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/652097/Growing_the_artificial_
intelligence_industry_in_the_UK.pdf

9. 80 per cent of AI companies, 
according to Sonovate - 50 Hottest 
UK AI Companies (2017) - http://
www.sonovate.com/quickview/50-
hottest-uk-ai-companies




Industrial Strategy Artificial Intelligence Sector Deal


40

© Crown copyright 2018

This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government 
Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit 
nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3 or 
write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, 
London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.Where 
we have identified any third party copyright information you will 
need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.

This publication is available from: www.gov.uk/beis 

Contact us if you have any enquiries about this publication, including 
requests for alternative formats, at: enquiries@beis.gov.uk 




