



Code of practice for the welfare of laying hens and pullets




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets 1

Code of practice for the welfare of
LAYING HENS AND PULLETS

© BFREPA




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets2




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets 3

© Crown copyright 2018

You may re-use this information (excluding logos) free of charge in any format or medium, under the terms 
of the Open Government Licence v.3. To view this licence visit www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-
government-licence/version/3/ or email PSI@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk 

This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/publications 

www.gov.uk/defra

http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3/
http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3/
mailto:PSI@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk
http://www.gov.uk/government/publications
http://www.gov.uk/defra




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets4

Contents Preface ............................................................................. 1
Introduction ...................................................................... 5
Definitions ......................................................................... 7
Section 1: Recommendations applying to 
all husbandry systems ...................................................... 8

Stockmanship and staffing ........................................ 8
Health and welfare plan ............................................. 9
Biosecurity and disease control ................................ 9
Contingency planning for disease and other 
emergencies ............................................................ 11
Inspection and responding to poor health 
and welfare .............................................................. 12
Welfare outcome assessments ................................ 14
Specific health and welfare issues .......................... 15

Injurious pecking, aggressive pecking 
and feather loss ................................................ 15
Skeletal health .................................................. 16
Red mites .......................................................... 17

Automatic or mechanical equipment ....................... 17
Ventilation and temperature ..................................... 18
Lighting .................................................................... 19
Litter ......................................................................... 20
Noise ........................................................................ 21
Feed and water ........................................................ 22
Mutilations ............................................................... 24

Beak trimming ................................................... 25
Breeding procedures ............................................... 26
Responsible medicines usage 
and record keeping .................................................. 27
Catching and handling ............................................ 28




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets 5

Housing: General requirements ............................... 29
Stocking density and freedom of movement .... 30
Environmental enrichment ................................ 31

Non-cage systems: 
additional housing requirements ............................. 32
Free range systems: 
additional housing requirements  ............................ 33
Enriched cage systems: 
additional housing requirements ............................. 34

Section 2: Recommendations applying 
to day-old chicks and pullet rearing ............................... 36

Brooding (0-6 weeks) .............................................. 36
Pullet rearing environment ....................................... 36
Transition from rearing to laying environment ......... 36

Annex 1: Legislation affecting laying hens and pullets .. 37
Annex 2: Permitted procedures ...................................... 39
Sources of further information ........................................ 41




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets 1

Preface 

This preface is not part of the Code; instead, 
it explains the Code’s role and the broad 
considerations on which it is based. 

This Code applies to England only. It replaces 
the Code of Recommendations for the Welfare of 
Livestock: Laying Hens, issued in 2002. 

The legal text in boxes throughout this document is 
not part of this Code but highlights relevant legislation. 
The text in these boxes is the law as it stands on the 
date that this Code is published (please see the final 
page for the date of publication). You should be aware 
that any of the legal requirements quoted here could 
change. You should check that these are an accurate 
statement of the law as it currently stands. See Annex 
1 for a list of other relevant legislation. 

This Code is made under the Animal Welfare 
Act 2006. The Act makes owners and keepers 
responsible for ensuring that the welfare needs of 
their animals are met, have a suitable environment, 
are fed an appropriate diet and are protected from 
pain, injury, suffering and disease. 

Section 14 of the Animal Welfare Act 2006 
states:

(1)  The appropriate national authority 
may issue, and may from time to 
time revise, codes of practice for 
the purpose of providing practical 
guidance in respect of any provision 
made by or under this Act.

(2)  The authority responsible for issuing 
a code of practice under subsection 
(1) shall publish the code, and any 
revision of it, in such manner as it 
considers appropriate.

(3) A person’s failure to comply with a 
provision of a code of practice issued 


14 


under this section shall not of itself 
render him liable to proceedings of 
any kind.

(4)  In any proceedings against a person 
for an offence under this Act or an 
offence under regulations under 
section 12 or 13—

(a)  failure to comply with a relevant 
provision of a code of practice 
issued under this section may 
be relied upon as tending to 
establish liability, and

(b) compliance with a relevant 
provision of such a code of 
practice may be relied upon as 
tending to negative liability.

The principal legislation referred to in this Code 
are the Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) 
Regulations 2007 (referred to later on in this Code 
as “WOFAR 2007”) and the Mutilations (Permitted 
Procedures) (England) Regulations 2007, which 
implement Council Directive 98/58/EC concerning 
the protection of animals kept for farming purposes 
and Council Directive 99/74/EC which lays down 
minimum standards for the protection of laying hens.

Section 3 of the Animal Welfare Act 2006 
states:

(1)  In this Act, references to a person 
responsible for an animal are to a person 
responsible for an animal whether on a 
permanent or temporary basis.

(2) In this Act, references to being 
responsible for an animal include 
being in charge of it.


3 

Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets2

Welfare Act 2006 or a statutory 
welfare code issued under section 
3 of the Agriculture (Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act 1968 (1) relating to the 
particular species of farmed animal to 
which a person is attending. 

(3) For the purposes of this Act, a 
person who owns an animal shall 
always be regarded as being a 
person who is responsible for it.

(4) For the purposes of this Act, 
a person shall be treated as 
responsible for any animal for which 
a person under the age of 16 years of 
whom he has actual care and control 
is responsible. 

Regulation 6 of the Welfare of Farmed 
Animals (England) Regulations 2007 states:

(1) A person responsible for a farmed 
animal—
(a) must not attend to the animal 

unless he is acquainted with any 
relevant code of practice and 
has access to the code while 
attending to the animal; and

(b) must take all reasonable 
steps to ensure that a person 
employed or engaged by him 
does not attend to the animal 
unless that other person—

(i) is acquainted with any 
relevant code of practice;

(ii) has access to the code 
while attending to the 
animal; and

(iii) has received instruction and 
guidance on the code.

(2) In this section, a “relevant code of 
practice” means a code of practice 
issued under section 14 of the Animal 

This Code is intended to help all those who care for 
laying hens and pullets to practise good standards 
of stockmanship to safeguard bird welfare. Without 
good stockmanship, animal welfare can never 
be adequately protected. Adherence to these 
recommendations will help keepers to maintain the 
standards required to comply with legislation. 

Those who have care for laying hens and pullets 
should demonstrate:

• Caring and responsible planning and 
management;

• Skilled, knowledgeable and conscientious 
stockmanship;

• Appropriate environmental design;

• Considerate handling and transport; and

• Humane culling.

The welfare of laying hens and pullets is considered 
within a framework that was developed by the Farm 
Animal Welfare Committee (FAWC) and known 
as the ‘Five Freedoms’. These form the guiding 
principles for the assessment of welfare within 
any system, together with the actions necessary 
to safeguard welfare within the constraints of an 
efficient livestock industry. The Five Freedoms 
should be considered in conjunction with FAWC’s 
three essentials of stockmanship.


6


Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets 3

The Five Freedoms are:

1. Freedom From Hunger And Thirst
by ready access to fresh water and a diet to 
maintain full health and vigour;

2. Freedom From Discomfort by providing an 
appropriate environment including shelter and a 
comfortable resting area;

3. Freedom From Pain, Injury Or Disease
by prevention or rapid diagnosis and treatment;

4. Freedom To Express Normal Behaviour by 
providing sufficient space, proper facilities and 
company of the animals’ own kind;

5. Freedom From Fear And Distress by ensuring 
conditions and treatment to avoid mental 
suffering.

The Three Essentials of Stockmanship are:

1. Knowledge Of Animal Husbandry
Sound knowledge of the biology and husbandry 
of farm animals, including how their needs may 
be best provided for in all circumstances.

2. Skills In Animal Husbandry
Demonstrable skills in observation, handling, 
care and treatment of animals, and problem 
detection and resolution. 

3. Personal Qualities
Affinity and empathy with animals, dedication 
and patience.

During on-farm welfare inspections carried out by 
the Animal and Plant Health Agency (APHA, an 
executive agency of Defra and exercising Secretary 
of State functions) and Local Authorities, inspectors 
will assess compliance against legislation and 
this Code. Not complying with the welfare-related 
legislation outlined in the boxes throughout this 
Code, is an offence. In cases that go to court 

for prosecution, whether someone has met the 
requirements of this Code, or not, can be used to 
help establish a person’s liability. 

There may be other legislation and requirements 
that are not outlined in this Code but that you must 
be familiar with and comply with.

Section 4 of the Animal Welfare Act 2006 
states:

(1) A person commits an offence if— 
(a) an act of his, or a failure of his to 

act, causes an animal to suffer, 

(b) he knew, or ought reasonably 
to have known, that the act, or 
failure to act, would have that 
effect or be likely to do so, 

(c) the animal is a protected animal, 


and 


(d) the suffering is unnecessary. 

(2) A person commits an offence if— 
(a) he is responsible for an animal, 

(b) an act, or failure to act, of 
another person causes the 
animal to suffer, 

(c) he permitted that to happen 
or failed to take such steps 
(whether by way of supervising 
the other person or otherwise) 
as were reasonable in all the 
circumstances to prevent that 
happening, and 

(d) the suffering is unnecessary. 


4 

Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets4

Section 9 of the Animal Welfare Act 2006 
states:

(1) A person commits an offence if he 
does not take such steps as are 
reasonable in all the circumstances to 
ensure that the needs of an animal for 
which he is responsible are met to the 
extent required by good practice.

(2) For the purposes of this Act, an 
animal’s needs shall be taken to 
include - 

(a) its need for a suitable 
environment,

(b) its need for a suitable diet,

(c) its need to be able to exhibit 
normal behaviour patterns,

(d) any need it has to be housed 
with, or apart from, other 
animals, and

(e) its need to be protected from 
pain, suffering, injury and 
disease.


9 

(3) The considerations to which it 
is relevant to have regard when 
determining for the purposes of 
this section whether suffering is 
unnecessary include— 
(a) whether the suffering could 

reasonably have been avoided 
or reduced; 

(b) whether the conduct which 
caused the suffering was in 
compliance with any relevant 
enactment or any relevant 
provisions of a licence or code 
of practice issued under an 
enactment; 

(c) whether the conduct which 
caused the suffering was for a 
legitimate purpose, such as— 
(i) the purpose of benefiting 

the animal, or 

(ii) the purpose of protecting a 
person, property or another 
animal; 

(d) whether the suffering was 
proportionate to the purpose of 
the conduct concerned; 

(e) whether the conduct concerned 
was in all the circumstances that 
of a reasonably competent and 
humane person. 

(4) Nothing in this section applies to 
the destruction of an animal in an 
appropriate and humane manner.

Suggested sources of additional information are 
included at the end of this Code. These sources of 
further information are relevant to the welfare of laying 
hens and pullets, but are for information only and should 
not be considered to be part of the Code of Practice. 

This Code has been issued by the Secretary of State 
for the Department for Environment, Food and Rural 
Affairs (following no objections by either House after 
being laid in draft in both Houses of Parliament). 

THIS WELFARE CODE CAME INTO FORCE ON 8 
AUGUST 2018




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets 5

Introduction

1. This Code (which applies in England only) covers 
all parts of the laying hen production sector, 
including pullets and breeding birds, and all 
types of husbandry systems. It covers single 
or multiple laying hens kept on a smallholding 
(hobby/backyard flock), as well as commercial 
laying hen producers. These recommendations 
will help owners and keepers of laying hens 
comply with animal welfare rules, but are not 
meant to replace expert advice such as from 
a veterinary surgeon or appropriately qualified 
technical advisor. 

2. Schedule 1 to the Welfare of Farmed Animals 
(England) Regulations 2007 lays down conditions 
under which all farmed animals, including 
laying hens, must be kept. Schedules 2, 4 and 
5 to the Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) 
Regulations 2007 lay down additional conditions 
that apply to the keeping of 350 or more laying 
hens. These additional conditions do not apply 
to establishments with fewer than 350 laying 
hens, hatcheries, pullet rearing farms or laying 
hen breeders. The Council of Europe has also 

made recommendations concerning laying hens 
and, where not covered in legislation, they are 
included in this Code.

3. The keeping of 350 or more laying hens in 
conventional (unenriched) cages has been 
banned in the UK on welfare grounds since 1 
January 2012. For this reason, conventional 
cages are not recommended for small units (with 
fewer than 350 birds). The legal requirements 
that apply to the keeping of 350 or more laying 
hens (such as for nesting, perching, scratch 
areas and stocking density) are recommended 
as good practice in flocks with fewer than 
350 birds. This Code’s recommendations 
on enrichment provision, range access 
and reducing risks of injurious pecking are 
recommended as good practice for all flocks, 
regardless of size. 

4. For ease of reference, the table below 
summarises the various legal provisions relating 
to animal welfare on farm for different types of 
laying hen production systems. 

Legislation in England

Production system Animal Welfare 
Act 2006

Schedule 1 to 
WOFAR 2007

Schedule 2 to 
WOFAR 2007

Schedule 4 to 
WOFAR 2007

Schedule 5 to 
WOFAR 2007

Hatcheries   - - -

Pullets   - - -

Establishments with <350 laying 
hens, including smallholdings

  - - -

>350 laying hens in barn systems    - 
>350 laying hens in free range 
systems

   - 

>350 laying hens in enriched 
cages

  -  

Organically reared laying hens    - 
Laying hen breeders   - - -




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets6

5. The relevant animal welfare legislation applies 
to owners at all times as well as to any person 
looking after the hens on their behalf, wherever 
the hens are located. A written protocol should 
clearly set out for all parties their responsibilities 
in respect of welfare. However, the obligations 
imposed by the law will still apply.

6. No person should operate or set up a laying hen 
unit unless the welfare of all the birds can be 
safeguarded to comply fully with the law. This 
can be achieved by ensuring that the buildings 
and equipment, the skills and abilities, and 
the numbers of keepers are appropriate to the 
husbandry system and number of birds to be 
kept.

7. Keepers of flocks of 50 or more birds must 
register with APHA, within one month of keeping 
this number of birds at the site. Keepers with 
fewer than 50 birds are also encouraged to 
register.




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets 7

Definitions

8. For the purposes of this Code, definitions of 
terms used in this Code are summarised below. 
Some of these (marked with an asterisk) are 
taken directly from the relevant legislation, whilst 
others are included to provide an explanation for 
the purposes of the Code. 

‘biosecurity’ means a set of management 
actions and physical measures designed to 
reduce the risk of introduction, establishment 
and spread of disease to, from, and within the 
flock and, where relevant, between different 
flocks on site; 

‘flock’ means a group of hens which are placed 
in a house of a holding and are present in this 
house at the same time;

‘holding’ means a production site on which 
laying hens are kept;

‘house’ means a building on a holding where a 
laying hen flock is kept;

‘injurious pecking’ is pecking behaviour 
directed at the feathers and skin of other birds 
and encompasses gentle and severe feather 
pecking, vent pecking and cannibalism;

‘owner’ or ‘keeper’ (*) means any natural or 
legal person or persons responsible for or in 
charge of animals whether on a permanent or 
temporary basis;

‘laying hen’ (*) means a hen of the species 
Gallus gallus which has reached laying maturity 
and is kept for the production of eggs not 
intended for hatching; 

‘litter’ (*) means, in relation to laying hens, any 
friable material enabling the hens to satisfy their 
ethological needs;

‘mutilation’ is a procedure which involves 
interference with the sensitive tissues or bone 

structure of an animal, otherwise than for the 
purpose of its medical treatment; 

‘nest’ (*) means a separate space for egg laying, 
the floor component of which may not include 
wire mesh that can come into contact with the 
birds, for an individual hen or for a group of 
hens;

‘pullet’ is used to describe birds during their 
rearing period and at transfer to the laying house 
when no eggs have been laid by the flock. As 
soon as the first egg has been laid in the flock it 
becomes a laying hen flock;

‘red mites’ are ectoparasites (up to 0.7mm 
diameter and grey or red in colour) that feed on 
the blood of hens; 

‘usable area’ (*) means an area, other than that 
taken up by a nest, used by laying hens which 
is at least 30cm wide with a floor slope not 
exceeding 14% and with headroom of at least 
45cm.




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets8

Section 1: Recommendations 
applying to all husbandry systems  

Stockmanship and staffing under the supervision of others and before 
being given sole responsibility for animals, 
staff should have demonstrated competence 
and understanding, including on-farm practical 
ability, to ensure that they are capable of 
safeguarding the animals under all foreseeable 
conditions. 

12. Regular training and refresher courses should 
be undertaken by all those responsible for 
laying hens, including those employed by 
contractors. Ideally, the training should lead to 
formal accredited recognition of competence.

13. Those working with hens should be able to 
recognise not only normal behaviour and 
good health and welfare, but also signs of 
illness or disease and should know how to 
seek veterinary advice. See also paragraphs 
37 to 48. Where specialised tasks are to be 
performed, for example, medication or humane 
culling, specific training should be given and 
records kept of those staff competent to carry 
out those tasks. Alternatively, the services of a 
contractor using competent trained staff should 
be obtained.

14. It is essential to ensure enough time is available 
within the daily work routine to inspect the hens 
properly and any installations essential for their 
health and welfare and for any remedial action 
to be taken promptly. The owner/keeper should 
have adequate knowledge of the husbandry 
system to be able to appreciate the suitability of 
the total environment for the birds’ health and 
welfare. 

15. Any hens bred for farming purposes should not 
be used to achieve any other goal, including 
public spectacles or demonstrations, if such 
use is likely to be detrimental to their health or 
welfare.

Paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 to the Welfare 
of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 
2007 states:

1. Animals must be cared for by a 
sufficient number of staff who possess 
the appropriate ability, knowledge and 
professional competence.

9. Stockmanship is one of the most important 
influences on the welfare of laying hens. A good 
keeper will have a compassionate and humane 
attitude, will be able to anticipate and avoid 
many potential welfare problems and have 
the ability to identify those that do occur and 
respond to them promptly. Those responsible 
for managing a laying hen unit should make sure 
that the hens are cared for by well-motivated 
and competent staff. Before any unit is set up or 
expanded, it is important to be certain that the 
level of stockmanship will be sufficiently high to 
safeguard the welfare of the hens. 

10. All staff and owners/keepers (where no staff 
are employed), including those contracted to 
carry out specific management tasks, need 
to be aware of the welfare needs and basic 
biology of the hens. To alleviate fear responses 
and possible injury, birds should be handled in 
a careful, positive and compassionate manner 
from an early age. 

11. Staff and owners/keepers (where no staff are 
employed) need specific knowledge and skills. 
They must be trained and competent in any 
specific tasks they are required to undertake 
and be competent in the use of any equipment. 
In a farm situation, this should be developed 
on the unit by working with skilled staff who 
are experienced in the relevant system. Whilst 




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets 9

Health and welfare plan
16. A health and welfare plan should be implemented 

for each farm which should set out health and 
husbandry activities covering the whole of the 
production cycle. Routine daily tasks and other 
regular checks essential for bird health and 
welfare should be clearly detailed. The plan 
should be developed with appropriate veterinary 
advice, regularly reviewed against performance 
and updated regularly, at the end of the flock or 
annually on a multi-age site.

17. Any plan should also establish management 
procedures and control measures to reduce 
the risk of infections and injury and include an 
effective vaccination programme. Antibiotics 
must not be used routinely, but only for treatment 
purposes as prescribed by a veterinary surgeon 
when specific disease or infection has been 
diagnosed to avoid a welfare issue. 

18. The plan should include contingency measures to 
account for both endemic and potential notifiable 
disease. See also paragraphs 33 to 36. The plan 
should also include the use of welfare outcome 
assessments to assess and monitor the ongoing 
welfare of the hens. See also paragraphs 49 to 52.

19. There are many sources of technical advice 
available to producers, in addition to advice from 
their veterinary surgeon. They may also receive 
regular inspections from independent assurance 
schemes as part of their retailer supply contract 
and from government regulators. Social media 
is largely unregulated and therefore may not be 
a reliable source of information. Advice should 
always be verified by a veterinary surgeon or 
appropriately qualified technical advisor.

20. As part of the health and welfare plan, owners/
keepers should establish in advance the best 
course of action to take should problems be 
identified and ensure that veterinary or other 
expert advice is sought when needed. 

Biosecurity and disease control

Paragraph 4 of Schedule 5 to the Welfare 
of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 
2007 states:

(1) Those parts of buildings, equipment 
or utensils which are in contact 
with the hens must be thoroughly 
cleansed and disinfected regularly 
and, in any case, every time 
depopulation is carried out and 
before a new batch of hens is 
brought in. 

(2) While the cages are occupied:

(a) the surfaces and all equipment 
must be kept satisfactorily clean; 

(b) droppings must be removed; and 

(c) dead hens must be removed 
every day.

21. Biosecurity applies to flocks of any size, 
from smallholdings with one or two birds to 
commercial farm units. 

22. Good biosecurity measures should result in:

a) farm units/smallholdings being more secure 
from the introduction of infectious diseases; 

b) the spread of any diseases within the unit, 
specifically from flock to flock, being kept to 
a minimum; and 

c) a reduced risk of spread of disease from the 
farm to other farms or elsewhere.


4 

Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets10

23. Good biosecurity can be achieved through:

a) limiting external vehicle or equipment 
movement onto farm and instigating 
appropriate cleansing and disinfection 
procedures where this occurs;

b) good management and husbandry 
procedures on site. These include: 

i) where possible, “all in - all out” 
management of sites, by site or by 
accommodation block;

ii) clear biosecurity protocols when 
moving between different flocks on site, 
particularly where the site has different 
aged flocks;

iii) disinfection points on entry and exit 
from each accommodation or rearing 
section;

iv) separating staff responsibilities to 
specific sections and/or following strict 
disinfection protocols between different 
aged flocks; and 

v) daily management routines which move 
from youngest birds through to the oldest. 

c) good hygiene throughout the site, including 
protocols in the health and welfare plan for 
staff hygiene, and cleansing and disinfection 
procedures when moving between flocks 
and other accommodation:

i) preventive disease control programmes, 
including vaccination and red mite 
management programmes;

ii) a pest control programme to limit 
access of rodents, wild birds, wildlife, 
domestic pets and other risks, to 
animals and feed stores; and

iii) familiarising birds with changes in 
routine whilst limiting avoidable stressful 
events or conditions to which birds are 
exposed.

24. One way by which notifiable avian disease 
may spread to poultry is through contact with 
infected wild birds. It is not possible to prevent 
all airborne infections from entering a unit but, 
when planning new sites, consideration should 
be given to providing the maximum possible 
distance between the proposed site and 
existing sites as well as areas where migrating 
wild birds congregate, to improve biosecurity. 
A useful guide is the 3 km distance that defines 
the radius of a Protection Zone in the control of 
notifiable diseases, such as highly pathogenic 
avian influenza. The distance between houses 
on a site should also be considered. Ponds 
on site should be avoided but, where this is 
not possible, the hens should not be able to 
access them. Similarly, wild birds congregating 
on ponds, or otherwise, should not be able 
to access the hens’ feed and water, nor nest 
and roost in poultry buildings. A vermin control 
system should be in place to limit rodents and 
pests accessing and contaminating feed.

25. Only essential visitors should be allowed onto 
the unit. All visitors, including inspectors, 
should comply with the required biosecurity as 
stipulated by the owner/keeper (and which may 
be subject to change under changing disease 
challenges), including personal/private bird 
contact. Visitors should follow strict disinfection 
procedures and wear unit-dedicated clothing 
and footwear. A visitor book should be provided 
and all visitors should sign to say they have not 
been near other poultry for an agreed period, 
as stipulated in the health and welfare plan. 
A system should be provided to alert staff or 
visitors at the gate of these requirements before 
they enter the site. Consideration should be 
given as to the need for visitors to enter bird 
space.




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets 11

26. Ideally, farm staff should not keep their own 
birds at home. If they do so, they should be 
extra vigilant for signs of disease and even more 
careful about biosecurity both at home and on 
the farm. Where possible, waterfowl (i.e. geese 
and ducks) should be kept separate from other 
poultry species.

27. Loading facilities and, where possible, feed bins 
and dead stock collection points should be sited 
at the unit perimeter. If used, isolation buildings 
for new stock should be as near as possible 
to the farm entrance and away from other 
buildings/ranges for disease monitoring to take 
place. Vehicles which visit other poultry units 
should be kept off the unit wherever possible 
but, where entry is essential, wheels and 
footwear should be cleansed and disinfected 
thoroughly on entry and exit. 

28. Once emptied, bird housing should be 
thoroughly cleaned to remove organic material; 
where appropriate, washed with detergent; and 
then disinfected. Used litter should be removed 
from the house and the site before re-stocking 
to reduce the risk of carry-over of disease. 

29. Owners/keepers should routinely use local and 
national surveillance information sources for the 
latest information on disease diagnoses in the area.

30. All owners/keepers should be familiar with the 
signs and symptoms associated with notifiable 
diseases which affect laying hens, including 
avian influenza and Newcastle disease. An 
owner/keeper who suspects the flock may 
be suffering from a notifiable disease, has a 
legal duty to report this immediately to APHA. 
All laying hen flocks of 350 or more hens 
are monitored under the National Control 
Programme for Salmonella, under which there 
are additional legal obligations. 

31.  Where notifiable disease is confirmed in birds 
on the farm/smallholding or other units there 

will be mandatory biosecurity measures and 
restrictions on movements which could persist 
for a considerable length of time and there may 
be a requirement to confine free range birds to 
their housing.

32. Keepers who have registered with APHA will be 
contacted by them by email or text message in 
the event of a disease outbreak. Keepers who 
have not registered should seek information from 
the Defra/APHA disease control website and 
should sign up to receive APHA disease alerts. 

Contingency planning for disease 
and other emergencies
33. Measures should be put in place for 

contingency planning following an assessment 
of possible hazards. All owners/keepers should 
ensure they, or at least one responsible member 
of staff, are always on call to take the necessary 
steps. Emergency plans should deal with events 
such as: 

a) the disruption of feed, power or water 
supply, including when automated 
equipment fails and cannot be immediately 
rectified; 

b) heat stress; 

c) natural disasters, such as floods;

d) fires; 

e) arrangements for allowing rapid entry to 
locked buildings in case of emergency, for 
example, by providing clear instructions on 
emergency contact details;

f) instructions for short and long term 
restrictions placed in case of notifiable 
disease, including dealing with delays 
in moving birds to slaughter and the 




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets12

compulsory temporary housing of free 
range birds; and

g) arrangements for both culling and disposal 
of flocks, when depopulation is required 
in the event of notifiable disease or due 
to contamination of feed or pasture with 
toxins. 

34. The use of alarm systems activated 24/7 should 
be considered, which allow prompt emergency 
warning of staff located on site or on duty 
remotely. Portable lighting such as a head torch 
should be available for emergency night time 
inspections.

35. Where long term housing of normally free range 
hens is anticipated, consideration should be 
given to the provision of additional littered 
flooring, enrichment and access to natural 
daylight within the confined housing, to avoid 
an increase in injurious feather pecking in birds 
that are normally accustomed to range access. 
A “veranda” or “winter garden” attached to 
the main accommodation could meet these 
additional requirements. 

36. Responsibility for animal welfare during any 
enforced restrictions on movement or any other 
emergency on farm remains the responsibility 
of the owner/keeper. Any concerns about 
animal welfare during such periods should be 
discussed with a veterinary surgeon and, where 
appropriate, reported to APHA if animal welfare 
conditions deteriorate. 

Inspection and responding to 
poor health and welfare

Paragraph 2 (1) and (2) of Schedule 1 to 
the Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) 
Regulations 2007 states:

2 (1)….animals kept in husbandry systems 
in which their welfare depends on 
frequent human attention must be 
thoroughly inspected at least once a day 
to check that they are in a state of well-
being. 

(2)….animals kept in husbandry systems 
in which their welfare does not depend 
on frequent human attention must be 
inspected at intervals sufficient to avoid 
any suffering.

Paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to the Welfare 
of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 
2007 states:

3.  Where animals are kept in a building, 
adequate lighting (whether fixed or 
portable) must be available to enable them 
to be thoroughly inspected at any time. 

Paragraph 1 of Schedule 5 to the Welfare of 
Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 2007 
states:

1.  All hens must be inspected by the owner 
or other person responsible for the hens at 
least once a day.




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets 13

Paragraph 6 of Schedule 5 to the Welfare of 
Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 2007 
states:

6.  Accommodation comprising two or more 
tiers of cages must have devices, or 
appropriate measures must be taken, to 
allow inspection of all tiers without difficulty 
and to facilitate the removal of hens.

Paragraphs 5 and 6 of Schedule 1 to the 
Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) 
Regulations 2007 state:

5.  Any animals which appear to be ill or 
injured must be cared for appropriately 
and without delay; where they do not 
respond to such care, veterinary advice 
must be obtained as soon as possible.

6.  Where necessary, sick or injured 
animals must be isolated in suitable 
accommodation with, where appropriate, 
dry comfortable bedding.

37. A thorough flock inspection must take place at 
least once a day, irrespective of the presence 
of any automatic surveillance system. Ideally, 
there should be three inspections spread out 
across the day. Even when linked with other visits 
to the poultry houses, each health and welfare 
inspection should be undertaken as a separate, 
specific procedure. 

38. Inspections should be sufficiently thorough to 
detect illness and injury of individual hens, and 
should include an inspection of nest boxes where 
hens in poor health may seek refuge. Aspects of 
the physical environment such as litter condition 
and air quality should also be monitored and 
problems rectified without delay. 

39. Owners/keepers should try to introduce some 
variation into the inspection routine, including 
different members of staff where possible, to help 
reduce fearfulness and stress associated with any 
necessary changes in management during the 
rearing and laying periods. Frequent inspection 
helps familiarise hens to human presence in the 
house as a normal part of daily life.

40. Housing and equipment must be designed so 
that all the laying hens can be clearly seen. Light 
levels during inspection must be sufficient to 
ensure that the birds are clearly visible. See also 
paragraph 34. 

41. Flock inspection should include an assessment 
of body condition, any growth variation within the 
flock, respiration, mortality, condition of plumage, 
indications of head or vent pecking, condition of 
droppings, eyes, skin, beak, legs, feet and claws, 
and, where appropriate, combs and wattles. 
Attention should be paid to the presence of 
external parasites, feed and water consumption 
and egg production level. The healthy individual 
hen should vocalise and perform activities 
appropriate to its age, breed or type, it should 
have clear bright eyes, good posture, clean 
healthy skin, good feather condition and coverage, 
well-formed legs and feet, effective walking and 
active feeding and drinking behaviour. 

42. Inspections should be made at every level of 
multi-tier and enriched cage systems. In order 
to ensure a thorough inspection, the owner/
keeper should pass close enough to every bird 
to encourage them to move, taking care not 
to frighten them with sudden, unaccustomed 
movement, noise or changes in light levels. This 
will enable the identification of any individual 
that is sick, injured or weak for appropriate 
action to be taken by the owner/keeper. 
Individual examination should occur where 
inspection suggests animal health or welfare 
is compromised and may require prompt 
intervention, including humane culling. 




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets14

43. The early signs of ill-health may include changes 
in food and water intake, preening, vocalisation 
and flock activity levels. There may also be a 
drop in egg production and changes in egg 
quality, such as shell defects. Any variation 
in normal feeding, drinking or behaviour may 
indicate a problem which should be given 
immediate attention, in order to identify the 
cause and rectify any emerging issue that is of 
risk to the flock’s health and welfare.

44. The owner/keeper should be able to anticipate 
problems or recognise them in their earliest 
stages and, in many cases, be able to identify 
the cause and put matters right immediately. 
Recording all incidents suggesting a health 
or welfare concern, in addition to minimum 
legal records requirements on mortality and 
medicines, may help in this. Such monitoring 
should be included in the health and welfare 
plan, so all staff are clear on specific measures 
to be made on a daily basis or at the time of 
specific management procedures. Advice should 
be sought, where appropriate. See also welfare 
outcome assessments at paragraphs 49 to 52.

45. The possibility that the birds may be affected 
by a notifiable disease should be considered 
and all owners/keepers and staff should be 
aware of risks and clinical symptoms associated 
with new and emerging diseases. See also 
paragraphs 29 to 32. If the cause is not obvious, 
or if the immediate action taken is not effective, 
a veterinary surgeon’s advice must be sought 
immediately; failure to do so may cause 
unnecessary suffering in the individual and/or 
in other hens subsequently affected by lack of 
prompt action. 

46. Hens that are injured or show signs of illness 
and are likely to suffer, must receive appropriate 
treatment without delay, including where 
necessary separation from the rest of the flock 
to allow treatment, rest and recuperation, or be 
humanely culled immediately. Where there are 

signs of recurring injuries which may be related 
to the environment, such as trauma to wings, 
legs or keel bone, these must be investigated 
and the cause rectified as soon as possible.

47. Dead birds seen during an inspection should 
be removed from the house without delay and 
disposed of appropriately. 

48. When any bird is culled this must be carried out 
using a permitted method in accordance with the 
relevant legislation and the procedures included 
in the health and welfare plan. 

Welfare outcome assessments
49. Many recognised welfare standards are based 

on “inputs” carried out by the owner/keeper 
and staff, such as during daily management and 
husbandry procedures, or resources provided 
to the animals such as housing, feed and water. 
Many of these are defined as minimum standards 
in law and are covered throughout this Code. 

50. The use of welfare outcomes can help the owner/
keeper understand how these inputs directly 
affect individual birds and the flock as a whole. 
The assessments are designed to be practical 
and measurable, whilst having a scientific basis 
to demonstrate positive or negative welfare 
states in the birds. 

51. In commercial systems the routine welfare 
outcome assessments to be carried out by the 
owner/keeper and staff should be agreed with 
a veterinary surgeon. Additional requirements 
may be specified through private schemes or 
retailer contracts. All agreed measures should be 
accurately detailed and recorded daily. Additional 
information from other rearing stages (for 
example, hatchery information and pullet rearing 
data) and from slaughterhouses at depopulation 
may provide further information on the health 
and welfare of the flocks.




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets 15

52. Recommended welfare outcome assessments in 
laying hens include:

a) Feather loss
b) Bird dirtiness
c) Antagonistic behaviours, including injurious 

and aggressive pecking
d) Flightiness or fearfulness 
e) Number of birds requiring isolation / 

additional care
f) Mortality

Specific health and welfare issues
Injurious pecking, aggressive pecking and 
feather loss 

53. A key positive outcome for the flock is absence of 
injurious pecking. Every effort should be made to 
reduce injurious pecking so as to stop the need 
to beak trim as soon as reasonably possible. See 
also section on beak trimming, at paragraphs 
100 to 105. However, beak trimming should not 
be ceased until the owner/keeper is confident 
that, under the current bird rearing, housing and 
management procedures, this will not result in 
significantly increased risk of injurious pecking.

54. Any sudden change in management, 
environment or disease (for example, red mite), 
i.e. a stressor, can precipitate an outbreak of 
injurious pecking. This includes gentle pecking 
(feather tip pecks, little reaction from the 
bird being pecked) through to severe feather 
pecking (forceful pecks, feather pulls, visible 
feather loss to back, vent, tail area, the bird 
being pecked may vocalise) and cannibalistic 
pecking (pecking of featherless skin following 
severe feather pecking leading to blood loss, 
infection, death). Vent pecking is a specific form 
of cannibalistic pecking that targets the vent 
area and can lead to the inner organs being 
pulled out; it can occur in fully feathered birds 
and a key risk time is onset of egg-laying.

55. Aggressive pecking is not the same as injurious 
pecking and is directed towards the head and 
neck of another bird. It includes fighting and 
chasing of other birds, which occurs as part 
of natural behaviour to establish dominance 
hierarchies or “pecking orders” within the flock 
and as a result of competition for resources. 
Vocalisation between birds during aggressive 
activity is common. If aggression levels are 
particularly high in a flock this can predispose 
to injurious pecking and cannibalism. The 
motivations for aggressive pecking are different 
to injurious pecking and may also be seen 
when management changes are made, so it 
is important that the owner/keeper takes time 
to observe the birds to understand the type of 
pecking occurring in the flock.

56. Owners/keepers should consider choosing 
strains with a reduced tendency to injurious 
pecking.

57. A bespoke action plan to reduce injurious 
pecking and thus the need to beak trim should 
form part of any health and welfare plan. This 
should be drawn up in consultation with a 
veterinary surgeon. It should detail specific 
management procedures and interventions from 
early rearing through to laying, to reduce the 
risk of injurious pecking occurring and the steps 
to be taken in the event of an outbreak. Feather 
scores should be recorded throughout flock life 
and outbreaks of injurious pecking recorded 
and investigated as to possible causes. 
Progress should be assessed on a flock by 
flock basis as part of the review of the plan, with 
the aim of continuous improvement.

58. Recommended strategies and interventions 
could include:

a) Managing the transition from rearing to 
laying house by matching conditions as 
far as possible. This is a high risk period 
for stress and the onset of feather pecking 




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets16

behaviour and the transition should be kept 
as smooth as possible. See also Section 2;

b) Allowing the pullets immediate access to 
good quality, friable litter;

c) Giving the pullets in the laying unit early 
access to the range;

d) Encouraging use of the range by providing 
shelters near the house; increasing the 
amount and variety of vegetation; co-
grazing with compatible non-avian species; 
and providing foraging opportunities and 
appropriate outside drinkers. See also 
paragraph 149; 

e) Actively managing the range by keeping the 
area around the popholes clean and well 
drained, controlling predators and rotating 
pasture;

f) Maintaining good, deep, friable litter 
throughout the laying period to promote 
foraging and dustbathing activities; 

g) Providing additional opportunities for 
foraging and dustbathing, such as straw or 
hay bales (entire to allow birds to pull them 
apart) or in hanging nets; a range of pecking 
objects and dustbathing boxes; 

h) Minimising diet changes – where possible, 
mix old and new diets through any transition 
period. Avoid changing from high protein 
to low protein diets. Mash increases eating 
time compared to pellets and keeps the 
birds occupied; 

i) Increasing insoluble fibre in diet – within 
the main diet or as an added forage, such 
as whole oats, wheat, corn, alfalfa, maize/
barley/pea, silage or carrots. However, 
ensure that methods of additional forage 
provision do not attract rodents;

j) Managing health and hygiene and 
maintaining effective disease control, for 
example, monitoring and controlling levels 
of red mite and worm burdens;

k) Reducing stress in the flock by developing 
good human-animal relationships, carrying 
out regular inspections and avoiding large 
contrasts in light, noise and temperature;

l) Inspecting birds more regularly than usual 
following any unusual or sudden change 
in management that is likely to increase 
stress levels, in order to detect any injurious 
pecking at the earliest opportunity, enabling 
steps to be taken to treat or cull injured birds;

m) Consider introducing additional perching 
opportunities in the vertical space in the 
building. Providing additional resting/
roosting options, appropriate for that 
shed, can allow submissive birds to avoid 
situations in which they might otherwise be 
pecked; and 

n) Consider the provision of “verandas” or 
“winter gardens” as practical methods of 
reducing stocking densities. The natural 
lighting and extra space, as well as 
opportunities for further enrichment points, 
all help maintain bird welfare. 

59. Once all management strategies are in place 
and good feather cover is achieved throughout 
lay for at least two consecutive flocks, stopping 
beak trimming in future flocks should be actively 
considered, in consultation with a veterinary 
surgeon and other appropriately qualified 
technical advisors.

Skeletal health

60. Skeletal health is an important aspect of the 
welfare of laying hens. Fractures can be a 
cause of pain and therefore poor welfare. 
They can occur during rearing or laying or 
during depopulation, transport or at the 
slaughterhouse.

61. The incidence of fractures is determined mainly by: 

i) the weakness of bones, including the 
susceptibility of keel bones to damage 
before and after ossification; 

ii) the design of housing systems, during 
rearing and in lay, including space availability 
and enrichment provision (to improve bone 




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets 17

health through load-bearing exercise) and 
housing layout (optimised to reduce trauma 
caused by collisions with furniture and 
equipment); and 

iii) handling, including at depopulation.

62. The keel bone (or sternum) is initially made of 
cartilage but ossifies at about 35 weeks of age. 
Before ossification, it may become twisted or 
otherwise deformed. It may be damaged or 
broken, for example, when the hen jumps or flies 
and collides with a perch or other equipment in 
the poultry house. Whilst bone strength alone 
may not be the sole cause of keel bone fracture, 
there is sufficient evidence that it is a major factor.

63. Suitable diet, housing design and careful 
handling contribute to optimising bone strength 
and reducing fracture risks. Owners/keepers of 
pullets and laying hens should follow the latest 
guidance on appropriate nutritional content of 
feed at different stages of rearing and laying to 
optimise bone strength throughout the bird’s life. 
Load-bearing exercises provided by the ability to 
dustbathe and access perches (ideally from the 
early rearing period) encourage mobility and should 
improve bone strength. The hen will also benefit 
from walking, hopping, wing flapping and other 
exercise. Design and location of perches, tiers and 
ramps should be carefully considered in both pullet 
and laying houses to prevent collisions and falls.

64. If birds are detected with fractures on farm, they 
must be isolated where necessary and treated 
or culled promptly by a trained and competent 
person in accordance with the specific welfare 
at the time of killing legislation. Birds which 
are not considered fit for transport should be 
immediately culled on farm. 

65. Owners/keepers should encourage end of 
lay hen processors to feedback information 
on fractures which should then be used to 
set targets in the health and welfare plan, to 
reduce the incidence of fractures. Any changes 

in housing design, management, nutrition or 
catching and handling strategies at depopulation 
should be detailed in the plan, before the next 
flock of replacement pullets arrives.

Red mites 

66.  Red mites in low numbers cause irritation, 
making birds restless and prone to injurious 
pecking. Large numbers of mites can cause 
anaemia, pale comb and wattles, reduced egg 
production and progressive weakness until 
death. Younger birds and chicks are particularly 
susceptible to rapid anaemia and death. The red 
mite lifecycle from egg to adult can be as little as 
a week and once there is a problem in the flock it 
can be difficult to bring under control. 

67. A clear monitoring and treatment protocol 
devised with a veterinary surgeon and defined 
in the health and welfare plan should be 
routinely carried out and records kept. See also 
paragraphs 112 to 117. Equipment and furnishings 
should be checked for mites; simple mite traps 
can be placed in the house in key areas to 
monitor levels. The comb, leg and breast skin of 
birds, including any found dead, should also be 
checked. A visible clumping of mites or blood 
spotting of eggs denotes a severe infestation. 

Automatic or mechanical 
equipment

Paragraphs 18 to 21 of Schedule 1 to the 
Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) 
Regulations 2007 state:

18.  All automated or mechanical equipment 
essential for the health and well-being of 
the animals must be inspected at least 
once a day to check that there is no 
defect in it.




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets18

19.  Where defects in automated or 
mechanical equipment of the type referred 
to in paragraph 18 are discovered, these 
must be rectified immediately or, if this 
is impossible, appropriate steps must 
be taken to safeguard the health and 
well-being of the animals pending the 
rectification of those defects including the 
use of alternative methods of feeding and 
watering and methods of providing and 
maintaining a satisfactory environment.

20.  Where the health and well-being of the 
animals is dependent on an artificial 
ventilation system –

(a)  provision must be made for an 
appropriate back-up system to 
guarantee sufficient air renewal to 
preserve the health and well-being of 
the animals in the event of failure of 
the system; and

(b)  an alarm system (which will operate 
even if the principal electricity supply to 
it has failed) must be provided to give 
warning of any failure of the system.

21.  The back-up system referred to in 
paragraph 20(a) must be thoroughly 
inspected and the alarm system referred 
to in paragraph 20(b) tested at least once 
every seven days in order to check that 
there is no defect, and, if any defect is found 
at any time, it must be rectified immediately. 

68. All equipment and services, including feed 
hoppers, feed chain and delivery systems, 
drinkers, ventilating fans, heating and lighting 
units, fire extinguishers, generators, other energy 
backup systems and alarm systems, should be 
cleaned, inspected, tested and kept in good 
working order. 

69. All automated equipment upon which the birds’ 
welfare is dependent should incorporate a fail-
safe or standby device and an alarm system to 
warn the owner/keeper of failure. Defects must 
be rectified immediately or other temporary 
measures taken (as described in the health and 
welfare plan) to safeguard the health and welfare 
of the birds until the problem has been rectified. 
Alternative ways of feeding and watering and of 
maintaining a satisfactory environment should 
therefore be ready for immediate use.

70. Ventilation, heating, lighting, feeding, drinker lines 
and all other equipment or electrical installation 
should be designed, sited and installed so as 
to avoid risk of injuring the birds. All electrical 
installations at mains voltage should be 
inaccessible to the birds and properly earthed.

Ventilation and temperature 

Paragraph 13 of Schedule 1 to the Welfare 
of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 
2007 states:

13.  Air circulation, dust levels, temperature, 
relative air humidity and gas 
concentrations must be kept within limits 
which are not harmful to the animals.

71. Environmental factors (temperature, humidity, 
ammonia, carbon dioxide, dust, bacteria and 
fungi) can directly impact on bird welfare, feed 
conversion, egg production (numbers, weight, 
shell quality), disease and mortality. The following 
table shows recommended values for some 
environmental parameters:




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets 19

House 
temperature

17 - 25°C (adult layers) 
depending on system of 
production

Humidity 40 - 60% (up to 70 - 75% for 
short periods)

Light intensity At least 10 lux (except nest 
boxes <1 lux)

Ammonia 
concentration

< 20 ppm

Carbon dioxide < 3000 ppm

72. The ventilation system and facilities for storing 
and handling litter and manure should be 
designed, maintained and managed to prevent 
the exposure of birds to gases such as ammonia 
and carbon dioxide, in concentrations which 
cause discomfort to the birds or which are 
detrimental to their health. People vary in their 
ability to smell ammonia, however, if ammonia 
can be smelt, it is likely to be too high and 
suggests monitoring and action is required. 
Certain activities (for example, topping up litter 
and manure removal) within the layer house can 
increase dust and pathogen levels and clear 
protocols should be in place to reduce frequency 
of exposure to birds and staff to elevated levels.

73. Provision of insulation and ventilation should 
be designed to avoid heat and cold stress. 
Ventilation requirements should be detailed in 
the health and welfare plan and clear guidance 
should be provided for staff on actions, including 
monitoring, at different times of the year to help 
maintain appropriate temperatures and humidity 
in the housing. Where ventilation appears to be 
causing health and welfare issues, expert advice 
should be sought.

74. Particular care should be taken to protect hens 
vulnerable to cold stress, such as those with 
feather loss, from draughts in cold conditions. 
Visible evidence of cold stress in the housing 
environment is huddling of groups of birds 

together for prolonged periods, in the warmest 
areas of the house (or the cage). Huddling is 
a normal response to cold temperatures but 
prolonged huddling indicates the temperature is 
not comfortable in the long term for the flock. 

75. Laying hens towards the end of lay are more 
likely to suffer cold stress, particularly if they have 
high feather loss in cold, wet weather conditions. 
End of lay hens’ fitness to transport for the 
intended journey should be considered carefully 
when feather loss is high and body condition is 
poor during cold wet weather, particularly when 
a recent increase in flock mortality beyond the 
expected levels has occurred.

76. Birds should not be exposed to persistently 
strong, direct sunlight or hot, humid conditions 
which can cause heat stress. Heat stress is 
indicated by any form of panting observed within 
the flock, typically during summer months. 
Birds will be less motivated to move and feed, 
will sit upright with beaks open and will make 
visible respiratory movements. During periods 
of hot weather attention should be paid to air 
throughput, distribution and air speed at bird level.

77. Where birds do not have a choice of 
environment, for example, to access a range, 
then it is important to maintain the environment 
within the main housing such that the birds can 
maintain their normal body temperature without 
resorting to the need to pant or huddle.

Lighting

Paragraphs 14 to 16 of Schedule 1 to the 
Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) 
Regulations 2007 state:

14.  Animals kept in buildings must not be 
kept in permanent darkness.




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets20

15.  Where the natural light available in 
a building is insufficient to meet the 
physiological or ethological needs of 
any animals being kept in it, appropriate 
artificial lighting must be provided.

16.  Animals kept in buildings must not be kept 
without an appropriate period of rest from 
artificial lighting.

Paragraph 3 of Schedule 5 to the Welfare 
of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 
2007 states:

3  (1) All buildings must have light levels 
sufficient to allow hens to see other hens 
and be seen clearly, to investigate their 
surroundings visually and to show normal 
levels of activity.

 (2) Where there is natural light, light 
apertures must be arranged in such a way 
that light is distributed evenly within the 
accommodation.

 (3) After the first days of conditioning, the 
lighting regime must be such as to prevent 
health and behavioural problems and 
accordingly it must follow a 24-hour rhythm 
and include an adequate uninterrupted 
period of darkness lasting, by way of 
indication, about one third of the day. 

 (4) A period of twilight of sufficient duration 
should if possible be provided when the 
light is dimmed so that the hens may 
settle down without disturbance or injury.

78. In normal conditions, in all systems, light intensity 
should be at least 10 lux, measured at any feed 
trough level. Whilst reduction in lighting level may 
assist in addressing behavioural problems such 
as injurious feather pecking or cannibalism, this 
may reflect a response to the change in light 
intensity from “normal” (for that flock) rather than 
the actual lux level of the lighting intensity itself. 
Hens perceive incandescent lighting at higher 
intensities than fluorescent lighting, so care 
should be taken when changing between lighting 
source types. 

79. Birds, when given the choice, will move between 
different light intensities through the day. 
However, in cage systems, measures should be 
taken to ensure that light distribution is as even 
as possible, other than in the nest area which 
should, where possible, be much lower (<1 lux). 

80. A period of twilight (between 1 and 5 lux) should 
be provided to give time for laying hens to adjust 
to changing light and dark patterns and give 
them time to roost. 

Litter

Laying hens in non-cage systems

Paragraph 2 of Schedule 2 to the Welfare 
of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 
2007 states:

2.  All systems must be equipped in such a 
way that all laying hens have— 

 (e) at least 250 cm² of littered area per 
hen, the litter occupying at least one third 
of the ground surface.




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets 21

Laying hens in enriched cages

Paragraph 2 of Schedule 4 to the Welfare 
of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 
2007 states:

2.  Laying hens must have—

 (c) litter such that pecking and scratching 
are possible.

81. The litter material should be of an appropriate 
quality, suitable for providing dry dustbathing 
or scratching material and must not contain 
anything that could be toxic or cause injury to the 
hens. Litter must be friable (loose) and should be 
dry on the surface.

82. Litter should be inspected frequently for signs of 
mould or infestation, especially under drinkers 
or near the walls, and appropriate action should 
be taken to rectify any problem. Litter should 
also be inspected to ensure it does not become 
capped, wet or excessively dusty.

83. In non-cage systems, all hens must have access 
to a littered area, which must be maintained in a 
friable condition. Average depth of litter should 
be at least 5 cm during nest box training and 
approximately 10 cm after nest box training 
is complete. Hens should have access to 
good quality substrate to allow expression of 
natural behaviours, including dustbathing and 
scratching, and to prevent health and welfare 
problems. Dustbathing is a social activity and 
therefore there should be sufficient good quality 
litter available to perform dustbathing as a 
group activity, but without being disturbed by 
other birds performing other activities. If no or 
only single birds are seen dustbathing this may 
suggest insufficient space or litter quality issues. 

84. Leakage or spillage from drinkers can have 
a negative impact on litter quality. Drinkers 
should be well maintained and positioned at 
an appropriate height for all birds. The water 
pressure should be checked frequently to ensure 
there is no leakage. Drinkers should be descaled 
frequently (between flocks) to overcome 
issues of leakage. Leaks should be fixed as 
soon as possible. Litter replacement may be 
necessary in the short term in badly affected 
areas, in conjunction with raised ventilation and 
temperatures to remove large amounts of excess 
moisture. However, long term solutions should 
be found and specialist advice should be sought 
where appropriate. 

Noise 



85. 


Paragraph 2 of Schedule 5 to the Welfare 
of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 
2007 states:

2.  In all systems in which laying hens are 
kept—

 (a) the sound level must be minimised;

 (b) constant or sudden noise must be 
avoided; and 

 (c) ventilation fans, feeding machinery and 
other equipment must be constructed, 
placed, operated and maintained in such 
a way that they cause the least possible 
noise.

When designing houses or installing new 
equipment, the noise levels should be 
checked and, where necessary, appropriate 
sound proofing should be installed to achieve 
acceptable levels before birds are placed. All 




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets22

equipment in regular use, such as ventilation, 
feeding equipment and back-up generators, 
should be assessed for noise levels as part of the 
regular checks and maintenance detailed in the 
health and welfare plan. 

86. Any repairs or renovations requiring the use 
of noisy equipment should ideally be carried 
out between flocks, but if not, they should be 
performed during the birds’ normal waking 
hours and the sounds introduced in such a way 
that causes minimum startle and smother risk to 
the birds. 

Feed and water 

25.  All animals must either have access to a 
suitable water supply and be provided with 
an adequate supply of fresh drinking water 
each day, or be able to satisfy their fluid 
intake needs by other means.

26.  Feeding and watering equipment must 
be designed, constructed, placed and 
maintained so that contamination of food 
and water and the harmful effects of 
competition between animals are minimised.

27 (1) No other substance, with the 
exception of those given for therapeutic 
or prophylactic purposes or for the 
purpose of zootechnical treatment, may be 
administered to animals unless it has been 
demonstrated by scientific studies of animal 
welfare or established practice that the 
effect of that substance is not detrimental to 
the health or welfare of the animals.

All laying hens

Paragraphs 22 to 27 of Schedule 1 to the 
Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) 
Regulations 2007 state:

22.  Animals must be fed a wholesome diet 
which is appropriate to their age and 
species and which is fed to them in 
sufficient quantity to maintain them in good 
health, to satisfy their nutritional needs and 
to promote a positive state of well-being.

23.  Animals must not be provided with food 
or liquid that contains any substance that 
may cause them unnecessary suffering 
or injury and must be provided with food 
and liquid in a manner that does not cause 
them unnecessary suffering or injury. 

24.  All animals must have access to feed at 
intervals appropriate to their physiological 
needs (and, in any case, at least once a 
day), except where a veterinary surgeon 
acting in the exercise of his profession 
otherwise directs.

Laying hens in non-cage systems

Paragraphs 2(a) and (b) of Schedule 2 to 
the Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) 
Regulations 2007 state:

2.  All systems must be equipped in such a 
way that all laying hens have - 

(a) linear feeders providing at least 
10cm per bird or circular feeders 
providing at least 4cm per bird;

(b) continuous drinking troughs 
providing at least 2.5 cm per hen or 
circular drinking troughs providing at 
least 1cm per hen.




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets 23

Paragraphs 3 and 4 of Schedule 2 to the 
Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) 
Regulations 2007 state: 

3.  Where a system is equipped with nipple 
drinkers or cups, there must be at least one 
nipple drinker or cup for every 10 hens. 

4.  Where a system has drinking points 
plumbed in, at least two cups or two nipple 
drinkers must be within reach of each hen.

Laying hens in enriched cages

Paragraphs 3 and 4 of Schedule 4 to the 
Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) 
Regulations 2007 state:

3.   A feed trough which can be used without 
restriction must be provided, the length of 
which must be at least 12 cm multiplied 
by the number of hens in the cage. 

4.  Each cage must have a drinking system 
appropriate to the size of the group; 
where nipple drinkers are provided, at 
least two nipple drinkers or two cups 
must be within reach of each hen.

c) it does not cause or result in injury to hens;

d) it operates in all weather conditions;

e) the consumption of water and feed can be 
monitored; and

f) when appropriate outdoor facilities are used, 
they can be easily removed or turned off in 
disease control situations.

In addition, all equipment must be able to be easily 
and effectively cleaned and disinfected.

89. Feeder space allocation should be sufficient to 
enable the hens to obtain adequate feed with the 
minimum of competition. If feed is not provided 
continuously, additional trough space may be 
needed to allow all hens to eat at the same time.

90. Sudden changes in the type or quantity of 
feed and feeding procedures, other than those 
appropriate to the physiological needs of the 
laying hens, should be avoided except in case of 
emergency. Feed mash can help to increase the 
time spent eating and reduce the risk of injurious 
pecking. Owners/keepers should ensure, with 
the appropriate expert nutritional and veterinary 
advice, that the hens’ feed has the appropriate 
balance of amino acids and level of sodium and 
take particular care with gradually reducing the 
protein content of any diet. Birds should have 
regular access to insoluble grit from an early age, 
to help develop the digestive system and to aid 
good digestion throughout the birds’ lives. 

91. Where practical, a small amount of whole grain, 
pellets or grit should be scattered over the indoor 
scratching area each day to encourage foraging 
and scratching and reduce the likelihood of 
injurious pecking.

92. Stale or contaminated feed or water should 
not be allowed to accumulate and should be 
replaced immediately.

87. Feed and water must be readily accessible to all 
hens.

88. Feeding and watering equipment should be 
designed, constructed, placed, operated and 
maintained in such a way that:

a) it minimises spillage or contamination of feed 
and water;

b) all laying hens have sufficient access to 
water and feed;




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets24

93. Body condition, body weight and egg quality 
and production should be used to monitor the 
effectiveness of the feeding regime.

94. Daily access to fresh water throughout the 
period of lighting and a sufficient number of 
drinkers, correctly maintained, well distributed 
and adjusted for height and pressure, should 
be provided. In longer poultry houses and in 
those with greater floor slopes, water pressure 
regulators should be provided if spillage or 
leakage is considered a problem.

95. Where possible, water meters should be fitted to 
each house to enable daily monitoring of water 
usage. A water meter is a useful management 
tool; daily records of water consumption provide 
an early warning of potential problems.

96. Arrangements should be made in advance to 
ensure that adequate supplies of suitable feed 
and water can be made available in emergencies 
such as interruptions in power supplies, or when 
water freezes.

97. Systems which call for the complete withholding 
of feed and water on any day must not be 
adopted. In no circumstances may hens be 
induced to moult by withholding feed and water. 
However, feed, but not water, may be withheld 
for up to 12 hours before expected slaughter 
time. See also paragraph 122.

Mutilations

Section 5 of the Animal Welfare Act 2006 
states:

5  (1)  A person commits an offence if– 

(a) he carries out a prohibited 
procedure on a protected animal;

(b) he causes such a procedure to 
be carried out on such an animal.

(2)  A person commits an offence if–

(a) he is responsible for an animal,

(b) another person carries out a 
prohibited procedure on the 
animal, and

(c) he permitted that to happen 
or failed to take such steps 
(whether by way of supervising 
the other person or otherwise) 
as were reasonable in all the 
circumstances to prevent that 
happening.

(3)  References in this section to the 
carrying out of a prohibited procedure 
on an animal are to the carrying 
out of a procedure which involves 
interference with the sensitive tissues 
or bone structure of the animal, 
otherwise than for the purpose of its 
medical treatment.

(4)  Subsections (1) and (2) do not 
apply in such circumstances as the 
appropriate national authority may 
specify by regulations.

98. All mutilations of laying hens are banned under 
the Animal Welfare Act 2006; certain procedures 
(see Annex 2) are excluded from this ban under 
the Mutilations (Permitted Procedures) (England) 
Regulations 2007, provided that they are carried 
out by a person permitted to carry out the 
procedure and:

a) in accordance with the relevant 
requirements in the Schedules; 




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets 25

b) in such a way as to minimise the pain and 
suffering it causes to the animal;

c) in hygienic conditions; and

d) in accordance with good practice.

99. Mutilations can cause pain to hens and should 
only be carried out where necessary to avoid 
a worse welfare outcome. They should only be 
applied having sought appropriate advice on 
possible alternative interventions in each case 
and not as a routine practice. 

Beak trimming 

Paragraph 5 (1) to (5) of Schedule 4 to 
the Mutilations (Permitted Procedures) 
(England) Regulations 2007 states:

5  (1)  For all poultry, the beak trimming  
procedure must be performed using 
a suitable instrument.

(2)  For all poultry, any subsequent 
haemorrhage from the beak must be 
arrested by cauterisation.

(3) For all poultry the procedure must be 
performed on –

(a) both the upper and lower beaks, 
with not more than one third of 
each removed, or

(b) the upper beak only, with not 
more than one third removed.

(4) For laying hens and chicks that are 
intended to become laying hens, 
which are kept on establishments 
with 350 or more such birds, beak 
trimming–

(a) may only be performed in order 
to prevent feather pecking or 
cannibalism;

(b) may only be carried out using 
infra-red technology;

(c) may not be performed on birds 
which are aged 10 days or over; 


and

(d) must be carried out by a 
person who has been provided 
with suitable and sufficient 
information, instruction and 
training so that they are qualified 
to perform the procedure.

(5) Sub-paragraphs (4)(b) and (c) do 
not apply where the procedure is 
carried out in an emergency in order 
to control an outbreak of feather 
pecking or cannibalism. 

100. The aim is for routine beak trimming to stop as 
soon as reasonably possible. To achieve this, 
every effort is needed by owners/keepers to 
reduce injurious pecking in their flocks.

101. Beak trimming is permitted on birds up to 10 days 
old using infra-red technology, for the purposes 
of reducing injurious pecking only. In practice, 
it is carried out at day-old in the hatchery. Beak 
trimming should be carried out to the highest 
possible standards by trained operators.

102. Infra-red beak treatment equipment should be 
monitored to ensure effectiveness of treatment, 
in terms of beak length and chick welfare. Any 
concerns about the effectiveness of treatment 
should be referred back to the hatchery. 
Equipment should be well maintained and 
calibrated. 




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets26

103. Owners/keepers should have an action plan to 
tackle injurious pecking, including management 
strategies and interventions to reduce the risk of 
injurious pecking. See also paragraphs 53 to 58.

104. Once all management strategies are in place 
and good feather cover is achieved throughout 
lay for at least two consecutive flocks, stopping 
beak trimming in future flocks should be actively 
considered, in consultation with a veterinary 
surgeon and other appropriately qualified 
technical advisors.

105. If an outbreak of injurious pecking does occur 
it should be tackled immediately by appropriate 
changes in the system of management. As 
a last resort, only when all other intervention 
strategies have been attempted, emergency 
beak trimming can be carried out on veterinary 
advice, by trained and competent operators, 
using appropriate equipment. 

Breeding procedures

Paragraphs 28 and 29 of Schedule 1 to 
the Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) 
Regulations 2007 state:

28  (1)  Natural or artificial breeding or 
breeding procedures which cause, or 
are likely to cause, suffering or injury 
to any of the animals concerned, 
must not be practised.

(2)  Sub-paragraph (1) does not preclude 
the use of natural or artificial breeding 
procedures that are likely to cause 
minimal or momentary suffering 
or injury or that might necessitate 
interventions which would not cause 
lasting injury.

29. Animals may only be kept for farming 
purposes if it can reasonably be expected, 
on the basis of their genotype or 
phenotype, that they can be kept without 
any detrimental effect on their health or 
welfare.

106. Birds should come from balanced breeding 
programmes promoting and protecting health, 
welfare and productivity goals simultaneously. 
Identification of birds should be encouraged, 
to enable future feedback of information within 
the breeding pyramid and better application of 
breeding for welfare, based on data from the 
supply chain.

107. The presence of males in a layer breeder flock 
should reduce stress and fear responses due 
to the natural instinct for males to protect their 
females. However, too high a number of males 
in the flock can lead to sexual aggression 
and increased stress in the flock which can 
have negative impacts on welfare and health, 
including egg production. When producing 
hatching eggs from breeding birds, different bird 
strains will require a different cockerel to hen 
ratio. This is due to genetic differences in docility 
and sexual activity. Breeder suppliers should 
ensure they provide guidance on appropriate 
sex ratios, which ensure the production of 
sufficient fertilised eggs whilst minimising 
aggressive breeding behaviour. 

108. Cockerel body condition should be assessed 
regularly throughout the laying cycle. Growth 
rates should follow the breeder growth 
recommendations provided by the supplier, 
because sperm production will be impacted if 
they grow too fast or if they lose body condition. 
Cockerels found in poor body condition should 
be removed and given additional feed, returning 
to the flock after being rested for a few weeks 
and when body condition has improved. 




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets 27

109. Cockerels displaying highly aggressive pecking 
or unacceptable behaviours, for example, 
repeatedly chasing and targeting the same hen 
for mating, may need to be temporarily removed 
from the flock. If unacceptable behaviour 
continues when the cockerel is returned, it 
should be humanely culled.

110. Husbandry measures and practices on the 
breeding farm should be designed to minimise 
floor eggs and heavily soiled eggs should not 
be sent as hatching eggs. Littered nests are 
preferred by breeding females and may reduce 
the number of floor eggs if litter substrate is 
placed in a nest, whatever the base type.

111. Surplus chicks and in-shell embryos, including 
in hatchery waste, must be culled humanely 
by a trained and competent person and in 
accordance with the specific welfare at the time 
of killing legislation. 

Responsible medicines usage and 
record keeping

Paragraphs 7 and 8 of Schedule 1 to the 
Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) 
Regulations 2007 state:

7.  A record must be maintained of –

(a)  any medical treatment given to 
animals; and

(b)  the number of mortalities found on 
each inspection of animals carried 
out in accordance with any of the 
following provisions - 

(i)  in the case of laying hens, 
paragraph 1 of Schedule 5.

8.  The record referred to in paragraph 7 must 
be retained for a period of at least three 
years from the date on which the medical 
treatment was given, or the date of the 
inspection, and must be made available to 
an inspector on request. 

112. Authorised veterinary medicinal products should 
be used for the animals specified and should be 
administered according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions. Where additional instructions are 
required, these must be given by a veterinary 
surgeon. 

113. In certain instances a veterinary surgeon can 
prescribe medicines that are not intended for 
the specific condition and species for which the 
product is authorised. This can only be done 
if there is no alternative authorised medicine 
available. Products used would need to comply 
with the law. See Annex 1. Further information 
on the ‘cascade’ system and prescribing 
unauthorised medicines is available from Defra’s 
Veterinary Medicines Directorate.

114. Under welfare legislation, records must be kept 
for at least three years. Further requirements for 
medicines records are required under additional 
legislation for food producing animals. See 
Annex 1. 

115. The medicines records must be available for a 
government or local authority inspector to review 
at any time.

116. Records are an essential aid to management. 
The records kept should include feed and water 
consumption, egg quality, results of health and 
welfare checks, behavioural abnormalities, air 
temperature, air quality and results of welfare 
outcome assessments.




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets28

117. Mortality, culling (including reason for culling) 
and, if possible, daily morbidity levels in the 
case of a disease outbreak should be closely 
monitored. Post mortems should be carried out 
in cases where mortality levels are significantly 
higher than breeders’ targets. Records should 
be kept.

Catching and handling 
118. There are detailed rules relating to the transport 

and movement of poultry to and from the 
farm which are covered by different pieces 
of legislation. See Annex 1. Owners/keepers 
should be familiar with these legal requirements, 
including any restrictions and licensing 
requirements associated with movements of 
both birds and eggs during notifiable disease 
outbreaks. 

119. Legal responsibility for bird welfare throughout 
any transport process is set out in welfare in 
transport legislation. Birds with severe and/
or painful conditions are unfit for transport. 
Any birds remaining on farm, which cannot 
be transported, should be humanely culled 
by a trained and competent person and in 
accordance with the specific welfare at the time 
of killing legislation.

120. Catching and handling should be carried out 
quietly and confidently exercising care to avoid 
unnecessary struggling which could bruise or 
otherwise injure the birds. This requires skill 
and it should only be undertaken by competent 
persons, i.e. those who have been appropriately 
trained for the task and have received clear 
guidance and instructions from the owner/keeper.

121. Birds should not be deprived of feed or water 
before transport. Feed and water must be made 
available for any journey lasting longer than 12 
hours, disregarding loading and unloading time. 
Specific rules apply to birds under 72 hours of 


age.


122. Feed, but not water, may be withheld for up to 12 
hours, prior to slaughter of end of lay hens and 
breeding birds. There should be coordination with 
the slaughterhouse in order to limit the time hens 
are held in containers before and after transport, 
and to advise of any breakdowns. 

123. Before de-populating layer and breeder houses, 
any hindrance from fixtures and fittings, 
especially sharp edges and protrusions, must 
be removed. Care must be taken throughout the 
process of catching hens in order to avoid panic 
and subsequent injury to and smothering of the 
birds, for example, by reducing the intensity of 
the light or using a blue or red light. 

124. When catching laying hens in cages, they must 
be removed from the cage singly to avoid injury 
or suffering and must be held by both legs. The 
breast should be supported during removal from 
the cage. Hens in non-cage systems, must also 
be caught and held by both legs. In all systems, 
hens should only be carried by both legs and 
care should be taken to avoid hitting solid 
objects particularly if wings are flapping. They 
must not be carried by their wings, head, tail or 
neck. The number of hens carried will depend 
upon the size of the hen and the ability of the 
carrier, but a maximum of three per hand must 
not be exceeded. Distances which hens are 
carried should be minimised as far as possible, 
for example, by bringing transport containers as 
close as possible to the hens.

125. Transport containers with large openings should 
be used for pullets and hens to avoid damage 
to the birds; the design, size and state of repair 
of any container used to carry birds must allow 
them to be put in, conveyed and taken out 
without injury. The condition of crates should be 
checked and, where broken crates are identified, 
they must not be used. Care should also be 
taken when crates are loaded onto vehicles, and 
in their transportation and unloading, to avoid 
physically shocking the birds.




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets 29

126. During the time birds are held in the containers 
prior to and after transport they should be 
protected from bad weather and excessively 
hot or cold conditions. Birds should not be 
allowed to become heat stressed (as indicated 
by prolonged panting) by being left in containers 
exposed to strong direct sunlight, nor should 
they be exposed to cold stress due to 
inadequate protection from rain and high winds. 
Adequate ventilation for the hens is essential at 
all times. 

Housing: General requirements

Paragraphs 11 and 12 of Schedule 1 to 
the Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) 
Regulations 2007 state:

11.  Materials used for the construction of 
accommodation, and in particular for the 
construction of pens, cages, stalls and 
equipment with which the animals may 
come into contact, must not be harmful 
to them and must be capable of being 
thoroughly cleaned and disinfected.

12.  Accommodation and fittings for securing 
animals must be constructed and 
maintained so that there are no sharp edges 
or protrusions likely to cause injury to them.

Paragraph 5 of Schedule 5 to the Welfare 
of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 
2007 states:

5.  Cages must be suitably equipped to 
prevent hens escaping.

Paragraph 7 of Schedule 5 to the Welfare 
of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 
2007 states:

7.  The design and dimensions of the cage 
door must be such that an adult hen 
can be removed without undergoing 
unnecessary suffering or sustaining injury.

127. When new accommodation for laying hens 
is planned, a suitable site should be selected 
taking into consideration the risks from outside 
environmental factors such as noise, light, 
vibration, flooding, atmospheric pollution, 
predators and disease risks. See also paragraph 
24. Where appropriate, advantage should be 
taken of natural features to provide shelter and 
to protect birds from predators, rodents and 
other animals. 

128. The design, construction and maintenance of 
enclosures, buildings and equipment for laying 
hens should be such that they: 

a) allow the fulfilment of essential biological 
needs and the maintenance of good health;

b) facilitate good management of the hens and 
ease of routine inspection of all areas;

c) allow for easy maintenance of good 
conditions of hygiene and air quality;

d) provide shelter from adverse weather 
conditions;

e) limit the risk of disease, disorders 
manifested by behavioural changes, 
traumatic injuries to the hens, injuries 
caused by hens to each other and, as far 
as possible, contamination of the hens by 
droppings;




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets30

132. Individual nests should be designed to 
accommodate only one hen at a time. The nests 
should be easily accessible by all birds and the 
location should not increase the risk of collision 
injury on entry or exit. 

133. As birds are attracted to dark areas for nesting, 
they can be discouraged from nesting on the 
floor and under multi-tier sections by raising the 
light levels in these areas. 

134. Hens should be kept in such a way that they can 
keep themselves clean. 

135. Ventilation, heating, lighting, feeding, watering 
and all other equipment should be designed, 
sited, installed and monitored to avoid risk of 
injuring hens.

Stocking density and freedom of movement

All laying hens

Paragraphs 9 and 10 of Schedule 1 to 
the Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) 
Regulations 2007 state:

9.  The freedom of movement of animals, 
having regard to their species and in 
accordance with good practice and 
scientific knowledge, must not be 
restricted in such a way as to cause them 
unnecessary suffering or injury.

10.  Where animals are continuously or 
regularly tethered or confined, they must 
be given the space appropriate to their 
physiological and ethological needs 
in accordance with good practice and 
scientific knowledge.

f) exclude predators, rodents, and wild 
animals and minimise insects;

g) allow for the prevention and treatment 
of infestations of internal and external 
parasites;

h) incorporate damp-proof membranes 
to prevent insulation breakdown and 
measures to prevent easy access by vermin 
to the insulation material; and

i) provide sufficient suitable lighting to enable 
normal behaviour.

129. Floors and perches should be of a suitable design 
and material that are comfortable and do not 
cause pain, distress or injury to the hens. They 
should provide sufficient support, particularly for 
the forward facing toes and claws of each foot. 
Perches should be of sufficient length to allow 
for the possibility of all hens roosting at the same 
time. The perch should be of the correct diameter 
to permit the bird to grasp it. Floors and perches 
should be kept sufficiently dry and clean.

130. Nests must be a separate space for egg laying 
and the floor component of which may not 
include wire mesh which can come into contact 
with the birds. Floor substrates provided in the 
nest area should create an environment which 
encourages nesting (pre-laying) behaviour. 

131. Nests should be secluded, clearly separated from 
other areas and draught free, allowing laying hens 
to isolate themselves from those carrying out other 
activities. Feeding tracks or other installations 
should not be located in or accessed via the 
nesting area. Where curtains are used to create 
seclusion, these should be long enough to prevent 
interactions between nesting and non-nesting hens 
and to create a lower light intensity in the nesting 
area. Birds prefer very low lighting of less than 1 lux 
for nesting and so nest design and location should 
attempt to reflect these lower lighting needs. 




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets 31

Laying hens in non-cage systems

Paragraph 8 of Schedule 2 to the Welfare 
of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 
2007 states:

8.  The stocking density must not exceed 
nine laying hens per m² of usable area.

Laying hens in enriched cages

Paragraph 2 of Schedule 4 to the Welfare 
of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 
2007 states:

2.  Laying hens must have— 

(a)  at least 750 cm² of cage area per hen, 
600 cm² of which must be usable; 
the height of the cage other than 
that above the usable area must be 
at least 20 cm at every point and the 
minimum total area for any cage must 
be 2000 cm².

136. When determining the stocking density, 
consideration should be given to breed of 
laying hen, system of housing, colony size, 
temperature, ventilation and lighting, as well as 
to the number of perching structures and welfare 
outcomes of the previous flock.

137. Bird numbers may need to be reduced in an 
emergency situation such as heat stress. See 
also paragraph 33. Planned bird numbers 
for future flocks may need to be reduced 
where historical evidence shows ventilation is 
insufficient to meet environmental requirements, 
for example, managing temperature, ammonia 
levels and litter condition. 

Environmental enrichment 

138. Environmental enrichment can improve bird health 
and welfare during rearing and in lay, by reducing 
disturbances, aggression, injurious pecking, fear 
responses and stress. It can also improve bone 
strength by increasing the level of physical exercise. 
The aim of different enrichment materials is to:

ei) Increase the amount of time the birds 
spend actively standing, walking, running, 
jumping and dustbathing; 

ej) Increase normal foraging behaviours, 
providing the opportunity to seek and peck 
at other materials in their environment, 
thus reducing the risk of injurious pecking 
directed towards other birds; and 

ek) Reduce the number of aggressive 
interactions between birds and creating 
environments in which birds can escape 
from confrontation and find safe refuges. 

139. Effective enrichment can include: 

a) straw and shaving bales to jump on, to create 
low barriers and partitions within larger 
spaces and to provide a substrate to peck at;

b) perches and platforms at different levels to 
support different behavioural uses during 
the day and night, including refuge from 
other birds;

c) novel food for pecking. See also paragraph 
58 i);

d) pecking blocks – some may incorporate 
nutritive value or beak blunting effects;

e) a range of pecking objects;

f) dustbathing boxes; and




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets32

g) “verandas” or “winter gardens” to provide 
additional space, litter and access to 
natural daylight in housing systems where 
range access is not available or may be 
restricted for periods of time.

Non-cage systems: additional 
housing requirements

Paragraph 2 of Schedule 2 to the Welfare 
of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 
2007 states:

2.  All systems must be equipped in such a 
way that all laying hens have-

(c)  at least one nest for every seven hens 
and, if group nests are used, there 
must be at least 1m² of nest space for 
a maximum of 120 hens;

(d)  perches without sharp edges and 
providing at least 15 cm per hen, which 
must not be mounted above the litter, 
and the horizontal distance between 
perches must be at least 30 cm and the 
horizontal distance between the perch 
and the wall must be at least 20 cm; and

(e)  at least 250 cm² of littered area per 
hen, the litter occupying at least one 
third of the ground surface.

Paragraphs 5 and 6 of Schedule 2 to the 
Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) 
Regulations 2007 state:

5.  The floors of installations must be 
constructed so as to support each of the 
forward-facing claws of each bird’s foot.

6.  If systems are used where the laying hens 
can move freely between different levels-

(a)  there must be no more than four 
levels;

(b)  the headroom between the levels 
must be at least 45 cm;

(c)  the drinking and feeding facilities 
must be distributed in such a way as 
to provide equal access for all hens; 


and

(d)  the levels must be so arranged as to 
prevent droppings falling on the levels 
below.

140. Usable area may be made up of the ground 
surface of the building where accessible to 
the hens and any additional raised areas 
or platforms at least 30 cm wide, including 
perforated floors provided that arrangements 
are in place to prevent fouling of hens below.

141. Perches must be 30 cm or more apart to be 
calculated as part of the perching space, although 
more perches may be provided adjacent to one 
another to make a perforated floor. Perforated 
floors can be considered as perching space when 
they have perches incorporated within the floor 
structure or attached on top of the floor surface. 
Birds perching on inappropriate structures, such 
as the edge of feed troughs, can result in foot 
damage and prevent other birds from accessing 
feed. Where this behaviour is seen, the provision of 
additional raised perches should be considered. 

142. There must be a sufficient gap on either side 
of any perch to allow the hens to grip the 
perches without risk of trapping their claws. If 
foot condition is poor, the design, location and 
quantity of perches should be reviewed. 




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets 33

least 35 cm high and 40 cm wide, and 
extending along the entire length of 
the building; and in any case, a total 
opening of 2 m must be available per 
group of 1,000 hens; and

(b) the open runs must be—

(i)  of an area appropriate to the 
stocking density and to the 
nature of the ground, in order to 
prevent any contamination; and 

(ii)  equipped with shelter from 
adverse weather conditions and 
predators and, if necessary, 
drinking troughs.

146.  Factors such as soil type, drainage, size of 
flock and frequency of pasture rotation are very 
important in deciding the number of laying hens 
that a particular area can carry. Heavy, poorly 
drained soil can carry fewer hens than land that 
is light and well drained.

147. Birds must have direct access to the range. 
They should be encouraged to use the outdoor 
area through easily and directly accessible 
popholes from the building. The height of the 
pophole exit should not discourage use or risk 
injury to the birds. All ramps providing pophole 
access should be of a sufficiently low gradient 
that birds will not be deterred from their use on 
either exit or re-entry. 

148. Increasing the amount and variety of natural 
cover, shelter and shade on the range, such 
as trees, hedgerows and shrubs, can promote 
and maximise range use, which in turn can 
help to reduce injurious pecking. There can be 
other benefits to providing tree cover, such as 
improved egg quality, reduced water runoff, less 
soil compaction and a reduction in ammonia 

143. Multi-tier systems with perforated platforms should 
have dropping belts or trays beneath. Perches 
must not be positioned over the litter area.

144. Even where ramps or platforms and/or alighting 
rails are provided, nests, roosting areas, 
perches and tiers should not be so high above 
floor level that birds have difficulty in using them 
or risk injury. 

145. Electric wires used to discourage laying in 
corners and smothering must never be placed 
in front of popholes and other access points to 
the range at any stage of rearing or laying for 
free range birds. Any electrified wire, whether 
insulated or otherwise, should be routed above 
the popholes. 

Free range systems: additional 
housing requirements 

Paragraph 17 of Schedule 1 to the Welfare 
of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 
2007 states:

17.  Animals not kept in buildings must, 
where necessary and possible, be 
given protection from adverse weather 
conditions, predators and risks to their 
health and must, at all times, have access 
to a well-drained lying area.

Paragraph 7 of Schedule 2 to the Welfare 
of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 
2007 states:

7.  If laying hens have access to open runs— 

(a)  there must be several popholes giving 
direct access to the outer area, at 




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets34

emissions. Tree cover should be available close 
to the housing as hens are reluctant to cross 
open ground.

149. Birds should never be fed or watered outdoors 
in open troughs or by scattering feed on the 
ground. Feed and water provided outside should 
be covered and inaccessible to wild birds, 
rodents or other animals. 

150. If ponds are located on or near to the range, 
they should be fenced off and/or netted to 
discourage wild birds, in particular water fowl.

151. Sufficient housing should be available to the 
birds at all times. It may be necessary to exclude 
birds from the range in bad weather or during 
a notifiable disease outbreak/risk if there is 
a danger that their welfare will otherwise be 
compromised. Natural or artificial windbreaks 
should be provided on exposed land. 
Precautions should be taken to protect hens 
against predators.

152. Land on which free range birds are kept for 
prolonged periods may become “fowl sick”, i.e. 
contaminated with organisms which cause or 
carry disease to an extent which could seriously 
prejudice the health of the birds on the land. 
Birds should be routinely monitored to check for 
signs indicative of a build-up of pathogens on 
the land and appropriate action taken. 

153. The time taken for land to become fowl sick 
depends on the type of land and stocking 
density. Appropriate measures should be 
taken to prevent fowl sickness or to provide 
a new ranging area by moving the housing (in 
the case of portable units) or by rotating the 
ranging area outside fixed buildings. Unless the 
house is moved frequently, it is good practice 
to protect the ground immediately adjacent 
to it, for example, by providing slatted or wire 
mesh platforms, covered “verandas” or “winter 
gardens” or areas of gravel.

Enriched cage systems: additional 
housing requirements 

Schedule 4 to the Welfare of Farmed 
Animals (England) Regulations 2007 states:

1.   All laying hens not kept in a cage system 
referred to in Schedule 3 must be kept in an 
enriched cage system which complies with 
the requirements of this Schedule. 

2.   Laying hens must have— 

(a)  at least 750 cm² of cage area per hen, 
600 cm² of which must be usable; the 
height of the cage other than that above 
the usable area must be at least 20 cm 
at every point and the minimum total 
area for any cage must be 2000 cm²;

(b)  access to a nest;

(c)  litter such that pecking and 
scratching are possible; and

(d)  appropriate perches allowing at least 
15 cm per hen.

3.   A feed trough which can be used without 
restriction must be provided, the length of 
which must be at least 12 cm multiplied by the 
number of hens in the cage. 

4.   Each cage must have a drinking system 
appropriate to the size of the group; where 
nipple drinkers are provided, at least two 
nipple drinkers or two cups must be within 
reach of each hen. 

5.   To facilitate inspection, installation and 
depopulation of hens there must be a minimum 
aisle width of 90 cm between tiers of cages 
and a space of at least 35 cm must be allowed 
between the floor of the building and the 
bottom tier of cages. 

6.   Cages must be fitted with suitable claw-
shortening devices. 




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets 35

154. If there is evidence that claws of hens are 
overgrown or broken, the provision of claw 
shortening devices should be improved. 
Excessively abrasive devices may cause 
injury so caution should be exercised in use 
of such devices. Assessment of claw length 
should be included in regular welfare outcome 
assessments and detailed in the health and 
welfare plan. See also paragraphs 16 to 20.

155. The aisle width should be measured as the 
unobstructed width between the outer edges 
of the feed troughs. The distance to the floor 
should be measured to the mesh base of the 
cage.




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets36

Section 2: 
Recommendations applying to 
day-old chicks and pullet rearing

Pullet rearing environment
161. The provision of enrichment during the rearing 

period may reduce the risk of developing abnormal 
and injurious behaviours during the production 
phase. For example, lack of experience with 
foraging or dustbathing material may result in 
ground pecks being redirected to the feathers of 
other laying hens in the flock. The provision of an 
enriched environment during the rearing period 
can help to ensure hens develop and transition 
well into an enriched laying environment. 

162. Pullets should be provided with perches from 7 
days of age at the latest and throughout rearing 
as this results in fewer broken back claws, 
improved bone mineral content, and improved 
bone strength in adult hens. 

163. The intensity of the light during the light period 
should never be below 10 lux to allow proper 
inspection of birds and to avoid abnormal 
growth of the birds. 

164. The maximum stocking density for pullets at 
the age of 16 weeks should be 20 kg/m2 of total 
usable area in both floor and multi-tier rearing 
systems. In addition, it is recommended that, 
when calculated at floor level, stocking density 
should not exceed 33 kg/m2 at 16 weeks in multi-
tier systems. Increasing space allowance during 
rearing allows for greater movement and more 
opportunities for exercise, which can improve 
muscle and bone growth in laying hens.

Transition from rearing to laying 
environment 
165. The environment in which pullets are reared 

should be matched as far as possible to their 
adult environment. There should be close liaison 
between the pullet rearer and layer site to ensure 
birds are reared in such a way as to reduce the 
stress at transition. 

156. The environment in which pullets are reared 
should be matched, as far as possible, to that in 
which they will live as adults, for example, having 
similar perch and ramp provision or being reared 
in multi-tiered if that is the system in which they 
will be housed as adults. Early life experiences 
for the individual and the flock as a whole can 
affect their foraging and pecking behaviour, as 
well as how they respond to changes or stresses 
throughout their laying life. Providing increased 
opportunities for exercise during rearing 
increases bone strength. See also paragraphs 
60 to 63. 

157. Chicks start to peck and learn about appropriate 
food and pecking substrates during the first 24 
hours of life. Consideration should be given to 
providing chicks with both food substrate and 
water (for example, through the provision of a gel 
block) as soon as possible after hatching; chicks 
should not be expected to rely on the egg yolk 
sac remnants as the sole source of nutrition. 

Brooding (0-6 weeks)
158. Chicks are particularly susceptible to heat stress 

or chilling in their first few weeks of life. The 
building should be pre-heated for at least a day 
before litter is placed prior to chick arrival and 
the litter must be friable and should be dry. 

159. The majority of chicks will arrive on the farm as 
day-old chicks. They need to be provided with 
additional heat and easy access to water and 
feed sources. It is important for the chick to 
learn quickly where feed and water sources are 
located. 

160. The provision of dark brooders (horizontal heat 
sources with curtains) may improve welfare by 
providing the opportunity for the young chick to 
choose the light and temperature to which it is 
exposed. The chicks under the dark brooders 
should be inspected frequently. 




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets 37

Annex 1: Legislation affecting 
laying hens and pullets 

(the protection of animals at the time of 
killing) https://assets.publishing.service.
gov.uk/government/uploads/system/
uploads/attachment_data/file/325000/
regulation_1099_2009_en.pdf 

• and associated domestic legislation and 
guidance 

Disease control and biosecurity
For guidance on registering poultry, see:
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/poultry-
registration

See the Animal Health Act 1981: 
https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1981/22

Responsible medicines usage and 
record keeping
See the following: 

The Avian Influenza (Preventative Measures) 
(England) Regulations 2006 requires those keeping 
50 birds or more to register their flock with APHA. 

The Control of Salmonella in Poultry Order 2007 
requires certain records to be kept (including at 
hatcheries) and Salmonella testing to be carried out 
for breeding and laying flocks.

Newcastle disease is covered by the Diseases of 
Poultry (England) Order 2003 which requires those 
keeping flocks of at least 250 birds to keep certain 
records. 

The Veterinary Medicines Regulations 2013 
require records to be kept on medicine usage, 
administration and disposal of unused medicines. 
Records must be kept for at least 5 years.

Note: The Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) 
Regulations 2007 relates to recording what medicine 

The main requirements are summarised below. 
This does not represent an exhaustive list and note 
that some legislation is regularly updated and/or 
amended. All UK legislation can be found at: http://
www.legislation.gov.uk 

The Animal Welfare Act 2006:
https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2006/45/
contents

The Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) 
Regulations 2007:
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2007/2078/
contents/made

The Mutilations (Permitted Procedures) (England) 
Regulations 2007:
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2007/1100/
contents/made

Transport
For information on transporting laying hens, see:

• Council Regulation (EC) No 1/2005 (the 
protection of animals during transport and 
related operations) http://extwprlegs1.fao.org/
docs/pdf/eur69655.pdf 

• the Welfare of Animals (Transport) (England) 
Order 2006 http://www.legislation.gov.uk/
uksi/2006/3260/contents/made

• and associated guidance https://www.gov.
uk/guidance/farm-animal-welfare-during-
transportation 

Slaughter
• For information on welfare at slaughter and 

killing laying hens, see:

• Council Regulation (EC) No 1099/2009 

https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/325000/regulation_1099_2009_en.pdf
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/325000/regulation_1099_2009_en.pdf
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/325000/regulation_1099_2009_en.pdf
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/325000/regulation_1099_2009_en.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/poultry-registration
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/poultry-registration
https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1981/22
http://www.legislation.gov.uk
http://www.legislation.gov.uk
https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2006/45/contents
https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2006/45/contents
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2007/2078/contents/made
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2007/2078/contents/made
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2007/1100/contents/made
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2007/1100/contents/made
http://extwprlegs1.fao.org/docs/pdf/eur69655.pdf
http://extwprlegs1.fao.org/docs/pdf/eur69655.pdf
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2006/3260/contents/made
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2006/3260/contents/made
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/farm-animal-welfare-during-transportation
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/farm-animal-welfare-during-transportation
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/farm-animal-welfare-during-transportation




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets38

is administered and when (for welfare purposes) and 
applies to all farm animals. The Veterinary Medicines 
Regulations 2013 recording requirements describe 
in detail what must be recorded, how long the 
records must be kept and includes the requirement 
for records of when and where medicines are 
acquired in addition to the requirement for records 
at the time of administration. 

Record keeping requirements are additionally 
set out in the Animals and Animal Products 
(Examination for Residues and Maximum Residue 
Limits) Regulations 1997, Part V, paragraph 32: 
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/1997/1729/
contents/made

Commission Regulation (EU) No 37/2010 on 
pharmacologically active substances and their 
classification regarding maximum residue limits in 
foodstuffs of animal origin:
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/en/
TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32010R0037

Animal by-products
For the requirements on storage, transport and 
disposal of animal by-products such as dead 
carcases, manure and litter see:

• Council Regulation (EC) No 1069/2009 http://
eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.
do?uri=OJ:L:2009:300:0001:0033:EN:PDF 

• Commission Regulation (EU) No 
142/2011 http://eur-lex.europa.
eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.
do?uri=OJ:L:2011:054:0001:0254:EN:PDF 

The requirements are enforced by The Animal By-
Products (Enforcement) (England) Regulation 2013. 
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2013/2952/
contents/made 

http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/1997/1729/contents/made
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/1997/1729/contents/made
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/en/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32010R0037
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/en/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32010R0037
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2009:300:0001:0033:EN:PDF
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2009:300:0001:0033:EN:PDF
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2009:300:0001:0033:EN:PDF
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2011:054:0001:0254:EN:PDF
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2011:054:0001:0254:EN:PDF
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2011:054:0001:0254:EN:PDF
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2013/2952/contents/made
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2013/2952/contents/made




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets 39

Annex 2: Permitted procedures

All mutilations of laying hens are banned under the 
Animal Welfare Act 2006.  The Mutilations (Permitted 
Procedures) (England) Regulations 2007 excludes 
certain procedures from this ban.  The permitted 
procedures for all laying hens and for chicks that are 
intended to become laying hens, are listed below.  
The list is correct at the point of publication.

• Micro-chipping for identification can be carried 


out.


• Wing tagging for identification – the law states 
this procedure:

• may only be carried out on farmed birds 
for the purposes of breed improvement 
programmes or testing for the presence of 
disease. 

• Other methods of identification involving a 
mutilation required by law can be carried out.

• Beak trimming – the law states that, if this 
procedure is carried out, it:

• must be performed using a suitable instrument;

• must be performed on both the lower and 
upper beaks, with not more than one third of 
each removed, or the upper beak only, with 
not more than one third removed; and

• any subsequent haemorrhage from the beak 
must be arrested by cauterisation. 

For laying hens and chicks that are intended 
to become laying hens, which are kept on 
establishments with 350 or more such birds, the 
law states that beak trimming:

• may only be performed in order to prevent 
feather pecking or cannibalism;

• may only be carried out using infra-red 
technology*;

• may not be performed on birds which are 
aged 10 days or over*; and

• must be carried out by a person who has 
been provided with suitable and sufficient 
information, instruction and training so that 
they are qualified to perform the procedure.

* These sub-paragraphs do not apply where 
the procedure is carried out in an emergency in 
order to control an outbreak of feather pecking or 
cannibalism.

• De-toeing – the law states:

• this procedure can only be carried out on 
a bird that is less than 3 days of age unless 
a veterinary surgeon considers that it is 
necessary; 

• an anaesthetic must be administered where 
the bird is aged 3 days or over.

• Dubbing – the law states:

• this procedure can only be carried out on 
a bird that is less than 3 days of age unless 
a veterinary surgeon considers that it is 
necessary;

• an anaesthetic must be administered where 
the bird is aged 3 days or over.

• Laparoscopy (examination of the abdominal 
cavity by insertion of an instrument called a 
laparoscope) – the law states:

• this procedure can only be carried out if an 
anaesthetic is administered.


.


Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets40

Sources of further 
information

Disease control and biosecurity
For advice on Avian influenza, see: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
biosecurity-and-preventing-disease

For information on the Salmonella National 
Control Programme, see: https://www.gov.uk/
government/publications/the-uk-national-
control-programme-for-salmonella-in-layers-
gallus-gallus

For the disease surveillance dashboards, see:
http://apha.defra.gov.uk/vet-gateway/
surveillance/scanning/disease-dashboards.htm

Antimicrobials and vaccines 
For guidance on the responsible use of 
antimicrobials and vaccines, see:

• www.ruma.org.uk/poultry/
• https://www.farmantibiotics.org/media-news-

updates/progress-by-sector/egg-production/

Egg marketing and trading
For information on egg marketing and trading, see:
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/eggs-trade-
regulations

*These sources of further information are for information 
only and should not be considered to be part of the Code 
of Practice. These sources of information are current on 
the date that this Code is published (please see the final 
page for the date of publication). Any of the sources of 
information listed here could change. 

Code of recommendations of the 
Council of Europe 
This Code takes account of the Council of Europe 
recommendations concerning domestic fowl 
(Gallus gallus). These set out general principles of 
husbandry and care and include a section on laying 
hens. See: https://rm.coe.int/16805165ec 

Slaughter
The Humane Slaughter Association has a Code of 
Practice for the Disposal of Chicks in Hatcheries.

Transport
For information on handling and transport, see:

• Joint Industry Welfare Guide on the Handling 
and Transport of End-of-Lay Hens http://www.
britisheggindustrycouncil.co.uk/download/
JIWGHELHB.pdf

• Humane Slaughter Association’s Poultry 
Catching and Handling guidance
https://www.hsa.org.uk/shop/publications-1/
product/-poultry-catching-and-handling-
(free-pdf) 

Animal by-products
For information on animal by-products, see:

www.gov.uk/guidance/animal-by-product-
categories-site-approval-hygiene-and-disposal

Welfare outcome assessments
For advice on measuring welfare outcomes, see: 

• AssureWel: www.assurewel.org
• FeatherWel: http://www.featherwel.org/

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/biosecurity-and-preventing-disease
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/biosecurity-and-preventing-disease
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-uk-national-control-programme-for-salmonella-in-layers-gallus-gallus
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-uk-national-control-programme-for-salmonella-in-layers-gallus-gallus
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-uk-national-control-programme-for-salmonella-in-layers-gallus-gallus
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-uk-national-control-programme-for-salmonella-in-layers-gallus-gallus
http://apha.defra.gov.uk/vet-gateway/surveillance/scanning/disease-dashboards.htm
http://apha.defra.gov.uk/vet-gateway/surveillance/scanning/disease-dashboards.htm
http://www.ruma.org.uk/poultry/
https://www.farmantibiotics.org/media-news-updates/progress-by-sector/egg-production/
https://www.farmantibiotics.org/media-news-updates/progress-by-sector/egg-production/
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/eggs-trade-regulations
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/eggs-trade-regulations
https://rm.coe.int/16805165ec
http://www.britisheggindustrycouncil.co.uk/download/JIWGHELHB.pdf
http://www.britisheggindustrycouncil.co.uk/download/JIWGHELHB.pdf
http://www.britisheggindustrycouncil.co.uk/download/JIWGHELHB.pdf
https://www.hsa.org.uk/shop/publications-1/product/-poultry-catching-and-handling-(free-pdf)
https://www.hsa.org.uk/shop/publications-1/product/-poultry-catching-and-handling-(free-pdf)
https://www.hsa.org.uk/shop/publications-1/product/-poultry-catching-and-handling-(free-pdf)
http://www.gov.uk/guidance/animal-by-product-categories-site-approval-hygiene-and-disposal
http://www.gov.uk/guidance/animal-by-product-categories-site-approval-hygiene-and-disposal
http://www.assurewel.org
http://www.featherwel.org/




Code of Practice for the Welfare of Laying Hens and Pullets 41

Date of publication: 8 August 2018




	Code of practice for the welfare of
	Contents
	Preface 
	Introduction
	Definitions
	Section 1: Recommendations applying to all husbandry systems	 
	Stockmanship and staffing 
	Health and welfare plan
	Biosecurity
	Disease control (Notifiable and reportable diseases)

	Contingency planning for disease and other emergencies
	Inspection and responding to poor health and welfare
	Welfare outcome assessments
	Specific health and welfare issues
	Injurious pecking, aggressive pecking and feather loss 
	Skeletal health
	Red mites 

	Automatic or mechanical equipment
	Ventilation and temperature 
	Lighting
	Laying hens in non-cage systems

	Litter
	Noise 
	Laying hens in enriched cages

	Feed and water 
	Mutilations
	Breeding procedures
	Responsible medicines usage and record keeping
	Catching and handling 
	Housing: General requirements
	Stocking density and freedom of movement
	Environmental enrichment 

	Non-cage systems: additional housing requirements
	Free range systems: additional housing requirements 
	Enriched cage systems: additional housing requirements 

	Section 2: 
	Recommendations applying to day-old chicks and pullet rearing
	Brooding (0-6 weeks)
	Pullet rearing environment
	Transition from rearing to laying environment 

	Annex: Legislation affecting laying hens and pullets 
	Transport
	Slaughter
	Disease control and biosecurity
	Responsible medicines usage and record keeping
	Animal by-products

	Sources of further information
	Code of recommendations of the Council of Europe 
	Slaughter
	Transport
	Animal by-products
	Welfare outcome assessments
	Disease control and biosecurity
	Antimicrobials and vaccines 
	Registering poultry
	Egg marketing and trading

	Annex_6
	_GoBack
	Preface 
	Introduction
	Definitions
	Section 1: Recommendations applying to all husbandry systems	 
	Stockmanship and staffing 
	Health and welfare plan
	Biosecurity and disease control
	Contingency planning for disease and other emergencies
	Inspection and responding to poor health and welfare
	Welfare outcome assessments
	Specific health and welfare issues
	Injurious pecking, aggressive pecking and feather loss 
	Skeletal health
	Red mites 

	Automatic or mechanical equipment
	Ventilation and temperature 
	Lighting
	Litter
	Noise 
	Feed and water 
	Mutilations
	Beak trimming 

	Breeding procedures
	Responsible medicines usage and record keeping
	Catching and handling 
	Housing: General requirements
	Stocking density and freedom of movement
	Environmental enrichment 

	Non-cage systems: additional housing requirements
	Free range systems: additional housing requirements 
	Enriched cage systems: additional housing requirements 

	Section 2: 
	Recommendations applying to day-old chicks and pullet rearing
	Brooding (0-6 weeks)
	Pullet rearing environment
	Transition from rearing to laying environment 

	Annex 1: Legislation affecting laying hens and pullets 
	Annex 2: Permitted procedures

