

  

www.gov.uk/environment-agency                                                                                                                                                                                                        1 of 3 


 

Cumbria flood action plan 


 

Blennerhasset and Baggrow community action table 


 

The purpose of this action table is to highlight the flood management that is currently in place and the 
specific actions that are happening or proposed within the Cumbria flood action plan for this community. 


 

Please read this table in conjunction with the full Cumbria flood action plan and summary document, which 
can be found online by visiting www.gov.uk and searching Cumbria flood action plan. 


 

Blennerhasset and Baggrow better protected 


 

1) Do now (within next 12 months):  

 Publish and review flood investigation report 

 Complete appraisals of possible actions to manage flood risk 


 

2) Develop (2-5 years):   

 Take forward recommendations in the flood investigation report and identify possible 
options to reduce flood risk 

 Continue to support sharing knowledge and best practice through the network for 
Community Action Groups 


 

3) Explore (5+ years):    

 Develop opportunities for natural flood risk management and engineered storage where 
feasible 


 

Catchment: Derwent  


 

Impact of December 2015 flood: Approximately 10 homes and businesses were flooded. 


 

Description: Blennerhasset and Baggrow are small villages in north west Cumbria, situated on the 
River Ellen between Carlisle and Cockermouth. 


     

What’s already in place What we’re going to do and what this will achieve When this work will 
take place  

Who’s responsible for 
this work  

How much 
will it cost/ 
Sources of 
funding 


 

Strengthening 
flood  
defences  


   

The Environment Agency has no formal flood defences in 
Blennerhasset or Baggrow. 


 

Improved defences 


 

Review the recommendations from the Flood Investigation 
Report and National Resilience Review to develop 
integrated flood risk management solutions. Although there 
may be no funding identified in the currently consented 
FDGiA Investment Programme, we have included this 
location in the current appraisal package and will submit a 
bid for funding for viable projects identified following a 
review of the recommendations at the earliest opportunity, 
as part of the annual FDGiA Investment Programme refresh 
and/or when other appropriate sources of funding are made 
available.  


    

Draft Flood Investigation 
Report published 
summer 2016 


   

Environment Agency 


    

Repairing damages from Storm Desmond 


 

No formal flood defences in Blennerhasset or Baggrow. 


     

Environment Agency 


       

Modelling and forecasting post-event model re-runs 


 

Update the river level model with the most recent flow data 
available from Storm Desmond to develop and support any 
future schemes. 


   

Short term (within next 
12 months) 


   

Environment Agency 


   

£70,000 
(Cumbria wide 
spend) 



    


http://www.gov.uk/environment-agency
http://www.gov.uk/


  

www.gov.uk/environment-agency                                                                                                                                                                                                        2 of 3 


  


What’s already in place What we’re going to do and what this will achieve When this work will 
take place  

Who’s responsible for 
this work  

How much 
will it cost/ 
Sources of 
funding 

Understanding Bridges 


 

Review the role that bridges play in flood risk and their 
vulnerability during a flood. 


  

Short term – strategic 
review within the next 12 
months 


 

Cumbria County Council 
Environment Agency  


 

Upstream 
management 


     

Currently there is limited use of upstream management in the sub-
catchments upstream of Blennerhasset and Baggrow. 


 

Explore opportunities for engineered and natural flood 
management solutions to be used upstream in order to 
‘slow the flow’ and manage peak river levels. 


 

Medium term (2-5 years) 
or long term (over 5 
years) 


 

Farmers 
Landowners 
Community groups 
Trusts 


      

Maintenance  


   

There are no formal flood defences but the river channel is 

maintained by the Environment Agency on an ongoing basis. This 

includes managing vegetation and assessing and removing gravel 

where necessary. 


 

The planned maintenance programme is available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/river-and-coastal-
maintenance-programme 
This year’s scheduled maintenance will be completed by the end of 
the year. 


    

The new Environment Agency system will make it easier for 
communities to understand maintenance in their area. 
Improvements will show exactly when, where and what 
maintenance is being planned each year. 


  

Make sure that communities understand how they can 
access information on planned maintenance at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/river-and-
coastal-maintenance-programme 


  

Short (within next 12 
months) 


 

Communities 
Environment Agency 
Parish and District 
Councils 


  


Resilience  


    

There are currently no community action groups in Blennerhasset or 
Baggrow. 


 

Work with communities to establish a network of 
Emergency Groups to share learning and best practice. 


  

Continue to encourage the community to develop an 
emergency plan. 


      

Environment Agency 
(Flood Warning & 
Community Resilience) 
Communities 
Parish & District 
Councils 
Local Government 


       

Local Levy, 
Flood Defence 
Grant in Aid 


   

There is currently a flood alert in Blennerhasset and Baggrow.  
There is currently no flood warning areas. 


    

Local authorities are administering the Flood Recovery and 
Resilience Grants. 


  

People who flooded in December are being urged to apply 
for the £5,000 resilience grant from their district/borough 
council. The deadline for applications has been extended to 
Friday 31 March 2017. A further £2,000 top up grant can 
also be applied for from the Cumbria Flood Recovery Fund.  


    

Closing date for grant 
applications – end of 
March 2017  


  

District Council 


 

Resilience 
grants of 
£5,000 per 
property 


 

http://www.gov.uk/environment-agency
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/river-and-coastal-maintenance-programme
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/river-and-coastal-maintenance-programme
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/river-and-coastal-maintenance-programme
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/river-and-coastal-maintenance-programme


  

www.gov.uk/environment-agency                                                                                                                                                                                                        3 of 3 


  


What’s already in place What we’re going to do and what this will achieve When this work will 
take place  

Who’s responsible for 
this work  

How much 
will it cost/ 
Sources of 
funding 

Water Level 
Management 
Boards 


      

There are no Water Level Management Boards in this area. 



     

http://www.gov.uk/environment-agency

