


Climate Change The UK Programme 2006 CM 6764


Climate Change
The UK Programme 2006


Climate Change
The UK Programme 2006
Presented to Parliament by the
Secretary of State for the Environment, 
Food and Rural Affairs
by Command of Her Majesty
Presented to the Scottish Parliament by the Scottish Ministers:
Presented to the Northern Ireland Assembly:
Placed with the Welsh Assembly library
March 2006
CM6764
SE/2006/43 £
00


©Crown Copyright 2006
The text in this document (excluding the Royal Arms and departmental logos) may be reproduced
free of charge in any format or medium providing that it is reproduced accurately and not used in
a misleading context. The material must be acknowledged as Crown copyright and the title of the
document specified.
Any enquiries relating to the copyright in this document should be addressed to the Licensing
Division, HMSO, St Clements House, 2-16 Colegate, Norwich, NR3 1BQ, Fax 01603 723000
or e-mail: licencing@cabinet-office.x.gsi.gov.uk


Climate change is probably the greatest long-term
challenge facing the human race. That is why I have
made it a top priority for this government, at home
and internationally.
The scientific evidence is now overwhelming. Since
1990, global temperatures have risen by 
2C and
atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations have
increased from 354 parts per million to over 380 parts
per million and are still rising. If the anticipated growth
in emissions is left unchecked, global average
temperatures could be as much as 
8C higher by the
end of this century, with a devastating impact on our
economy and natural world, in the UK and, above all, in
the most vulnerable developing countries.
We have to accept that some climate change is now
inevitable. We must adapt to this and provide greater
support for the poorest nations. We can, however, avert
the worst global scenarios if the world acts decisively,
but there can be no delay. The longer we put off action,
the more dramatic and costlier the changes we will have
to make.
Our 2000 Climate Change Programme has already
helped put us on track to meet our Kyoto greenhouse
gas reduction commitment. Indeed, we are projected
to go significantly beyond our Kyoto commitment and
reduce our greenhouse gas emissions by 23-25 per cent
by 2010, one of the best records of any Kyoto signatory.
Without the measures introduced since 1997 and the
package of new measures being announced today, we
estimate that carbon dioxide emissions in 2010 might
only be about 1 per cent lower than in 1990, rather
than 15 to 18 per cent lower. But we are not
complacent. This programme contains further
commitments to help achieve our national goal of
reducing carbon dioxide by 20 per cent below 1990
levels by 2010 and, in the long-term, reduce emissions
by 60 per cent by 

Domestic action is essential, not least to underline the
fact that emissions reductions and prosperity can go
hand-in-hand. But national action can only be part
of a much bigger strategy. The UK is responsible for
2 per cent of global emissions, and this figure is falling.
Climate change is a global problem that requires a global
solution. That is why our new programme sets out our
strategy for both international and national action.
The UK has already taken a strong lead internationally
on climate change. We played a major role in
negotiating the Kyoto Treaty. In the Hadley Centre, we
have one of the world’s leading climate change research
centres. We have also taken a policy lead, through the
climate change levy and UK emissions trading scheme.
In 2005 we took this to a new level, through our
Presidencies of the G8 and EU. We made important
progress. Crucially, the G8 countries agreed to a new
Dialogue with the Leaders of China, India, Brazil and
other emerging economies that will hold meetings
annually and culminate in 2008 when it reports to the
Japanese G8 Presidency. The progress made at the G8
and in our EU Presidency helped to secure a positive
outcome to the UN Climate Change Conference
in Montreal.
But the progress made last year has, in truth, simply got
the world to the starting blocks for the real race – to
secure agreement to the long-term goal of global action
on climate change and on the action needed to deliver
that goal.
This document sets out our plans for working, with other
countries, to secure agreement on the scale needed.
They include a strong focus on a stabilisation goal to
frame future international action, progress through the
UN Framework on Climate Change and the G8 Dialogue,
and a much greater role for the European Union.
Section Number – CHAPTER NUMBER iii
TitlePrime Minister’s Foreword


We will work with our EU partners to take further action
both internally and internationally. The UK will push
hard for greater certainty on European plans for
implementation of the EU Emissions Trading Scheme
beyond 
 The scheme remains the most important
mechanism for stimulating international investment in
low-carbon technology. We will also seek agreement
for much more ambitious collaboration with emerging
economies. Our EU Summits with China and India in
2005 were a useful step forward. But again we need
to go much further, to scale up these actions to make
a real difference.
We will also work with the G8 and developing countries
through the Dialogue to accelerate the deployment of
clean technologies and provide incentives for investment
in low carbon technologies. We will co-operate closely
with the World Bank and other multilateral development
banks to deliver an effective framework for investment in
clean energy, and with the International Energy Agency.
Targets matter, at home and abroad. But recent events
have shown that no government can control emissions
in any one year, due to factors such as changes in
international fuel and energy prices that are outside our
control. Our approach seeks to secure steady emissions
reductions over time, through a framework that
recognises the importance of maintaining our economic
competitiveness and our responsibilities to all members
of society – particularly those experiencing fuel poverty.
This programme will take us close to our domestic target.
But it is by no means the last word. We are launching
the consultation today on the UK’s approach to the next
phase of the EU emissions trading scheme, which will
provide a vital signal to business of the parameters from
2008–
 I am a strong supporter of the scheme. We
look forward to hearing people’s views prior to our final
decision this summer. We will also be considering other
future policy options through the Energy Review and the
annual Budget process. We will report to Parliament
annually on emissions, future projections, the impact
of these measures and forward plans.
Government will play its part and give the necessary
lead. But we won’t succeed without the support and
active participation of all sectors of society.
If every household and business took measures to reduce
its carbon dioxide emissions, by reducing energy used in
the home, in buildings, and by changing how journeys
are made, we could achieve our 20 per cent target.
We can and will help make this happen. We are putting
more funding into a new initiative to raise consumer
demand for energy efficiency. The Carbon Trust and the
Energy Saving Trust will this year run awareness
campaigns on what companies and individuals can do to
help. Our Climate Change Communications Initiative will
do more to inform the public of the threat and how we
can together overcome it.
Our emissions goals require leadership and action, by
government and by us all. This programme will move us
closer, and we will go further. But the solution is in the
hands of us all – as businesses, citizens and consumers.
Let’s achieve this together.
Tony Blair
Prime Minister
March 2006

iv
Foreword


Section Number – CHAPTER NUMBER 1
TitleContents
Executive Summary 3
Section 1 – The international challenge 7

 What is climate change and why does it matter? 8

 International framework for action 15
Section 2 – Delivering emissions reductions 23

 UK emissions inventory and projections 24

 Strategy to reduce UK emissions 30

 Energy supply 32

 Business 44

 Transport 61

 Domestic 74

 Agriculture, forestry and land use management 90

 Public sector 104

 Stimulating action by individuals 117

 Bringing it all together 124

 Monitoring and review 126
Section 3 – Adapting to the impacts of climate change 129

 Adaptation 130
Section 4 – Action by the devolved administrations 143

 Scotland 144

 Northern Ireland 153

 Wales 163


Section 5 – Annexes 00
Section 5 – Annexes 169
Annex A – Emissions projections 170
Annex B – Carbon dioxide 174
Annex C – Methane 176
Annex D – Nitrous oxide 178
Annex E – HFCs, PFCs and SF6 180
Annex F – Carbon sequestration 183
Annex G – Carbon capture and geological storage 187
Annex H – List of greenhouse gases 188
Annex I – Review of the 2000 Climate Change Programme 190
Glossary of terms 191

2
Contents


This Government believes that climate change is the
greatest long-term challenge facing the world today.
There is strong and indisputable evidence that climate
change is happening and that man-made emissions are
its main cause. The ten warmest years globally since
formal records began in 1861 have all occurred since

 If left unchecked, climate change will have
profound impacts on our societies and way of life,
affecting agriculture and food security, leading to water
shortages, triggering population movements and
impacting on our economies, and our security. So action
is needed now.
The UK has already taken significant steps to meet this
challenge. The Government has led the way with
innovative policies, such as the Climate Change Levy and
agreements, Renewables Obligation and Energy
Efficiency Commitment. Equally, we have built on our
experience of domestic policy to foster greater action at
the international level – most notably with the successful
introduction of the EU Emissions Trading Scheme which
draws many elements from our domestic emissions
trading scheme. The combination of these measures has
had a substantial impact on greenhouse gas reduction in
the UK. It is for this reason that the UK is one of very
few countries on track to meet our commitment under
the Kyoto Protocol to reduce emissions of greenhouse
gases by 
5 per cent below 1990 levels by 2008-

And we have made progress beyond this commitment,
with our greenhouse gas emissions projected to be
almost 20 per cent below 1990 levels in 2010 even
without the new measures in this programme.
We want to go further. This Climate Change Programme
sets out our policies and priorities for action in the UK
and internationally. Climate change is a global problem,
so we will strive to secure global action on the scale
needed to tackle it. But we will also take further action
at home, to meet our commitments and demonstrate
that climate change can be tackled without damaging
our economy.
The UK is already at the forefront of the fight against
climate change. Our Presidencies of the G8 and the EU
in 2005 and this made a powerful impact. At the
Gleneagles Summit in July 2005, the G8 leaders agreed
that climate change was a serious and long-term
challenge caused by human activity, and that urgent
action was needed. The Gleneagles Action Plan and the
commitment by G8 leaders and leaders of other
countries to launch a Dialogue on “climate change,
clean energy and sustainable development” were a
major signal of renewed political will. The Montreal UN
Conference in December 2005 was an important step
forward for the whole international community.
But there is a long way to go. So we will continue to
play a leadership role in 2006 and beyond through the
European Union, G8 and UN Framework Convention
processes, and find ways to reach global agreement
to action on the scale needed to avert dangerous
climate change.
We have also set ourselves a more challenging domestic
target to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 20 per cent
below 1990 levels by 
 Although we have made
significant progress, higher than anticipated levels of
economic growth and the recent rise in global energy
prices, which has altered the relative prices of coal and
gas, have led to increases in our carbon dioxide
emissions in recent years. As a result, achieving our
domestic target has become more challenging since our
last Climate Change Programme in 
 We have
therefore used this Review to assess both the impact of
existing policies and the potential contribution of new
policy options.
This new Climate Change Programme will take us close
to our domestic target, and ensure that the UK can
make the real progress by 2020 towards the long-term
goal to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by some 60 per
cent by about 2050 that we committed to in the 2003
Energy White Paper. The package of existing and new
policy measures in the Programme are projected to
reduce carbon dioxide emissions to 15-18 per cent
below 1990 levels – the new measures saving 12 million
tonnes of carbon by 
 This is very good progress.
Our overall emissions of greenhouse gas emissions are
now projected to be 23-25 per cent below 1990 levels
in 2010 – around double our Kyoto target.
This Programme is not the final word. The projections
and policies set out in this Programme will change over
time. There is more that government will do both to
influence emissions directly and to encourage action by
others. The 2010 carbon target is still within reach.
Further contributions could be made by the Energy
Review, the ODPM review of buildings and other
government policy processes over the coming years.

3
Executive SummaryExecutive Summary


Recent experience has proven the need to assess
progress towards our medium and long-term goals on
a more frequent and regular basis. We will therefore in
future report annually to Parliament on our progress at
reducing the UK’s greenhouse gas emissions. Building
on this, the Review of the Economics of Climate
Change, led by Sir Nick Stern, will consider other aspects
of recent proposals for the introduction of “carbon
budgeting”. This analysis will inform the Energy Review.
So this Climate Change Programme sets out the
Government’s commitments both at international and
domestic levels to meet the challenge of climate change.
It also sets out our approach to strengthening the role
that individuals can play. We will encourage individuals
as citizens, consumers, motorists and business people to
take the action needed to help meet our goals. There is
no choice to be made between action at international,
national and personal levels. We regard all as essential.
The primary elements of our programme at all levels are
summarised below.
Internationally we will:

 work to build consensus on the scale of action
needed to stabilise the climate and avoid dangerous
climate change, and build on the progress made at
the G8 Summit in Gleneagles and the Montreal
climate change conference to strengthen the
international regime;

 work with EU partners to secure agreement to
further action in the EU, in particular by extending
and strengthening the Emissions Trading Scheme and
the Clean Development Mechanism to make them
key regional and global tools for emissions
reductions beyond 2012;

 in partnership with the EU, enhance our efforts to
help India, China, Brazil and other large emerging
countries evolve as low-carbon economies;

 work with the World Bank and the multilateral
development banks to ensure that the proposed
Clean Energy Investment Framework delivers
significant new investment in low carbon energy
sources, energy efficiency and adaptation to climate
change in developing countries;

 support international collaboration and coordination
to ensure the successful expansion of new
technologies, through action in key areas such as
product standards and research and development;

and


 help poorer developing countries to adapt to
changes in climate already occurring and to make
their economies more resilient to future changes.
Domestically we will:

 report annually to Parliament on emissions, our
future plans and progress on domestic climate
change; and

 set out our adaptation plan for the UK, informed
by additional research on the impacts of climate
change.
In the energy supply sector we will:

 consult now on a National Allocation Plan for the
second phase of the EU Emissions Trading Scheme to
achieve carbon savings of between 3 and 8 MtC;

 spend £80m in the next three years to support
microgeneration technologies, with the aim of
encouraging manufacture at higher scale leading
to lower costs;

 provide £35m over four years for the development of
carbon abatement technologies, and consult on the
barriers to wide-scale commercial development of
carbon capture and storage (CCS) in the UK and the
potential role of economic incentives in addressing
those barriers;

 continue to support electricity from renewables
under the Renewables Obligation and address
barriers to take-up; and

 fully consider the treatment of CHP in the UK’s
National Allocation Plan for the second phase
of the EU Emissions Trading Scheme.
In the business sector we will:

 continue to use the climate change levy and
associated climate change agreements to encourage
businesses to improve the efficiency with which they
use energy;

4
Executive Summary



 maintain a strong package of support, advice and
information measures to help businesses improve
their energy efficiency;

 continue to make the EU Emissions Trading Scheme a
central element of the business sector’s contribution
to our national goal; and

 keep the current policy mix under review to ensure
that it continues to represent the most effective use
of policy instruments to deliver emissions reductions.
In the transport sector we will:

 introduce the Renewable Transport Fuel Obligation
from 2008 to increase the uptake of biofuels and
ensure a long term framework which promotes
additional investment;

 continue to use fiscal instruments such as Vehicle
Excise Duty and Company Car Tax to give incentives
to purchase less polluting vehicles;

 maintain momentum in the EU to secure agreement
to the inclusion of aviation in the EU Emissions
Trading Scheme from 2008 or as soon as possible
thereafter;

 work strongly to achieve further commitments from
vehicle manufacturers to improve fuel efficiency; and

 continue to promote carbon offsetting and lead by
example to offset emissions arising from central
Government air travel.
In the domestic sector we will:

 continue to take forward significant improvements
already made and update the Building Regulations
in April 2006 to raise energy standards of new build
and refurbished buildings;

 introduce the Code for Sustainable Homes which will
have minimum standards for energy and water
efficiency at every level of the Code, with the lowest
levels raised above the level of mandatory building
regulations;

 building on substantial progress to date, seek to
achieve substantially higher carbon savings from the
Energy Efficiency Commitment in 2008-11, working
with stakeholders to examine the scope to provide
greater flexibility and incentive in the design of the
scheme and to enable it to encourage consumers to
reduce their energy demand;

 achieve 250,000 additional subsidised installations
of home insulation over the next two years over and
above existing commitments;

 launch a major new initiative designed to strengthen
consumer demand for energy efficiency, working
closely with energy suppliers and through local
authorities, with funding of £20m over the next
two years;

 provide more reliable consumer product information
and set effective standards for energy-using products
via voluntary agreements, in particular a new
initiative with major retailers on consumer
electronics, the Eco-design of Energy Using Products
Directive and other national, EU and international
policy measures and initiatives, including public
procurement;

 consider how to enable consumption feedback to
households via improved billing and metering,
including the Budget 2006 announcement of £5m to
help co-finance with energy companies a pilot study
in the use of “smart” meters and associated
feedback devices;

 maintain the Energy Efficiency Commitment, Warm
Front and Decent Homes schemes to deliver energy
efficiency measures in low income households to
help meet our fuel poverty targets; and

 continue to support the activities of the Energy
Saving Trust and the Climate Change
Communications Initiative to raise awareness about
climate change and the action individuals can take
to help tackle it.
In the public sector and local government we will:

 introduce a package of measures to drive additional
action for local authorities to include an appropriate
focus on action on climate change;

 set up a new revolving loan fund of £20m for the
whole of the public sector, to finance investment
in energy efficiency; and

 introduce new strategic targets for the central
government estate in summer 


5
Executive Summary


In the agriculture, forestry and land management
sector we will:

 promote resource efficient farm management
in order to reduce agriculture's contribution
to greenhouse gas emissions; and

 examine the scope and feasibility of an emissions
trading scheme for the agriculture and forestry
sector.
And to encourage personal action we will:

 introduce further measures and initiatives to
encourage and enable individuals to understand their
role and responsibility in tackling climate change;

 continue to support the essential work of the
Energy Saving Trust and Carbon Trust and other
organisations that provide information and advice
to individuals, businesses and local authorities;

 set out a plan for action on sustainable consumption
by the end of 2006, in response to the Sustainable
Consumption Round Table report due in Spring 2006;

 establish a new online information service (working
title: Environment Direct) to provide information on
the environmental impact of a range of everyday
products and services, and practical advice on
sustainable lifestyle choices;

 provide up to £4m over three years to roll out a
new package of measures to help thousands of
community groups across England to take action on
sustainable development, including climate change;

and


 enhance our new Climate Change Communications
Initiative, to change public attitudes toward climate
change, above all at local, grass roots and regional
level.

6
Executive Summary


SECTION

1
The International Challenge


CHAPTER ONE
What is climate change and why does it matter?
Introduction

 The earth’s climate has changed frequently over
the long periods of geological time in responses
to changes in the strength of the sun, the shape
and tilt of the earth’s orbit around the sun, the
position and shape of the continents and the
composition of the atmosphere. There is strong
evidence that greenhouse gas emissions from
human activities are now raising the earth’s
temperature and causing other changes in
climate. Emissions are projected to rise
significantly over the next few decades, and quite
likely beyond this, leading to significant increases
in global temperatures with profound risks for
the natural environment and human society
worldwide. This Chapter provides background
material on the nature of human induced climate
change and its likely impacts.
The greenhouse effect and other 
influences on climate

 The temperature of the earth is determined by
the balance between energy from the sun in the
form of visible radiation (sunlight), and energy
constantly re-radiated from the earth to space in
the form of infra-red radiation. Sunlight passes
through the atmosphere with little direct
warming effect but it warms the earth’s surface
which in turn warms the atmosphere by
convection and the emission of infra-red
radiation, which is absorbed by certain trace
gases – the greenhouse gases. These return some
infra-red radiation back to the surface thereby
warming the surface further. An analogy is often
made with the effect of a greenhouse which
allows sunshine in through clear glass or plastic
that in turn stops the heat inside from escaping,
hence the term ‘greenhouse effect’.

 The greenhouse effect occurs naturally. Without
it the earth would be over 30°C cooler than it is
and largely uninhabitable. The main naturally
occurring greenhouse gases are water-vapour
(H2O), carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4) and
nitrous oxide (N2O). Although water vapour
makes the greatest contribution to the
greenhouse effect, it has a short lifetime in the
atmosphere and its concentration is largely
determined by the temperature of the
atmosphere and not simply by emission or loss
rates. By contrast, the other three gases have
relatively long atmospheric lifetimes – about a
1) Visible and near-visible
 radiation from the Sun
easily passes through the
glass and heats the ground,
plants, etc.
3) Most of the IR
radiation passes
back through the
glass and escapes
to space ...
2) The ground, plants,
etc. act as a thermal
black-body radiator
and emit long-wave
infra-red (IR)
wavelengths
4) Some IR radiation
is reflected by the
glass and is trapped
inside the
greenhouse causing
internal temperatures
to rise.
The overwhelming majority of scientific
opinion supports the view that human
activities are changing the earth’s climate and
that likely future changes present a serious
threat to human society and the natural
environment.
The ten warmest years globally since
instrumental records began in 1861 have all
occurred since 
 1998 was the warmest
year and 2005 was almost as warm.
Without action to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions global temperatures are expected to
rise by between 
4 and 
8°C by 2100 and sea
level could also rise by between 
09 and

88 metres compared to 1990 levels.
Such changes will have significant impacts on
human society and on the natural
environment, with increases in drought and
extreme rainfall and greater risks of abrupt
changes in climate.

89
What is climate change and why does it matter?
1 The UNFCCC and the Kyoto Protocol are concerned with greenhouse gases not covered by the Montreal Protocol. Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and hydro-
chlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) are also greenhouse gases but are being phased out under the Montréal Protocol.
2 GWP is defined as the warming influence of a gas over a set time period relative to that of carbon dioxide. The GWP values used for calculating national
greenhouse gas emissions totals are from IPCC’s Second Assessment Report and differ slightly from the values shown in Table 1 – see Annex H.
century for CO2 – and so their concentrations are
determined by emission and removal rates. Since
the industrial revolution, man’s use of fossil fuels
and increase in agriculture has increased the
emissions of all the long-lived greenhouse gases.

 Human activities also affect the climate in other
ways. Airborne aerosol particles emitted by
sources such as industry, power stations and
transport scatter sunlight, which would otherwise
reach the earth’s surface, and have a cooling
effect on the climate system. Their influence can
be important in heavily polluted regions but,
unlike greenhouse gases, they do not accumulate
in the atmosphere because they are washed out
by rain within a few weeks. Aerosols have
partially masked the full effect of increasing
greenhouse gases and have slowed the rate of
temperature increase. Human activities, such as
agriculture and deforestation, have also changed
the nature of the earth’s surface in ways which
affect climate. For example, changing land use
from forests to pasture increases the amount of
sunlight reflected and the availability of moisture
at the surface. Such changes affect the climate
on a regional scale. Deforestation also leads to
significant emissions of CO2 to the atmosphere
and currently accounts for some 20 per cent
of global emissions.
Greenhouse gases

 In addition to the human induced emissions of
carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide,
industrial activities have generated other
greenhouse gases, namely hydrofluorocarbons,
perfluorocarbons and sulphur hexafluoride

Each greenhouse gas has a different capacity to
cause global warming, depending on its radiative
properties, its molecular weight and its residence
time in the atmosphere. Global warming
potential (GWP)2 is a convenient index that can
be used to assess the relative global warming
effect of the emissions of different gases over a
set time period – usually taken to be one
hundred years – relative to the emission of an
equal mass of CO
 The following table
summarises the GWPs for the main greenhouse
gases. The overall effect of emissions on the
climate system can be found by multiplying the
emissions by the relevant GWP.
The relative contribution to global warming over the next 100 years
of current emissions of greenhouse gases. 
Global Warming Potentials for selected gases from the IPCC Third
Assessment Report
GAS GWP
CO2 1
CH4 23
N2O 296
HFC-23 12000
HFC-134a 1300
CF4 5700
SF6 22200

 Atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide,
methane and nitrous oxide have been rising for
200 years. Concentrations of most other
greenhouse gases have also been rising in the
past five decades. Evidence from bubbles in
ice cores shows that the pre-industrial level of
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere was about
270ppm (parts per million) which has risen to
377ppm by the end of 2004 and provisional data
for 2005 show a concentration of over 380ppm.
The atmospheric CO2 concentration is already at
a level not seen on earth for at least 740,000
years, and probably for over 20 million years.
Both ice core and instrumental measurements
have also shown well over a doubling of pre-
industrial methane concentrations in the
atmosphere.
Others

3%
Carbon
dioxide

63%
Methane

24%
Nitrous
oxide

10%10
What is climate change and why does it matter?
Historical CO2 concentrations
Historic trends and observed changes

 The global temperature record indicates that the
earth has warmed by about 
7°C since the
beginning of the last century. All of the ten
warmest years on record since 1861 have
occurred since the beginning of the 1990s and
the last ten years have seen nine of the ten
warmest years on record with only 1996 not
making the top ten. 1998 was the warmest year
on record and 2005 was almost as warm.

 How much of this change in temperature can be
attributed to human activities is studied using
complex climate models which show a
characteristic fingerprint (spatial and temporal
response) of the pattern of change due to
increasing greenhouse gas concentrations. This
suggests that at least half of the increase since
1900 has been caused by human activities, with
the remainder likely due to natural variations,
including changes in the sun’s output and
volcanic eruptions. Most of the warming over
the past 50 years is likely to have been caused
by human activities.
Global average near surface temperatures (1861-2005)

 The area of snow cover in the Northern
Hemisphere has decreased by 10 per cent since
the 1960s and there has been a significant retreat
of glaciers in most regions of the world. Large
areas of ice shelves in the Antarctic Peninsula
have broken off in recent years. Arctic sea-ice has
thinned by up to 40 per cent in recent decades in
late-summer and has decreased in extent in late-
summer by 15 per cent since the 1950s. Latest
estimates indicate a decline in Arctic sea ice area
of about 8 per cent in the last decade alone. The
melting of sea-ice does not affect sea levels (as it
already displaces its own weight of water) but the
loss of ice shelves may hasten the flow of land
ice to the ocean and consequently add to sea
level rise.

11
What is climate change and why does it matter?

 Sea level has risen by 1 to 2 mm per year during
the 20th century, mainly as a result of thermal
expansion of the oceans and melting of glaciers.
Sea levels will continue to rise for several
centuries after greenhouses gas concentrations
in the atmosphere are stabilised because of the
very large thermal inertia of the oceans.

 The ranges of many plant and animal species
have shifted pole-ward and to higher altitudes
in recent decades. Plant flowering, the arrival of
migrating birds, the onset of some bird breeding
seasons and the emergence of insects have all
been observed to occur earlier across much of
the middle and high latitudes of the Northern
Hemisphere. In several regions insect and pest
species are now over-wintering more easily.

 Coral reef bleaching has increased globally.
This is caused by unusually high sea surface
temperatures. We are also beginning to see an
increase in ocean acidity as more CO2 is absorbed
by the ocean. This could have serious impacts on
marine organisms and reduce the oceans’ ability
to absorb carbon dioxide from the atmosphere.

 There is strong evidence of increases in storm and
heat-wave frequency in many parts of the world
and, most importantly, a significant decrease in
cold weather snaps in high and mid-latitudes,
including in Britain.
For example:

 in the Arctic, temperatures have risen by up to
twice the global average since the mid-1970s;

 Alaska has warmed especially quickly in the
last two decades, with dramatic impacts on
the environment, plants and animals and
human societies; and

 across Europe, several dramatic floods have
hit the headlines during the last decade.
Possibly the hottest summer in a thousand
years in Europe killed more than 35,000
people in 2003 and set a new UK record high
temperature (
5°C near Faversham in Kent
on 10 August). A study shows that a summer
of such exceptional warmth was twice as
likely to occur due to the presence of
increased levels of greenhouse gases and that
by the middle of this century such a summer
may occur every two or three years.

 Some exceptional tropical storm activity has been
observed in recent years. In 2005 in the Atlantic
sector there were an unprecedented number of
hurricanes stretching over a very long season,
leading to speculation that global warming is
responsible. Recent studies provide some evidence
that tropical storms are becoming more intense and
that this is related to rising sea surface temperature.
But many factors influence tropical storm formation
and the scientific community is still analysing the
possible linkage with climate change.
Projected European summer temperatures through this century

12
What is climate change and why does it matter?
How the climate may change in the
future

 Complex computer models are used to simulate
global and regional climates of the past, present
and future. The first graph below shows observed
global temperature change between 1861 and
2000 (black curve) as well as a simulation of global
temperature change back into the 19th century
from the latest climate change model developed by
the Met Office’s Hadley Centre (red curve). The
second graph shows four simulations into the future
using the same model and based on four emissions
scenarios of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC). Each shows a continuing global
temperature rise until the end of this century.
Recent warming can be simulated when man-made factors are included
Predicted warming due to range of IPCC emissions
Abrupt and dangerous climate
change

 As global temperatures continue to increase, the
risks of abrupt and possibly irreversible changes
that would have serious consequences are
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC)
Recognising the need for a scientific assessment,
the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO)
and the United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP) established the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change in 

The role of the IPCC is to assess on a
comprehensive, objective, open and transparent
basis the scientific, technical and socio-economic
information relevant to understanding the
scientific basis of risk of human-induced climate
change, its potential impacts and options for
adaptation and mitigation.
The IPCC does not carry out research. It bases
its assessments on peer reviewed and published
scientific/technical literature. Since its
establishment the IPCC has produced a series of
publications which have become standard
works of reference.
The main products are Assessment Reports,
Special Reports, Methodology Reports and
Technical Papers. Each assessment includes a
Summary for Policymakers published in all
official UN languages. IPCC’s next major
assessment, the Fourth Assessment Report on
climate change, is currently under preparation
and will be published during 

The UK considers that the assessments of the
IPCC provide the most authoritative and
comprehensive picture of all aspects of climate
change. UK scientist Professor Martin Parry
co-chairs Working Group II on impacts,
adaptation and vulnerability. The Government
funds a technical unit, which supports him in
this role.

13
What is climate change and why does it matter?
3 Further information can be found at: www.stabilisation
com
4 “Avoiding Dangerous Climate Change”, Cambridge University Press, January 

increasing. These include substantial melting of
polar ice sheets like those of Greenland and West
Antarctica, which would cause an additional sea
level rise of up to 12 metres, reduction in the
strength of the North Atlantic ocean currents,
which could cause significant cooling in the
North Atlantic and Europe region, and increased
methane emissions following melting of
permafrost or destabilisation of the large
quantities of methane hydrates deposited in
the oceans depths along continental margins.

 Important questions are how the current upward
trend in greenhouse gas emissions can be halted
and how their atmospheric concentrations can
ultimately be stabilised at a level which avoids
these and other potentially dangerous changes;
in the mid-1990s the EU proposed that the aim
should be to limit global temperature rise to no
more than 2ºC to avoid dangerous climate
change.

 At that time, it was thought that this equated to
atmospheric carbon dioxide levels below
approximately 550 ppm. The more recent work of
the IPCC suggests that a limit closer to 450 ppm
or even lower, might be more appropriate to
meet a 2°C stabilisation limit. Since pre-industrial
times we have already seen a rise from 270 to
about 380 ppm adding urgency to need for
action to reduce emissions sufficiently to avoid
“dangerous levels” of climate change.

 In order to encourage scientific debate on this
issue, the UK Government hosted an
International Symposium on Stabilisation of
Greenhouse Gases, “Avoiding Dangerous Climates
Change”3 in February 2005 at the Met Office,
Exeter. The conference brought together over 200
experts from some 30 countries. Issues including
the long-term implications of different levels of
climate change for different sectors and the
world as a whole were considered. Major themes
included:

 key vulnerabilities of the climate system and
critical thresholds;

 socio-economic effects, both globally and
regionally; and

 emission pathways to climate stabilisation and
technological options available to achieve
them.

 The conference findings were published by
Cambridge University Press in January 

The conference concluded that climate change
looks to be worse than expected, that we need
to act urgently to avoid considerable risks and
that the long term costs of mitigation are small
and less than previously stated.
How the world might be affected

 As a result of past and present emissions, some
degree of climate change is now inevitable.
Global temperature is now increasing at 
17°C
per decade, and is projected by the IPCC to be
between 
4 and 
8°C above 1990 levels in

 Sea levels could be between 9 and 88
centimetres above 1990 levels by 
 As
temperature continues to increase the frequency
of droughts and extreme rainfalls are also
expected to increase with a wide range of
impacts on both the natural environment and
human society. The table below summarises some
of the key impacts that are predicted to become
significant at different levels of temperature
change.
Temperature 
increase 
above pre-
industrial Impacts
1-2ºC Major impacts on ecosystems and species; 
wide ranging impacts on society
2-3ºC Greenland ice cap starts to melt, major loss
of coral reef ecosystem; considerable 
species loss; large impacts on agriculture; 
water resources; health; and economies.
Terrestrial carbon sink could become a 
source
1-4ºC North Atlantic circulation at increasing risk
of collapse
2-
5ºC West Antarctic ice sheet at increasing risk 
of collapse

14
What is climate change and why does it matter?
5 Swiss Re Sigma Report No 2/2006 – Natural catastrophes and man-made disasters 2005: high earthquake casualties, new dimension in windstorm losses,
available from: www.swissre.com
6 www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climatechange/carboncost/sei-scc.htm
7 www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climatechange/carboncost/aeat-scc.htm

 As the table shows, even seemingly small
increases in temperature can have significant
impacts on ecosystems and species, lead to
increasing drought and extreme rainfalls and
imply severe consequences for our society. The
extent to which future climate change will affect
human society and ecosystems across the world
will vary greatly from place to place. The most
vulnerable communities in developing countries
are likely to be affected more severely and will be
least able to cope. Changes in rainfall and
drought patterns and storm intensities are likely
to lead to further millions at risk from drought,
famine and disease. Increases in sea level of
almost a metre over the next 100 years bear
potentially devastating consequences for many
coastal areas and low-lying small island states.
Disruption of key components of the climate
system, such as the ice sheets and ocean currents
could have far reaching consequences but it is
very difficult to predict what level of climate
change might trigger such changes.
The economic costs of climate change
damage

 Increasing attention is being placed on assessing
the economic costs of climate change as it is clear
that extreme weather can have considerable
economic effects. For example, the damage costs
from Hurricane Katrina alone are estimated at
about $135 billion
 A measure for assessing
the potential economic damage costs of climate
change is the social cost of carbon (SCC). The
social cost of carbon is the global marginal
damage costs of carbon emissions – in common
language the damage done to the world
economy by every new tonne of emissions
(carbon dioxide or equivalent) added to the
atmosphere. Although estimates differ
considerably, the SCC can provide illustrative
monetary benchmarks for valuing changes in
emissions in cost-benefit analyses.
Social Cost of Carbon
The analytical work in support of the UK
Climate Change Programme included an
element of cost-benefit analysis that valued
reductions in emissions using estimates from
the Government Economic Service (GES)
Working paper Estimating the Social Cost of
Carbon Emissions, which was published in 

The paper suggested a central value of £70/tC
(within a range of £35 to £140/tC) as an
illustrative estimate for the global damage cost
of carbon emissions. It also suggested that
these estimates should increase by £1/tC per
year in real terms, to reflect the increasing
damage costs of carbon emissions over time.
Finally the GES paper recommended periodic
reviews of the illustrative figures as new
evidence became available.
In 2004, the Inter-departmental Group on the
social cost of carbon (IGSCC) commissioned
further research on the issue. Two research
reports, Social cost of carbon: a closer look at
uncertainty6 by the Stockholm Environment
Institute, and Methodological Approaches for
Using Social Cost of Carbon Estimates in Policy
Assessment7 by AEA Technology Environment
have been published by Defra.
Both reports will provide relevant input into
the Review of the Economics of Climate
Change, led by Sir Nick Stern, which as part of
its terms of reference is considering evidence
on the economic, social and environmental
consequences of climate change, including
extreme events. Overall, the evidence gathered
by the research reports indicates a comparable
range of estimates to those currently
recommended in the GES paper including the
risk of higher values at the top end of the
range. The Government will consider whether
any revision of the current advice is necessary
once the review has reported in the autumn




CHAPTER 
Title
15CHAPTER TWO
International framework for action

 Climate change is a global problem, with global
causes and effects. Preventing dangerous man-
made climate change and dealing with the impacts
that cannot now be avoided requires efforts by all
countries, consistent with their responsibility for
greenhouse gas emissions, their capacity to take
action, and the effects they will experience. In
2003, the UK contributed about 2 per cent of
world greenhouse gas emissions. Our contribution
will fall as we move towards a low-carbon
economy, and as the increasing demand for energy
in developing countries continues to be met. By
2020 our net contribution to world emissions from
fossil fuels will be 
5 per cent or lower. For that
reason the Government considers it essential that
the UK and our EU partners give high priority to
reaching and implementing international
agreements to tackle climate change.
The UNFCCC

 In recognition of the global nature of the
problem, the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) was
agreed at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro
in 
 To date 189 countries, including all
major developed and developing countries, have
ratified the Convention. The UNFCCC sets the
overarching objective for multilateral action: to
stabilise greenhouse gas concentrations in the
atmosphere at a level that avoids dangerous
anthropogenic climate change. It also establishes
key principles to guide the international response,
in particular that countries should act consistently
with their responsibility for climate change as well
as their capacity to do so, and that developed
countries should take the lead, given their
historical contribution to greenhouse gas
emissions and the economic development they
have enjoyed as a result. The Convention places a
commitment to act on all countries but whereas
for developing countries this is unquantified and
linked to assistance from developed countries, the
developed countries agreed specifically to aim to
return greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels
by 
 The UK was one of relatively few
countries that achieved this, with emissions in
2000 about 
6 per cent below the1990 level

The Kyoto Protocol

 The Parties quickly acknowledged that the
Convention commitments could form only a first
step in the international community’s response to
climate change. The Kyoto Protocol, agreed in
December 1997, sought to address this.
Developed countries agreed to reduce their
overall emissions of a basket of six greenhouse
gases by 
2 per cent below 1990 levels over the
period 2008-2012, with differentiated, legally
binding targets. The then 15 EU Member States
adopted a collective target to reduce EU
emissions by 8 per cent. Under this ‘bubble’
arrangement the EU’s target is distributed
between Member States to reflect their national
circumstances, requirements for economic
The UK Government will:

 build on the progress made at the G8
Summit in Gleneagles and the Montréal
Climate Change Conference to strengthen
the international regime to tackle climate
change;

 in partnership with the EU enhance our
efforts to help India, China and other
developing countries evolve as  low-carbon
economies;

 work to build international consensus on
the scale of global action needed to
stabilise the climate and avoid dangerous
climate change;

 work with EU partners to secure agreement
to further action in the EU, in particular
strenghtening the Emissions Trading
Scheme beyond 2012 and making it the
heart of a global carbon market; and

 support international collaboration and
coordination to ensure the successful
expansion of new technologies, through
action in key areas such as product
standards and research development.
8 
6 per cent is the fall in all emissions minus all removals between 1990 and 
 Emissions of Kyoto basket fell by an estimated 
8 per cent between the
base year and 
 

16
International framework for action
growth, and scope for further emissions
reductions. Each Member State has a legally
binding target, with the UK undertaking to
reduce its emissions by 
5 per cent.

 The Protocol also established the innovative flexible
mechanisms to assist in meeting Kyoto targets in
the most efficient and cost-effective manner. This
recognises that as greenhouse gases are emitted
into the atmosphere they will contribute to global
increases in temperature, regardless of the source,
and that equally it does not matter where
reductions are made provided that they are real
reductions. The Kyoto mechanisms are international
emissions trading and two mechanisms, Joint
Implementation (JI) and the Clean Development
Mechanism (CDM), by which credits from emission
reducing projects in one country can be used to
meet the Kyoto target of another country. Under JI,
projects can be hosted in developed countries, and
under CDM, in developing countries.

 The Kyoto Protocol entered into force in February
2005 and to date has been ratified by 162
countries. Uncertainty about entry into force
of the Kyoto Protocol led to a loss of momentum
in international action and a slow start to the
international carbon market. Crucially, it also
uindermined international political will to address
the increasingly urgent question of what further
action would be taken by countries beyond the
first set of Kyoto targets that expire at the end
of 

Progress in 2005

 It was against this background that the Prime
Minister put climate change on the international
political agenda in 2005 by making it a priority
for the UK’s Presidencies of the G8 and EU. The
effect was to put a strong public and political
spotlight on climate change and encourage
unprecedented international debate by
government ministers, scientists,
parliamentarians, businesses, non-governmental
organisations and other areas of civil society.

 At their Summit at Gleneagles in July 2005 the
G8 leaders agreed that climate change was a
serious and long-term challenge, that it was
caused by human activity and that urgent action
should be taken to make significant reductions
in greenhouse gas emissions – a significant
statement from countries that had not previously
committed themselves to the case for urgency
so publicly. They also agreed on a package of
actions to combat climate change


 In addition, G8 leaders agreed, with the leaders
of the other countries invited to attend the
Summit (China, India, Brazil, South Africa and
Mexico), to launch a new Dialogue on “climate
change, clean energy and sustainable
development”.
The G8 Gleneagles Plan of Action aims to
increase the speed with which we reduce
greenhouse gas emissions. It includes
improvements to energy efficiency in both
appliances and buildings, cleaner vehicles,
aviation, work on developing cleaner fuels,
renewable energy and promoting research &
development and the financing of future
projects. The World Bank and the International
Energy Agency (IEA) are playing an important
role in supporting the Action Plan. The World
Bank is working to create a framework for
investment in cleaner energy technologies
and in measures necessary for adaptation,
involving the private sector and the regional
development banks. The IEA is analysing
alternative energy strategies and supporting
work on best practice in energy efficiency and
cleaner coal technologies.
9 www.fco.gov.uk/Files/kfile/PostG8_Gleneagles_Communique,
pdf

17
International framework for action

 Twelve months of intense focus and political
discussion on climate change culminated in
December 2005 at the Montreal UN Climate
Change Conference in a significant set of
important decisions to strengthen international
action. The Parties to the Kyoto Protocol, at their
historic first meeting, adopted the operating rules
and the compliance provisions needed to ensure
that the Protocol and its mechanisms could
function effectively. They also agreed to launch
negotiations on further emissions reductions by
developed country Parties for the period beyond
2012 and to begin preparation for a broader
review of the Protocol at the end of 

The Convention Parties, including the USA and
Australia, agreed to launch a dialogue on
long term cooperative action to enhance
implementation of the Convention, focusing on
promoting sustainable development, adaptation,
and realising the potential of technology and of
markets, as well as a five-year work programme
on adaptation to the effects of climate change.
The first discussions following up these decisions
will take place in May 

Next steps

 The intensive discussions on climate change in
2005 have focused attention on the scale and
urgency of the challenge, based on the
compelling scientific evidence, and the actions
needed to tackle it successfully and meet the
objective of the UN Convention which all
countries are committed to work towards. There
is no longer any real debate over the fact that
climate change is happening and that man-made
emissions are the main cause. The debate has
shifted to how much we need to do to stabilise
the climate, and the economic implications.

 The IEA projects that $17 trillion of investment is
needed globally by 2030 in energy infrastructure
and that carbon dioxide emissions could increase
by more than 60 per cent over current levels by

 It is therefore clear that international
efforts must be urgently directed towards more
effective ways to drive uptake of existing lower
carbon technologies as well as the research,
development and deployment of new ones.
The huge investment in energy systems in the
emerging economies like China and India, and
the long lifetime of such investments, makes it
essential to ensure that these countries have
access to the most efficient, lowest carbon
technologies and that international financial
institutions take full account of climate change in
their investment decisions to enable them to
continue to grow sustainably. The significant role
of the private sector alongside governments
creates a need to incentivise both private and
public choices of lower carbon technologies.
And the fact that a certain degree of climate
change is now inevitable and its consequences
are already being felt means that more urgent
and effective support to poor and vulnerable
countries is needed to cope with the impacts,
The Gleneagles Dialogue on Climate Change,
Clean Energy and Sustainable Development
aims to provide a forum for continuing
discussions amongst the G8, China, India, Brazil,
South Africa, Mexico, and other countries with
significant energy needs. It enables participating
countries to work together on the shared
challenges of addressing climate change, energy
security and access to energy.
The Dialogue complements the work of the
UNFCCC and existing organisations, partnerships
and initiatives by providing an informal space to
explore these issues away from the negotiating
room. The Dialogue will also oversee
implementation of the G8 Action Plan. The
Dialogue will report back to G8 leaders under
the Japanese G8 Presidency in 

The first Ministerial meeting of the Dialogue
was held on 1 November 2005 in London. The
Dialogue Partners agreed to work together on:
the deployment of clean technologies;
incentives for investment in low carbon
technologies; co-operation between developed
and developing countries; and action on
adapting to the impacts of climate change. The
next Ministerial meeting will be hosted by the
Government of Mexico in 


18
International framework for action
harnessing the efforts of the many bodies
engaged in development.

 The Government will therefore continue to show
leadership in 2006 and beyond in maintaining the
high international political profile of climate
change as countries consider the further action
needed. We will be working for speedy progress
in multilateral discussions in the UNFCCC and
also in associated fora such as the Commission
on Sustainable Development (CSD), which is
currently working on climate change and
associated topics
 The UNFCCC is the only
forum in which binding international agreements
on emissions reductions can be made, and
binding agreements will be needed to underpin
political and market confidence. But other
organisations, informal discussions and
partnerships will also have an essential
complementary role in exploring how countries
can work together, sharing experience and
building political will and confidence. We will
work with G8 partners, particularly the Russian
G8 Presidency in 2006 and the subsequent
German and Japanese Presidencies, to deliver on
the commitments in the G8 Action Plan and build
on the agreement reached at Gleneagles. The
Government believes that the Gleneagles
Dialogue will be able to make an important
contribution to accelerating international progress
in tackling climate change.

 The Government also believes that a high priority
for driving action on the scale and with the
urgency needed to deliver a long term shift
towards a global low-carbon economy is for
governments to give an early signal about the
long term direction of policy that is sufficiently
clear to drive investment decisions. Without that
there will be insufficient confidence among
business and in the fledgling carbon market.
The Government therefore believes that the
political debate in 2006 should focus in particular
on building consensus on the scale of action
needed to stabilise the climate and avoid
dangerous climate change, the costs and benefits
of taking such action and the long term signals
that are needed to drive it.

 A key element of the international debate will be
how countries can develop sound, effective and
timely responses to climate change whilst
maintaining the health of their economies and
their competitiveness. It will be important to
engage economic policymakers and institutions
in this. The Review of the Economics of Climate
Change, within the context of existing national
and international climate change policy, will help
the Government to understand more
comprehensively the nature of the economic
challenges and how they can be met, in the UK
and globally.
UK bilateral co-operation on climate
change

 The UK works bilaterally in partnership with
a number of countries on both mitigation
and adaptation measures in order to build
understanding of the urgency of tackling climate
change and possible solutions. In 2004, the UK
and China agreed to establish a bilateral working
group on climate change. Defra has been
working with the Chinese Ministry of Science
and Technology since 2001 on the impacts on
agriculture in China. The first phase was a
research project on the impacts of climate change
on four key agricultural crops – cotton, rice,
wheat and maize. The second phase, launched
in September 2005, consists of national and
regional components taking forward the earlier
work and will explore the effect of climate
change on water availability and the impact of
this on projected crop yields. The UK also
supports activities to accelerate the deployment
of renewable energy and improve energy
efficiency in China, primarily through the
Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency
Partnership (REEEP).
10CSD’s second implementation cycle focuses on climate change, energy for sustainable development, industrial development, and air pollution/atmosphere.

19
International framework for action

 In 2005 the UK and India announced the
intention for a structured dialogue on climate
change. A number of activities have since been
taken forward. In November 2005, the UK and
India announced the launch of a joint study on
how to reinforce co-operation on energy
technology between developed and developing
countries. The study will look to address concerns
over barriers to technology transfer and in
particular the issue of Intellectual Property Rights
(IPR). Defra also funded a collaborative project
with the Indian Ministry of Environment and
Forests involving eight Indian research institutions
that looked into the effects of climate change in
India. The results were reported in September
2005, and a second phase of the project is under
development. India hosts the South Asia Regional
Secretariat for REEEP, and through REEEP the UK
is funding initiatives to promote the acceleration
of renewable energy and improvement of energy
efficiency in India.

 March 2006 saw the launch of the UK-Brazil
working group on climate change, which focuses
on the promotion of low-carbon technology
globally, improved scientific collaboration on
assessing the impacts of climate change and the
further development of Brazil’s leading role in the
emerging Latin American carbon market. The
working group will also examine the links
between climate change, poverty eradication
and social development.

 At the G8 Environment and Development
Ministers’ meeting in March 2005, the UK
announced funding of £100k towards regional
predictions of climate change for Africa and
£400k over the next three years towards a new
multi-country initiative on advancing knowledge,
capacity and networks in support of climate
change in Africa.
European Union

 Both the European Community and the individual
Member States are Parties to the UN Convention
and the Kyoto Protocol. The European Union has
always taken a strong lead in pushing for global
action to tackle climate change: the EU
negotiates as a bloc, which gives it a powerful
voice in the UN discussions, and the Commission
and Member States work together to promote
effective international action. In recent years the
EU, as a major signatory of the Kyoto Protocol,
has played a key role in keeping the UN climate
change process on track through its
determination to put in place measures to meet
Kyoto targets, and in particular its pioneering
activity on emissions trading. This commitment
underpins the EU’s influential position in formal
and informal international discussions – including
at the recent Montreal Conference, where the
European Union, under the UK Presidency, played
a leading role in securing agreement from all
parties to discuss further international action.
European Climate Change Programme

 Member States have agreed that European-level
policies and measures are essential to help them
deliver their Kyoto targets. Some measures can be
delivered most effectively at Community level. In
some sectors, for example, there is a strong, single
market case for European action. Other measures
could have little impact if taken at a national level
or could harm the competitiveness of the industry
in the Member State concerned. European-level
co-ordination also gives Member States a valuable
opportunity to share experience and expertise on
action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
REEEP is a public-private partnership that was
launched by the United Kingdom along with
other partners at the Johannesburg World
Summit on Sustainable Development in August

 It has been developed via an intensive
consultation process in 2003 covering a wide
range of stakeholders at the national and
regional levels.
In June 2004, REEEP was formally established as
a legal entity in Austria with the status of an
International NGO. The partnership actively
structures policy initiatives for clean energy
markets and facilitates financing mechanisms
for sustainable energy projects.

20
International framework for action

 In 2000 the European Climate Change
Programme (ECCP) was launched, to identify and
develop the necessary elements of an EU strategy
to implement the Kyoto Protocol. Between 2001
and 2003, a package of priority actions to tackle
climate change was put in place, including the
Directive setting up the EU emissions trading
scheme11, as well as Directives on the promotion
of electricity from renewable energy sources12, on
the energy performance of buildings13, and on
the promotion of biofuels
 

 The EU’s latest estimate of progress towards
meeting its Kyoto target is that, as a result of
measures in place or planned purchases of
emissions credits, the EU is on track to lower
projected emissions in 2010 by 
3 per cent
below base year levels

EU medium- and long-term strategy

 Since 2004 the EU has been working to develop
its strategy for the period beyond 2012,
addressing both international and EU action for
the medium and long term. The process is driven
by EU leaders in the European Council, reflecting
the fact that climate change is a major strategic
challenge for the EU with implications for all
sectors of the economy and requiring
co-ordinated action to tackle both the causes and
effects. The extent of the challenge and the
possible responses were reflected in the European
Commission’s February 2005 Communication,
Winning the Battle Against Climate Change.

 In March 2005 the European Council moved the
process forward significantly by identifying
ambitious greenhouse gas emissions reductions
pathways to be considered by developed
countries, consistent with the EU’s objective of
limiting average global temperature increase to
no more than 2ºC above pre-industrial levels. EU
leaders agreed that developed countries should
consider emissions reductions in the order of
15-30 per cent by 2020 compared to 1990 levels.
They also stressed that longer-term cuts were
essential, consistent with EU Environment
Ministers’ conclusion that reductions of the order
of 60-80 per cent by 2050 should be considered.
EU Heads of Government underlined the
importance of the EU engaging with other
countries both on strategies for achieving further
emissions reductions and on options for further
action within the UN framework.

 Work is continuing to develop the medium and
long term strategy. In October 2005 the
Commission launched a new phase of the ECCP
to consider further measures to contribute
towards the EU’s Kyoto Protocol target and
beyond. This will include geological carbon
capture and storage, passenger road transport,
aviation, and non-carbon dioxide emissions. For
the first time, the ECCP will also consider
adaptation to the impacts of climate change.
During the UK Presidency the Government put
particular emphasis on the involvement in climate
change policy development of Ministers covering
all relevant policy areas, including energy,
competitiveness and agriculture.

 Under the UK’s Presidency, climate change
featured prominently in the EU’s bilateral
discussions with China and India at Head of
Government level, with the successful agreement
of the EU-China Partnership on climate change
and the EU-India Initiative on clean development
and climate change.
11Directive 2003/87/EC.
12Directive 2001/77/EC.
13Directive 2002/91/EC.
14Directive 2003/30/EC.
15“Report on Demonstrable Progress under the Kyoto Protocol”, December 2005 –
www.europa.eu.int/comm/environment/climat/pdf/demonstrable_progress_kyoto_
pdf 

21
International framework for action

 The EU-Russia Summit reaffirmed both parties’
commitment to tackling climate change, and
to the Kyoto Protocol and its effective
implementation, and bolstered co-operation
on energy and energy efficiency.

 EU leaders in the European Council are
expected to return to the issue of considering a
medium and long-term strategy under the Finnish
Presidency in the second half of 2006, when they
will be able to reflect on further cost-benefit
analysis by the Commission of action to reduce
emissions, and on the outcome of the review of
the ECCP.

 The Government strongly supports the
development of the EU’s medium- and long-term
strategy as an important signal of the EU’s
continuing determination to show leadership in
shaping the international response to climate
change, both through its own actions and by
developing and sharing proposals for
strengthening international action. To be
effective, it will be essential for the EU’s work on
climate change and energy strategy development
to be closely linked. The UK believes that a key
priority for the EU is to give a firm signal about
the medium and long term direction of EU policy
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and the
continuing role of the EU emissions trading
scheme in delivering emissions cuts beyond 

Without confidence in the EU’s determination to
move decisively towards a low-carbon economy,
business investment in the technologies needed
to deliver deep cuts in emissions will simply not
take place. The UK also believes that the EU
should expand its outreach to other countries,
supported by Community resources such as the
Country Strategy Programmes and Research
Framework Programme, and building in particular
on the EU-China and India partnerships. The EU
should direct significant future resources towards
supporting its internal and external climate
change objectives, in particular on co-operation
with developing countries on research and
development, technology and capacity building.
The international carbon market

 The Government believes that, by providing for
emissions savings to be made at the point of least
cost, emissions trading is the most promising
mechanism for stimulating international
investment in low-carbon technology. The
Government has been a strong advocate of the
EU emissions trading scheme since its inception.
The UK Government has made it a priority to
work with the European Commission on its
review of the EU emissions trading scheme post-

 Our policy for the second phase of the
scheme is set out in the “Business” chapter
in Section 


 The EU Environment Council acknowledged in
October 2005 that the scheme will remain an
In September 2005, EU summits with China and
India resulted in an EU-China Partnership on
Climate Change and an EU-India Initiative on
Clean Development and Climate Change.
Through these initiatives the EU aims to scale
up efforts for development, deployment and
transfer of low carbon energy technologies as
well as to increase co-operation on adaptation
to climate change.
A centre-piece of the EU-China Partnership on
Climate Change was a new initiative on Near-
Zero Emissions Coal with carbon capture and
storage. The UK is leading the first phase of
the project, supporting it with £
5m of
funding. The three-year feasibility study will
examine the viability of different technology
options for the capture of carbon emissions
from power generation and the potential for
geological storage in China.
The EU-India Initiative on Clean Development
and Climate Change aims to encourage and
promote sustainable patterns of consumption
and production to lessen the causes and the
adverse impacts of climate change. India and
the EU will also co-operate on improving
adaptation to current climate variability and
future climate change, and on one integration
of adaptation concerns into sustainable
development strategies.

22
International framework for action
essential instrument in the EU’s medium and long
term strategy to tackle climate change. The UK
believes that the true potential for emissions
trading to achieve global emissions reductions will
only be delivered through the continued
international extension of the carbon market
outside Europe. Our international work on
developing the Kyoto Protocol project
mechanisms and promoting the use of emissions
trading outside the EU recognises this as a
priority.

 Since the Kyoto Protocol was adopted, the UK
has been active in developing the detailed rules
and implementation of the project mechanisms of
the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) and
Joint Implementation (JI). At the Montreal UN
Climate Change Conference, the UK, holding the
EU Presidency, played a key role in strengthening
CDM institutions and procedures at UN level,
establishing the framework for JI and the
timetable for the deployment and linking of UN
registry systems. Over $8m in additional funding
was agreed to fund CDM administrative activities
this year. 

 Through the EU Linking Directive, companies with
obligations under the EU emissions trading
scheme can now make use of credits from these
mechanisms, leading to increased investment in
overseas projects aimed at reducing emissions of
the basket of six greenhouse gases. The UK is a
leading investor country in the CDM. By the end
of February 2006, the UK was ranked second
investor country in terms of number of registered
projects with UK approval of participation. The
UK designated national authority for CDM had
issued 48 letters of approval of participation by
17 UK companies in 38 CDM projects in 11
countries. These are estimated to deliver annual
reductions of up to almost 30 million tonnes
carbon dioxide equivalent. 

 At the same time, the Government has also been
active in promoting the development of domestic
emissions trading schemes in countries outside
Europe and the potential for establishing links
between those schemes and the EU emissions
trading scheme. Not only is the linking of trading
schemes consistent with a multilateral approach
to dealing with climate change but successful
linking will also lead to greater economic
efficiency, as cost-effectiveness and liquidity
increase with market size, and as clearer signals
for investment emerge through the establishment
of a single price of carbon across all linked
schemes. During 2005, we have continued to
exchange information with those developing
emissions trading schemes outside the EU,
including a successful event at the Montreal UN
Climate Change Conference which reviewed the
prospects for linking trading schemes and areas
such as monitoring and reporting where the use
of common standards might play a role. The
Government considers that the international
carbon market has a vital role to play in the
future of climate change policy and will continue
to prioritise further work in this area, which in
time could lead to the emergence of a global
network of linked trading schemes.


SECTION

2
Delivering emissions reductions


CHAPTER ONE
UK emissions inventory and projections

 The Climate Change Programme is designed to
deliver the UK’s Kyoto Protocol target of reducing
emissions of the basket of six greenhouse gases
by 
5 per cent below base year levels over the
commitment period 2008-2012, and move the
UK close to the domestic goal to reduce carbon
dioxide emissions by 20 per cent below 1990
levels by 
 It also aims to put the UK on a
path to cutting carbon dioxide emissions by some
60 per cent by about 2050, with real progress
by 


 This chapter includes information on historical
trends of the UK’s greenhouse gas emissions
since 1990 and sets out projections to 

These projections are defined as baseline with
measures. They include the ongoing impact of
existing policies and the effect of measures that
the Government has introduced since the Kyoto
Protocol was agreed. The projections do not
reflect the impact of the additional policies and
measures set out in the remainder of this Section.
The Bringing it all together chapter summarises
the baseline with measures projections and the
impact of additional policies and measures in
order to estimate the total level of emissions
reductions that the Programme is expected
to deliver.
Base year

 The base year for the purposes of assessing
progress towards the Kyoto Protocol target is a
combination of 1990 and 1995 data. 1990 is the
base year for emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2),
methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O). The UK
has chosen to use 1995 as the base year for
emissions of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs),
perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and sulphur hexafluoride
(SF6) in accordance with the Kyoto Protocol which
allows Parties the flexibility to choose either 1990
or 1995 as the base year for the industrial gases.
Using a 1995 base year is in line with the
approach other EU Member States are adopting.
Convention and Kyoto accounting

 The UK will report land use, and use change and
forestry (LULUCF) emissions and removals in
accordance with separate rules for reporting on
this sector under the UNFCCC and the Kyoto
Protocol. The Convention reporting basis includes
all human-induced changes to land-based carbon
stocks i.e. total emissions minus total removals
from the LULUCF sector. This is consistent with
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) 1996 guidelines. It is on this basis that the
Government assesses and reports progress
towards the domestic carbon dioxide goal


 The Kyoto reporting basis includes only LULUCF
emissions and removals associated with
mandatory activities under Article 
3 of the
Kyoto Protocol, which are afforestation,
reforestation and deforestation occurring since
1990, and forest management as an elective
activity under Article 
4 of the Kyoto Protocol.
The UK has decided not to account for cropland
or grazing land management or revegetation
which are other options under Article 
4
because of the additional uncertainties associated
with the detailed monitoring of these activities
required under the Protocol. In addition, a small
allowance related to deforestation emissions in
1990 is included in our base year estimate, as
required by Article 
7 of the Kyoto Protocol and
subsequent decisions of the COP.
Greenhouse gas emissions inventory
and trends

 In 1990, the UK’s emissions of the six greenhouse
gases covered by the Kyoto Protocol were about
209 million tonnes of carbon (MtC)
 Action in
the UK is already driving a significant reduction in
emissions, with annual emissions falling by about

6 per cent between 1990 and 
 Carbon
dioxide emissions were 
5 MtC in 1990 and
fell by about 
6 per cent between 1990 and

 Figure 1 shows emissions of carbon dioxide
and the basket of all six greenhouse gases
included in the Kyoto Protocol target, over the
period 1990 to 


24
15 The Government will also use any credits generated through the Kyoto mechanisms in its assessment of progress towards the domestic target.
16 Greenhouse gas emissions are expressed throughout this document as million tonnes of carbon equivalent (MtC). One tonne of carbon is contained in 
67
tonnes of carbon dioxide which is the ratio of the molecular weight of carbon dioxide to the atomic weight of carbon (i.e. 44/12). Other gases are expressed
in terms of carbon equivalent by multiplying their emissions by their global warming potential (GWP) and dividing by 




UK emissions of greenhouse gases 1990-2004
Source: UK greenhouse gas inventory 1990-2004

 The reduction in greenhouse gas emissions since
1990 has mainly been driven by restructuring,
especially in the energy supply industry; energy
efficiency; pollution control measures in the
industrial sector and other policies that reduced
emissions of non-CO2 greenhouse gases.
Compared with what would have happened
otherwise, it is estimated that greenhouse gas
emissions in 2004 could have been some 15 per
cent higher, rather than almost 15 per cent lower,
than in the base year.

 The total annual reduction of all greenhouse
gases since the base year is therefore estimated
at about 30 per cent of base year emissions or
some 65 MtC in 
 Of this it is estimated
that:

 improved energy efficiency represents about
35 per cent of the total reduction;

 fall in non-CO2 greenhouse gas emissions
contributed about 30 per cent;

 restructuring of the energy supply sector in
the mid-1990s, with fuel switching from coal
to gas, which led to an increase in the
proportion of gas in the energy mix,
contributed around 25 per cent; and

 greater use of other lower carbon fuels,
higher nuclear output, more renewable
energy and other fuel switching, contributed
around 10 per cent.
Carbon dioxide

 Carbon dioxide is the main greenhouse gas in the
UK. It contributed around 77 per cent of the UK’s
total emissions of greenhouse gases in 1990 or

5 MtC. The main driver behind the reduction
in emissions between 1990 and 2004 comes
from the power generation sector. While carbon
dioxide emissions from power stations fell by
16 per cent17 between 1990 and 2004, electricity
consumption increased by 17 per cent. The
reason that emissions did not increase in line with
electricity consumption was largely due to a
switch from coal to gas in electricity generation,
together with improved reliability and
performance from nuclear generation. There have
also been increases in the use of renewable
energy and combined heat and power.

 Carbon dioxide emissions presented here take
into account carbon emission factor revisions that
have been implemented since the consultation
document for the review of the UK Climate
Change Programme was published in December

 Emission factor revisions affect the whole
historical time series and the projections.
Methane

 Methane is the second most important
greenhouse gas in the UK after carbon dioxide. It
contributed 12 per cent of the UK’s total
emissions of greenhouse gases in 1990 or 
1
MtC. The major sources were landfill waste,
agriculture, natural gas distribution and coal
mining. Annual emissions fell by about 50 per
cent below 1990 levels to 
5 MtC in 

Emissions from all the main sources of methane
in the UK have fallen since 


 Methane emissions from landfill sites have
recently been revised upwards due to the revision
of gas collection and oxidation efficiencies

These revisions affect the whole historical time
series and the projections.

Mt Ce050100150200250
20102005200019951990
Basket of six greenhouse gases
Kyoto target
2008-2012
Carbon dioxide
goal 2010
Carbon dioxide M

t CO2e010020030040050060070080090025
UK emissions inventory and projections
17 This percentage excludes emissions of carbon from Flue Gas Desulphurisation (FGD) units fitted to UK power stations. In 2004 these emissions were 
08

Mt C.

18 www.defra.gov.uk/corporate/consult/ukccp-review/ccpreview-consult.pdf
19 UK Landfill Methane Emissions: Evaluation and Appraisal of Waste Policies and Projections to 2050, Golder Associates, November 



Nitrous oxide

 Emissions of nitrous oxide from the UK in 1990
were 
6 MtC or 9 per cent of the UK’s total
greenhouse gas emissions. The major sources
were agricultural soils and industrial processes,
particularly fugitive emissions from adipic acid
manufacture. Emissions from this source have
now been reduced significantly due to the
introduction of abatement technology in 

Nitrous oxide emissions from road transport have
increased due to the rise in the number of petrol-
fuelled motor vehicles fitted with three-way
catalytic converters to reduce emissions of
hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide and other
nitrogen oxides (NO and NO2). Annual emissions
of nitrous oxide fell by 
4 per cent below 1990
levels to 
1 MtC in 


 Estimates of nitrous oxide emissions from
agricultural soils are currently under review and
may be revised in future. This is unlikely to have a
significant effect on the overall trend in nitrous
oxide emissions.
Fluorinated gases

 Although emissions of the fluorinated or
industrial gases are small in absolute terms, these
gases generally have high global warming
potentials (GWP)
 Emissions of all fluorinated
gases from the UK in 1995 (as indicated above,
1995 is the UK’s base year for the fluorinated
gases) were 
7 MtC or 
4 per cent of UK total
greenhouse gas emissions in that year. Use of
HFCs rose in the early to mid-1990s in response
to the phase out of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)
and hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) under the
Montréal Protocol21 and accounted for 90 per
cent of the total fluorinated basket in 
 The
major source in 1995 was fugitive emissions of
HFC-23 from the manufacture of the refrigerant
and chemical feedstock, HCFC-


 Emissions of HFCs have fallen by 
8 per cent
between 1995 and 2004, mainly due to the
introduction of thermal oxidiser pollution
abatement equipment at the two UK plants
where HCFC-22 is manufactured. Emissions of
PFCs have reduced by 
2 per cent between
1995 and 
 This is mainly due to the
introduction of improved technology in the
aluminium production sector that has led to
lower process emissions. SF6 is used in four main
markets: electrical insulation, magnesium
smelting, electronics and training shoes. Total use
of SF6 has decreased from these end use markets
by 9 per cent between 1995 and 

Projections of UK greenhouse
gas emissions

 Even without the additional measures included in
the Programme, the UK’s emissions of the basket
of six greenhouse gases are expected to be about

4 per cent22 below base year levels in 

The UK is therefore on track to meet its Kyoto
Protocol target. Emissions by sources minus
removals by sinks of carbon dioxide are projected
without additional measures to be about 
6 per
cent below 1990 levels in 
 This means
further effort is required to move the UK closer to
its domestic goal to reduce carbon dioxide
emissions by 20 per cent below 1990 levels by



 Tables in this Section show historical greenhouse
gas emissions data and baseline with measures
projections classified in three different ways – by
gas, by sector and by end user. The first table
includes historical greenhouse gas emissions for
the UK’s base year, 1990, 1995, 2000 and 2004
and baseline with measures projections for 2010,
2015 and 2020, disaggregated by gas
 The

26
UK emissions inventory and projections
20 Global warming potentials are used by Parties to the UNFCCC to compare the relative climate effects of greenhouse gases by assessing their contribution
to changes in the net downward infrared radiation flux at the tropopause (the top of the lower atmosphere) over a period of time. GWP provides the
contribution of a unit emission of a greenhouse gas relative to the effect of a unit emission of carbon dioxide integrated over a fixed time period. A 100-year
time horizon has been chosen by the Convention in view of the relatively long time scale for addressing climate change.
21 www.ozone.unep.org/Treaties_and_Ratification/2B_montreal_protocol.asp
22 This figure includes the effect of the mandatory Art 
3 ARD activities and the Forest Management ‘cap’ in the LULUCF sector in accordance with the
choices that the UK has made under Art 


23 CO2 energy projections are based on the greenhouse gas inventory published in 2005 which agrees with the inventory published in January 2006 to about

01 per cent for total CO2 emissions on average over the period 1990 to 2003, with individual years differing by up to about 
4 per cent. The energy
projections will be updated to be based on the 
 Other projections have already been updated for consistency with this inventory.


historical time series of emissions set out in this
Programme is based on the UK greenhouse gas
inventory published in 2006 covering the period
1990 to 
 The methodologies used to
generate the projections are described in Annex
A and the uncertainties associated with the
projections are set out by gas in Annexes B-E.

 The calculation of the UK’s base year for
reporting under the Kyoto Protocol includes a
small allowance representing emissions from
Deforestation in 
 This allowance (
1
MtC/year in 1990) is calculated in accordance
with rules associated with Article 
7 of the
Kyoto Protocol and forms part of a Party’s
assessment of progress towards meeting its
Kyoto target.

 The same historical data and baseline with
measures projections from Table 1 are set out in
Table 2, grouped by sectors consistent with the
UNFCCC’s reporting guidelines
 Table 2 shows
how historical and projected greenhouse gas
emissions are distributed across the UK economy.
In this classification, the emissions from the
energy supply sector which includes emissions
from power stations, refineries and other energy
supply industries are shown separately.

 Table 3 shows another way of looking at how
historical and projected greenhouse gas emissions
are distributed across the UK economy. In this
classification, the emissions from power stations,
refineries and other energy supply industries are
re-allocated to the end users of the electricity,
petroleum products and other fuels. There is
therefore no separate line for the energy supply
industry. This classification gives the most
complete account of the relationship between
emissions and the production of goods and
services. It is called the end user classification.

 Tables 4 and 5 show emissions of carbon dioxide
by source and by end user respectively, grouped
by sector

27
UK emissions inventory and projections
24 UK Greenhouse Gas Inventory, 1990 to 2004, only data tables available at present. Full report will be available later in 2006 at www.naei.co.uk/reports.php.
25 Guidelines for the preparation of national communications by Parties included in Annex I to the Convention FCCC/CP/1999/7 (UNFCCC, 2000).
26 Total emissions by sources minus total removals by sinks.
27 Does not include emissions from Overseas Territories or Crown Dependencies
28 Totals for assessing progress with Kyoto Protocol commitments include the forest management cap of 
37 MtC agreed for the UK under Art 
4 of the
Kyoto Protocol and emissions from UK overseas territories to whom the UK’s instruments of ratification of the Kyoto Protocol are being extended.
Table 1: UK greenhouse gas emissions, MtC
Gas Base Year 1990 1995 2000 2004 2010 2015 2020
Total carbon dioxide26 
5 
5 
9 
0 
5 
3 
0 
6
Methane 
1 
1 
8 
3 
5 
8 
0 
5
Nitrous oxide 
6 
6 
5 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0
Hydrofluorocarbons 
2 
1 
2 
5 
4 
7 
6 
5
Perfluorocarbons 
1 
4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1
Sulphur hexafluoride 
3 
3 
3 
5 
3 
4 
3 
3
Total greenhouse gas emissions27 
9 
0 
9 
5 
9 
2 
0 
0
Total greenhouse gas emissions
including only mandatory
Art 
3 LULUCF activities28 
5 
2 
6 
3 
0 
9 
1 
5
Change from base year levels
(for row above) -
6% -
5% -
9% -
6% -
4% -
9% -
6%
Note: the percentage changes and emission estimates may differ slightly due to rounding

28
UK emissions inventory and projections
29 Includes the category ‘exports’ which includes emissions occurring within the UK from producing fuels (for example from a refinery or coal mine) which are
subsequently exported or sent to bunkers for use outside the UK. These emissions are properly part of the UK inventory even if the use of the fuel occurs
outside the UK.
Table 2: Greenhouse gas emissions by source, MtC
Sector Base year 1990 1995 2000 2004 2010 2015 2020
Energy supply 
4 
4 
1 
2 
4 
2 
0 
1
Business 
4 
5 
5 
8 
7 
0 
8 
4
Transport 
1 
1 
3 
0 
4 
6 
1 
7
Domestic 
3 
2 
5 
6 
3 
8 
0 
2
Agriculture, forestry and
land management 
0 
0 
9 
7 
2 
5 
1 
6
Public 
7 
7 
6 
2 
9 
0 
1 
2
Total emissions by sources minus
total removals by sinks 
9 
0 
9 
5 
9 
2 
0 
0
Note: the percentage changes and emission estimates may differ slightly due to rounding
Table 3: Greenhouse gas emissions by end user, MtC
Sector Base year 1990 1995 2000 2004 2010 2015 2020
Business 
2 
4 
7 
1 
3 
2 
3 
0
Transport 
2 
2 
2 
6 
0 
5 
5 
2
Domestic 
9 
8 
7 
1 
7 
6 
9 
7
Agriculture, forestry
and land management 
0 
0 
8 
4 
0 
3 
8 
1
Public 
5 
5 
7 
3 
9 
5 
6 
0
Total emissions by sources minus
total removals by sinks 
9 
0 
9 
5 
9 
2 
0 
0
Note: the percentage changes and emission estimates may differ slightly due to rounding
Table 4: Carbon dioxide emissions by source, MtC
Sector 1990 1995 2000 2004 2010 2015 2020
Energy supply 
1 
6 
7 
0 
4 
7 
1
Business 
3 
5 
4 
6 
1 
3 
2
Transport 
5 
4 
7 
8 
0 
3 
8
Domestic 
7 
1 
8 
4 
8 
0 
2
Agriculture, forestry and
land management 
2 
7 
2 
7 
0 
6 
1
Public 
7 
6 
2 
9 
0 
1 
1
Total emissions by sources minus total
removals by sinks 
5 
9 
0 
5 
3 
0 
6
Note: the percentage changes and emission estimates may differ slightly due to rounding
Table 5: Carbon dioxide emissions by end user, MtC
Sector 1990 1995 2000 2004 2010 2015 2020
Business29 
8 
2 
3 
5 
4 
0 
1
Transport 
2 
8 
9 
1 
8 
7 
3
Domestic 
4 
1 
8 
7 
5 
0 
0
Agriculture, forestry and
land management 
2 
5 
9 
5 
7 
3 
7
Public 
9 
2 
1 
7 
9 
0 
5
Total emissions by sources minus total
removals by sinks 
5 
9 
0 
5 
3 
0 
6
Note: the percentage changes and emission estimates may differ slightly due to rounding



 The baseline with measures projections in the
tables include the emission reductions expected
from existing measures such as the climate
change levy. They also include the effect of
policies introduced since the Climate Change
Programme was published in 2000, such as the
climate change agreements, the UK emissions
trading scheme and the Energy Efficiency
Commitment.

 The impact of these policies on greenhouse
gas emissions in 2010 and 2015 has been
re-evaluated and quantified wherever possible.
The analytical work was undertaken by the
Interdepartmental Analysts Group (IAG) following
the consultation on the review of the 2000
Climate Change Programme initiated in
December 
 The analytical work is
summarised in the documents setting out
respectively the basis for the analysis, the
re-evaluation of existing policies, and the
appraisal of new policies
 The review of the
2000 Programme focused mainly on policies to
reduce carbon dioxide emissions because of the
significance for the UK’s domestic goal and
because non-CO2 policies are generally described
in the separate work commissioned by Defra on
non-CO2 projections

 The Bringing it all together
chapter sets out the estimated carbon savings
that existing measures are now expected
to deliver.

29
UK emissions inventory and projections
30 Will be available at www.defra.gov.uk
31 Non-CO2 projections report by Entec will be available at www.defra.gov.uk


CHAPTER TWO
Strategy to reduce UK emissions

 The Government’s priority is to deliver the UK’s
legally binding target under the Kyoto Protocol
but it believes that greater reductions in
emissions are feasible, and that there will be real
advantages to the UK in aiming to achieve them.
That is why the Government and the devolved
administrations agreed a separate domestic goal
of reducing carbon dioxide emissions to 20 per
cent below 1990 levels by 
 This is to ensure
that the UK continues to lead by example on
climate change and starts to make the transition
to a lower carbon economy.

 Recent rises in global energy prices and in
particular their impact on the relative prices of
coal and gas have led to increases in UK carbon
dioxide emissions in recent years. Some policies
designed to tackle climate change will involve
upfront costs, but in the long-run they can lead
to substantial savings in energy costs. The
Government has therefore to combine a number
of objectives and strike the right balance when
making decisions.

 The Climate Change Programme is based
on a number of principles:

 the need to take a balanced approach with all
sectors and all parts of the UK playing their
part;

 the need to safeguard, and where possible
enhance, the UK’s competitiveness, encourage
technological innovation, promote social
inclusion and reduce harm to health;

 the need to focus on flexible and cost
effective policy options which will work
together to form an integrated package;

 the need to take a long term view, looking to
targets beyond the first Kyoto commitment
period and considering the need for the UK to
adapt to the impacts of climate change; and

 the need for the Programme to be kept under
review.

 Our existing policies will ensure that we will meet
our international commitment under the Kyoto
Protocol. But more needs to be done to achieve
our national carbon dioxide goal. The new
measures in the Programme are expected to lead
to further reduction of some 7-12 MtC by 2010,
achieving an overall reduction of between 15-18
per cent by 
 The range is accounted for by
the EU emissions trading scheme on which we
will be launching consultation today. We will
decide the final cap for the National Allocation
Plan in the Summer, when we will need to submit
our plan to the European Commission.

 By this time too, the Energy review will have
reported to the Prime Minister. Its findings will
inform decisions about how we can achieve our
longer-term targets set out in the Energy White
Paper, to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by
some 60 per cent by about 2050 with real
progress by 
 Several processes that are
currently underway such as the review of existing
buildings, will be important parts of this process.
The Programme also identifies some ideas for
additional carbon savings. Work in these areas
will continue to see if they should be taken
forward.

 The next six chapters of the Programme set out
the measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
in six broad sectors: energy supply, business,
transport, domestic, agriculture, forestry and land
management and public and local government.

 The “Bringing it all together” chapter summarises
all of the measures included in the Climate
Change Programme and gives an indication of
the progress which the Government expects to
be have made by 2010 against its commitments
under the Kyoto Protocol and the domestic
carbon dioxide target.

 This Programme is not the Government’s last
word. We will keep our policy under review. The
Government will introduce a new annual report
to Parliament on the level of greenhouse gas
emissions in the UK and the steps it has been

30
taking to reduce these. It will also set out an
indicative work plan for the following year. The
Review of the Economics of Climate Change –
led by Sir Nick Stern, will also consider recent
proposals for the introduction of “carbon
budgeting”. This analysis will inform the
Energy Review. 

 In developing the measures in the Climate
Change Programme we have taken account of
the principles of better regulation. This will mean
that the programme will look to achieve its
objectives with the minimum additional
regulatory burden and taking on board the work
of the Better Regulation Commission (previously
the Better Regulation Task Force). Evaluations of
individual policies will also consider options for
simplifying the regulatory landscape as well as
ideas for reducing administrative burdens.

 The ongoing review of the Air Quality Strategy to
reduce air pollution, has also been considering
the impact of policies and measures on
greenhouse gases. The review of the Climate
Change Programme adopted a similar approach,
identifying measures that will have some air
quality benefits. In the long term the two policies
will work together synergistically.

 Involving all parts of society in the fight against
climate change is a key part of the national
strategy. Each one of us, whether citizens,
consumers, businesses or motorists, we all have
something to offer. The Government is
committed to raising awareness and
understanding of climate change, working with
organisations such as the Energy Saving Trust and
the Carbon Trust to encourage and stimulate
individuals and businesses to take action to
reduce their greenhouse gas emissions.

31
Strategy to reduce UK emissions


CHAPTER THREE
Energy supply
Introduction

 A principal reason for the fall in the UK’s
greenhouse gas emissions over the past decade
has been the restructuring of the energy supply
industry in the mid-1990s. Fuel switching from
coal and oil to gas led to a significant increase in
the proportion of gas in the energy mix. The
volatile and high gas price – and the
corresponding switching from gas to coal and oil
generation that have resulted from this – will
inevitably have had a detrimental effect on
carbon dioxide emissions this winter.

 The direction of the energy supply sector over the
coming decade will be critical to our ability to
make the much deeper emission cuts to which
the Government is committed. This is one of the
key questions being considered by the current
Energy Review.
Greenhouse gas emissions inventory
and trends

 The energy supply sector, which is the biggest
single contributor to the UK’s carbon dioxide
emissions, was responsible for about 58 MtC or
38 per cent of net CO2 emissions in 


 Emissions from the energy supply sector include
those from the production of fuel for final
consumption by other sectors. This includes
electricity generation, oil production and refining,
The energy supply sector has contributed a
large reduction in the UK’s greenhouse gas
emissions over the past decade. This has been
largely through the switch away from more
carbon intensive fuels such as coal and oil
towards low or zero carbon emissions fuels
such as gas, nuclear and renewables.
In 2004, the energy supply sector was
responsible for carbon dioxide emissions of

7 MtC or about 36 per cent of the UK total.
Emissions fell to about 19 per cent below 1990
levels by 2004 and we estimate that they will
fall further through to 2010 as a result of the
impact on electricity demand of existing
measures and a further increase in the share of
gas-fired electricity generation. Greenhouse gas
emissions fell by 17 per cent below base year
levels by 

Measures introduced in the Climate Change
Programme 2000 are estimated to save 
5 MtC
in 
 The main contributions are the
Renewables Obligation and support for
Combined Heat and Power.
The second phase of the EU emissions trading
scheme will save an additional 
0 – 
0 MtC
in 

The Government will also be introducing a
support scheme for biomass heat in the
industrial, commercial and community sectors.
Budget 2006 announced a further £50m for
DTI’s Low Carbon Buildings Programme with
the aim of encouraging manufacture at higher
scale leading to lower costs. This will help fund
the installation of microgeneration
technologies in a range of buildings including
schools, social and local authority housing,
businesses and public buildings. Further details
will be announced by the DTI in due course.
The Energy Review is assessing further options for
longer-term carbon savings from both the supply
and demand side for energy. This will include
consideration of what more can be done to improve
the conditions for low carbon technologies, such
as carbon capture and storage, to come forward.

32
gas production and transmission, and the
production of coal and other solid fuels. (Carbon
dioxide emissions from the energy supply industry
are shown separately in the table below, but are
incorporated into emissions from individual
sectors that use the final products from energy
supply in the ‘end user’ tables.)

 Carbon dioxide contributed around 94 per cent
of the greenhouse gas emissions from the energy
supply sector in 
 The other emissions are of
methane from natural gas transmission and
distribution, coal mining and offshore oil and gas
production. In 2004, greenhouse gas emissions
from the UK energy supply sector were about

4 MtC. Annual emissions have fallen since
1990 and are projected to be about 
2 MtC in
2010, 
5 per cent lower than 1990 emissions.
Projections of greenhouse gas emissions from the energy supply
sector and the estimated effect of additional quantified measures,

Mt CMt C4050607080
2020201520102005200019951990
Historical trend
Baseline with measures projections
Additional quantified measures
(including low range for EU ETS)
Additional quantified measures
(including high range for EU ETS)

33
Energy supply
Greenhouse gas emissions from energy supply industry, MtC
Gas 1990 1995 2000 2004 2010 2015 2020
Carbon dioxide 
1 
6 
7 
0 
4 
7 
1
Methane 
8 
1 
1 
0 
4 
0 
7
Nitrous oxide 
5 
4 
3 
4 
4 
3 
3
Total 
4 
1 
2 
4 
2 
0 
2
Change from 1990 levels -
2 -
8 -
6 -
5 -
8 -
4
Note: the percentage changes and emission estimates may differ slightly due to rounding.
Existing measures Carbon savings in 2010 (MtC)
Renewables Obligation 
5
TOTAL 
5
Potential carbon savings
Additional measures Carbon savings in 2010 (MtC)
Subsidy for biomass heat 
1
Second phase of EU emissions trading scheme 
0 – 
0
TOTAL 
1 – 
1


Energy policy

 The Government set out a long-term framework
for energy policy in the 2003 White Paper “Our
Energy Future – Creating a Low Carbon Economy”.
The White Paper brings climate change to the
heart of energy policy, as one of four key goals:

 to put the UK on a path to cut its carbon
dioxide emissions by some 60 per cent by
about 2050, with real progress by 2020;

 to maintain the reliability of energy supplies;

 to promote competitive markets in the UK
and beyond, helping to raise the rate of
sustainable economic growth and to improve
our productivity; and

 to ensure that every home is adequately and
affordably heated.

 The White Paper made clear that, in reducing
carbon dioxide emissions, the priority is to
strengthen the contribution of energy efficiency
and renewable energy sources, and to put the EU
emissions trading scheme at the centre of the
future market and policy framework. It also noted
that energy efficiency is likely to be the cheapest
and safest way of addressing all four goals.

 Liberalised and competitive markets continue to
be a cornerstone of UK energy policy, improving
efficiency and helping keep prices down for
domestic consumers and industrial users.
Indications are that in January 2006, prices in the
UK were below the EU median for both domestic
electricity and gas prices. For industry, indications
are that prices will be above the EU median for all
size bands. However, historically prices to
industrial users have been below the EU median,
and right up to October 2005 prices were no
higher than the EU median. Annual prices for
2005 will be significantly higher than 2004, the
latest available published annual figures. However,
they are not as high as in previous years.
Indications are that domestic gas prices in real
terms1 are likely to be around 1994 levels, and
domestic electricity prices in real terms are likely to
be around 1999 levels. Industrial gas prices in real
terms including the climate change levy (CCL) are
likely to be around 1988 levels, and industrial
electricity prices in real terms including CCL are
likely to be around 1997 levels. Provisional 2005
estimates will be published in March 


 On 1 April 2005, a single GB-wide wholesale
electricity market was introduced by BETTA (the
British Electricity Trading and Transmission
Arrangements). This extended the market
arrangements previously operational in England
and Wales to Scotland, enabling competitive
markets in the generation and supply of
electricity to develop further.

 The Government believes that the market
framework, reinforced by long-term policy
measures, is the best way of delivering energy
security and encouraging investment, including
through the provision, maintenance and
replacement of electricity generating capacity to
meet demand. Nevertheless the Government
recognises, as set out in the Energy White Paper,
that to encourage the innovation that will help us
meet our goals, some technologies, including
renewable energy, require additional support.

 In January 2006, the Government launched a
public consultation on the Energy Review. This is
taking place against a background of more
evidence on the nature and extent of climate
change and increasing concerns about the future
security of UK energy supplies. The Review is
looking at whether the Government needs to take
further steps to meet our goals and is due to
report to the Prime Minister and the Secretary of
State for Trade and Industry in early summer 

The consultation document – “Our Energy
Challenge: securing clean, affordable energy for
the long-term” – makes clear that the UK’s
liberalised energy markets have delivered well
against the four goals for energy policy of the
2003 White Paper, and the current review is not
re-examining the goals themselves. Rather, it
recognises that there are risks that the
Government may make only limited further
progress against these goals in the medium- and
long-term without further measures. The Review is

34
Energy supply
1 Adjusted to take account of inflation.


therefore assessing options on both the supply and
demand side for energy. It does not mean pulling
back from the priorities set out in the White Paper,
notably on encouraging renewable energy and
energy efficiency, but it does include looking again
at nuclear power. The Review is also considering
whether the UK should do more to improve the
conditions for other low carbon technologies to
come forward. The Review will also examine what
role carbon capture and storage might play in
ensuring we can continue to use fossil fuels,
particularly coal, while also reducing emissions.
Electricity generation

 There has been a significant change in the way
that electricity is generated in the UK since 1990,
and this has been an important contributor to
reductions in the UK’s greenhouse gas emissions.
There has been a shift away from more carbon
intensive fuels such as coal and oil towards lower
or zero carbon emission fuels such as gas, nuclear
and renewables.
UK electricity generation 1990-2010

 Emissions from power stations have steadily
decreased over the recent past – by around 26 per
cent between 1990 and 
 This is against a
general rise in the demand for electricity, of some
24 per cent over the same period. Emissions are
expected to decline further, falling to around 41
MtC by 2010, a reduction of 26 per cent below
1990 levels, as older coal plant is retired and the
proportion of electricity supplied from renewables
increases. Although high gas prices have made
coal stations more competitive in the past few
years, pushing emissions back up, new gas-fired
power stations are expected to replace some of
the existing coal capacity as it reaches the end of
its economic life or its closure is accelerated by
other environmental legislation, such as the EU
Large Combustion Plants Directive.
EU emissions trading scheme

 The inclusion of the electricity industry in the EU
emissions trading scheme (covered in detail in the
next chapter) has also begun to provide generators
and suppliers with direct incentives to reduce
emissions. The scheme covers all emissions from
the generation of electricity which is supplied to
the grid and therefore, by association, the use of
electricity by homes and businesses. Over time, it
should provide incentives for investment in lower
carbon forms of generating capacity.

 The Government will explore how it can provide
the generators with more certainty about the
contribution it expects the scheme to make to
longer-term emissions reductions and how it could
allocate allowances in ways that encourage the
investment that is needed.

 The Government has decided that the overall
cap for the second phase of the EU emissions
trading scheme should be set within a range
which would achieve average annual
emission reductions of between 
0 and

0 MtC. In the draft National Allocation Plan,
the Government proposes that the reductions in
allowances against business as usual would be
borne entirely by the electricity supply industry,
which is relatively insulated from international
competition and is able to pass on the costs of
carbon to customers.
1990 2000

TWh
2010 2020

050100150200250300350400Coal Gas
Nuclear
Renewables
Other

35
Energy supply


Electricity from renewables

 In January 2000, the Government set a target to
increase the proportion of electricity provided by
renewable sources to 10 per cent of electricity
supplied by 2010, subject to the cost to the
consumer being acceptable. The Energy White
Paper signalled the Government’s aspiration to
double the proportion of electricity supplied by
renewables by 


 The main policy mechanism through which the
Government supports the development of new
renewables capacity is the Renewables
Obligation on licensed electricity suppliers in
England and Wales and its equivalents in
Scotland and Northern Ireland. The Renewables
Obligation requires suppliers to source a specific
and annually increasing percentage of electricity
they supply from renewable sources. The level of
the Obligation in England, Wales and Scotland is

5 per cent for 2005-06 rising to 
4 per cent
by 2015-
 In order to provide a stable and
long-term market for renewable electricity, the
Obligation will remain in place until 
 At the
end of 2004, generation from renewable sources
eligible under the Renewables Obligation stood at

1 per cent2 of electricity supplied.

 For each megawatt hour of renewable electricity
generated, a tradable certificate called a
Renewables Obligation Certificate (ROC) is issued
by Ofgem who administers the scheme. Suppliers
can meet their obligation either by acquiring
ROCs or by paying a buy-out price, set at
£
33/megawatt hour in 2004/05 and indexed
to inflation, or by a combination of both. Money
paid into the buy-out fund is recycled to ROC
holders at the end of the 12-month Obligation
period.

 It is expected that the Obligation, together with
exemption from the climate change levy for
electricity from renewables, will provide financial
support worth up to £1 billion per year by 


 The Obligation is working well. Since its
introduction in April 2002, there has been a step
change in the number of renewables projects
that have been built in the UK; almost 450MW of
wind capacity was installed in 2005, double that
installed in 
 And following the opening of
the Cefn Cross wind farm in Wales in June 2005,
the UK became only the eighth country to pass 1
GW of installed wind capacity. We expect 2006
to be another record year for growth in onshore
wind, with over 500 MW planned for
construction in Scotland alone.

 In April 2001, The Crown Estate announced that
18 companies had pre-qualified for offshore wind
site development options under the first round of
site awards in UK territorial waters. Three of the
18 offshore windfarms have been built and are
now generating electricity: North Hoyle off the
north Wales coast, Scroby Sands off Great
Yarmouth, Norfolk and Kentish flats in the
Thames Estuary. A number of others are either
under construction or planned for the near
future. The first round was intended to act as a
demonstration round, enabling prospective
developers to gain technological, economic and
environmental expertise and building on the
experience of the Blyth offshore windfarm, which
was commissioned in 
 The second round
took a more strategic approach to offshore
windfarm development by restricting
development to three areas: the Greater Wash,
the Thames Estuary, and the North West
(Liverpool Bay). In December 2003, The Crown
Estate announced that 15 projects had been
successful. Five applications for consent have
been received from those projects granted leases
in the second round.

36
Energy supply
2 
6 per cent including all non-eligible renewable sources.



 Unlike some other renewable technologies,
biomass has the advantage that it can be used to
generate electricity when required, once a fuel
supply chain is in place. A strong biomass supply
chain can also offer diversification opportunities
for farmers and foresters as well as job
opportunities, and building and operating the
generating plant. Installed biomass and waste
capacity had reached 1,333 MWe by the end of
2004, with biomass providing 
6 mtoe of
electricity and 
64 mtoe of heat in 20043 £66m
of capital grant funding allocated under the
DTI/Big Lottery Fund is bringing forward
additional capacity, such as the plants at Teesside
(30 MW) and Lockerbie (43MW) which are under
construction, and the biomass CHP plant at
Enniskillen in Northern Ireland, which was
commissioned in 


 Co-firing of biomass with fossil fuels is eligible for
ROCs under the Renewables Obligation with
certain restrictions and a requirement for a
minimum use of purpose-grown energy crops
from 
 The Government has recently
announced its intention to review the co-firing
rules within the Renewables Obligation as part of
the Energy Review, focusing on the potential
contribution to our energy and environmental
policy goals and the level of support it will require
going forward.

 Although the Government is making progress
towards the 10 per cent target, recent projections
indicate that this level of generation may not be
achieved until some time after 
 The
Government is continuing with a range of work
to address barriers to progress towards the 10 per
cent target. The Government has recently laid a
new Renewables Obligation Order before
Parliament, which includes a number of small
modifications that are aimed at improving its
effectiveness over time.

 As well as the Renewables Obligation, the
Government is providing support through R&D
funding and capital grants worth around £500m
between 2002 and 2008, including grants for
offshore wind, biomass, solar PV and R&D. The
Government will continue to explore other
options, such as geopressure, to see whether
they can play a role in producing low carbon
energy in the UK.
Wave and tidal stream

 Wave and tidal stream technologies will only
make a small contribution towards the 2010
renewables target but, if they can be successfully
developed on a commercial scale, they could
make a significant contribution towards achieving
the 2020 aspiration and beyond. A report by the
Carbon Trust, published in January 2006,
indicates that wave and tidal stream energy could
provide 15 – 20 per cent of UK electricity.

 Since 1999, the Government has committed
around £25m to the research and development
of wave and tidal stream technologies through
the DTI’s Technology Programme. This has led to
a number of full-scale prototype demonstrations
with several more planned. Developers of some
of these devices have indicated that R&D is nearly
complete and that they are, or soon will be,
ready to begin pre-commercial operation to gain
more experience through accelerated trials of
small numbers of arrays of devices to discover
whether feasible cost-effective solutions can be
developed. In August 2004, the Secretary of State
for Trade and Industry announced the setting up
of a Marine Renewables Deployment Fund
(MRDF) that aims to support innovative and
visionary businesses to take R&D on wave and
tidal stream technologies to market. The centre-
piece of the MRDF is a Wave and Tidal Stream
Energy Demonstration Scheme, which will
provide up to £42m to support the deployment
of a small number of multi-device wave or tidal
stream electricity generating facilities connected
to the UK electricity grid. It will do this through a
combination of capital grants and revenue
support.

37
Energy supply
3 Digest of UK Energy Statistics 




 Support for technology deployment is also being
backed up by support for infrastructure, such as
support for the European Marine Energy Centre
and the development of a consents framework
for wave and tidal stream demonstration projects.
Network infrastructure for
renewables

 The development of renewable energy will
require the upgrade or reinforcement of parts of
the transmission or distribution system. In
particular, there is a need for upgrades to allow a
surplus of power from proposed wind farms in
Scotland to flow to centres of demand in other
parts of the UK.

 The Government is working with Ofgem to
ensure that these upgrades happen in a timely
manner and to ensure that there is sufficient
network capacity for new renewable generators
to connect to and thus contribute to meeting the
Renewables Obligation target. In December 2004,
Ofgem approved additional investment of £560m
to strengthen electricity transmission networks in
Scotland and the North of England so that they
can accommodate the growth in renewable
generation.

 The Government published a public consultation
document in July 2005 outlining proposals for
giving renewable developers on the Scottish
Islands of Shetland, Orkney and the Western Isles
a discount on the transmission charges they will
have to pay to use the high voltage transmission
grid. While these islands are not connected to the
transmission network yet, these proposals will
help to support the industry and unlock the vast
potential of the Scottish islands for renewables
development.

 Ofgem and DTI consulted in 2005 on the high
level regulatory options for offshore transmission.
The Energy Minister, Malcolm Wicks intends to
announce his decision as soon as possible.
Biomass heat

 Around 30 per cent of non-transport energy
consumed in the UK is in the form of heat for
space and process heating. The Government is
committed to putting in place a framework for
reducing emissions from heat production by
supporting the use of combined heat and power
and by looking to support the use of renewables.

 Developing a strong biomass heat sector supplied
from indigenous sources will also help secure
future energy supplies. The recent rise in fossil
fuel prices has also helped shift the economic
arguments, although in most cases biomass heat
generation still remains more expensive than
conventional heat generation.

 Currently only about one per cent of UK heat
demand is supplied from renewable sources.
A report commissioned by the Government4
concluded that this could rise to 
8 per cent by
2010 and 
7 per cent by 2020, but that
numerous barriers need to be addressed to
achieve this outcome.

 One key barrier is the greater cost of renewable
heating infrastructure compared to conventional
systems. The Government will introduce a
support scheme for biomass heat in the
industrial, commercial and community
sectors. The scheme will run for five years and
will be worth at least £10-15m in England over
the next two years. This builds on the support for
renewable heat provided through the Bioenergy
capital Grants Scheme and the Clear Skies
initiative. In developing the scheme, account will
be taken of the recommendations of the Biomass

38
Energy supply
4 ‘Renewable Heat and Heat from Combined Heat and Power Plants – Study and Analysis’ Future Energy Solutions:
www.dti.gov.uk/renewables/policy_pdfs/heatreportfinal.pdf


Taskforce on how the support can best be
delivered. By May 2006, the Government will
have published its full response to the Taskforce's
recommendations on optimising the contribution
of biomass to renewable energy targets. Other
measures on biomass are described in the
Agriculture, Forestry and Land Management
chapter.

 Additional analysis of the issues affecting
renewable heat development is provided in
reports from the Royal Commission on
Environmental Pollution5 and the Carbon Trust

The latter noted that biomass can be drawn from
a very large number of sources, and highlighted
particularly forestry, agricultural residues, waste
wood and energy crops. Energy from waste is
considered further below.
Combined heat and power (CHP)

 CHP is an efficient way of providing heat and
electricity at the same time. Overall fuel efficiency
is around 70-90 per cent of the input fuel – much
better than conventional power stations which
are only up to around 50 per cent efficient. It
enables a very wide range of energy users, from
heavy industry down to individual homes, to save
money and to reduce overall carbon emissions.

 The Government has introduced a range of
measures to support CHP, including:

 climate change levy exemption on fuel inputs
to Good Quality CHP and on all Good Quality
CHP electricity outputs;

 Enhanced Capital Allowances eligibility to
stimulate investment;

 reducing the VAT rate to all domestic micro-
CHP appliances; and

 a target for Government departments to
source 15 per cent of their electricity from
CHP by 


 In recognition of CHP’s environmental benefits, in
2000 the Government set a target to achieve at
least 10 gigawatts (GW) of Good Quality CHP
capacity by 
 Installed capacity in the UK
stood at 
6 GW at the end of 2004, which is
estimated to save around 
5 MtC per year.

 In recent years the CHP industry has faced
adverse economic conditions, due largely to the
spark spread – the difference between the price
received for the electricity and the cost of
generation – which has not been large enough to
provide an adequate return on investment. The
disparity between gas and electricity prices in
recent years has acted against CHP, which means
that there is still room for support for CHP in the
current market conditions. Modelling by
Cambridge Econometrics estimates a 2010
capacity figure of 
5-
7 GW excluding the
impact of the EU ETS. With the EU ETS,
Cambridge Econometrics estimate an increased
capacity of 
3-
6 GW with a medium allowance
price. However this modeling is subject to
uncertainty and depends significantly on carbon
price assumptions.

 The Government has assessed several new
support measures for CHP and will introduce two:

 The treatment of CHP will be fully
considered in the UK’s National Allocation
Plan for the second phase of the EU
emissions trading scheme, to address some
of the concerns about the impact of the first

39
Energy supply
5 ‘Biomass as a Renewable Energy Source’ 2004, Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution.
6 ‘Biomass sector review for the Carbon Trust’ 
 www.thecarbontrust.co.uk/carbontrust/about/publications/Biomass%20Sector_FINAL.pdf


phase allocations on CHP. Government will be
consulting on proposals to create a separate
sector for incumbent (existing) Good Quality
CHP plant and a ring-fenced New Entrant
Reserve for new plant generating Good
Quality CHP electricity. Government will also
consult on proposals for incumbent CHP to
receive an equitable allocation based on
historic emissions within the Good Quality
CHP sector. Government will additionally
consult on new entrant CHP to receive
favourable allocation arrangements relative to
non-CHP through the New Entrant Reserve.

 eligibility for Renewable Obligation
Certificates will be extended to include
mixed waste plants which use Good
Quality CHP. This would add CHP to the list
of eligible advanced conversion technologies.

 The Government will shortly undertake a
study into the licensing and exemption
arrangements governing small-scale CHP and
renewables operations and the cost and
benefits of these operations.

 The Energy Review will consider the contribution
that CHP can make to our energy policy goals.

 The Government has considered a number of
other measures to support CHP but has decided
not to take them forward at this time:

 a CHP Obligation, along the lines of the
Renewables Obligation would be the one
measure that could enable us to meet the
2010 target. However, it would be hugely
expensive and interfere with our policy of
promoting competitive energy markets;

 the proposal to guarantee the level of spark
spread for CHP, which would reduce the
uncertainty that has inhibited growth in the
CHP sector. However, the measure would have
significant public expenditure implications and,
at the same time, be a significant intervention
in the electricity market;

 under the review of the Renewables
Obligation, exempting CHP from the
Renewables Obligation base has been
considered. However it would be an
additional cost to customers at a time of
rising fuel bills; and

 adding a heat element to the target for using
CHP electricity on the Government estate
would be disproportionately expensive,
because purchasing heat requires significant
capital expenditure to install heat mains.

 The opportunity was also taken to review the
proposed £10m Community Energy programme
extension (discussed in the Domestic chapter) and
CHP Quality Improvement Programme (QIP). The
development of QIP was an undertaking in the
CHP Strategy with an aim to increase Good
Quality CHP capacity through targeting specific
CHP schemes thought to have the potential for
expansion. Detailed analysis, involving direct
contact with schemes, indicates that the potential
is around 35MW and it is not cost-effective to
develop a programme for such a small return. We
will be contacting the few schemes concerned
with the offer of site-specific advice, but will not
roll out the programme more widely.
Microgeneration

 Micro generation is the production of heat or
electricity on a small-scale from a low carbon
source. Various technologies can be used for
microgeneration – air source heat pumps, ground
source heat pumps, fuel cells, micro-CHP, micro-
hydro, micro-wind, bio-energy and solar.

40
Energy supply



 The Government commissioned the Energy
Saving Trust to undertake an analysis of the
potential of microgeneration in the UK. This
report, published in December 2005, suggests
that microgeneration could reduce household
emissions by approximately 15 per cent by 

The Government is currently developing a
strategy to promote microgeneration, which will
include measures to tackle the barriers currently
preventing widespread take-up of
microgeneration technologies. This strategy is due
to be finalised by the beginning of April 


 The strategy will also include the Low Carbon
Buildings Programme. The Government has
committed £80m over three years that will enable
the programme to run between 2006-09,
including £
5m that has been brought forward
to facilitate a smooth transition between existing
schemes (Clear Skies and the Major PV
demonstration programmes) and the new
programme.

 Microgeneration technologies can also make a
contribution to achieving our other energy goals.
Widespread local generation from renewable
sources would reduce the load on the national
gas and electricity networks. A thriving
microgeneration industry could improve the
competitiveness of UK energy markets by
providing consumers with a wider choice of
products from which to gain their electricity and
heat. It would also allow existing major energy
suppliers to offer more innovative energy services
packages including a microgeneration element.
Carbon abatement technologies

 In June 2005, the Government set out its strategy
for supporting the technical development and
commercial deployment of carbon abatement
technologies (CAT).

41
Energy supply
Low Carbon Buildings Programme
The Low Carbon Buildings Programme (LCBP), with a £80 million budget over three years, is due to start in
April 2006 and will supersede the current Clear Skies and Photovoltaic Major Demonstration programmes.
£
5million was brought forward to smooth transition between existing capital grant schemes and the new
programme. The new programme will mark a change to current grant programmes as it aims to take a
more holistic approach to reducing carbon emissions by innovatively combining energy efficiency and
microgeneration technologies. This change is in direct response to The Renewable Innovation Review,
February 2004, which recommended this approach.
While there will be continued support for household and community installations, there will be a shift in
emphasis to large-scale developments. The focus on larger developments is designed to engage the
construction sector more widely and to increase the take up of microgeneration products in new build and
refurbished developments. This change in focus will aim to deliver standard low carbon buildings that can
be more easily replicated. The DTI will be working closely with the Carbon Trust to develop the advice
element of the programme, which will be important to ensure projects deliver low carbon developments.
DTI aims to promote these developments in ways, which clearly communicate the replicability, cost
effectiveness and appeal of low carbon technologies.
In parallel, work to develop the Microgeneration strategy should help to create a sustainable
microgeneration industry in the UK. The microgeneration strategy will seek to address some of those none-
grant barriers preventing widespread take-up of microgeneration technologies.
Budget 2006 announced a further £50m for DTI's Low Carbon Buildings Programme with the aim of
encouraging manufacture at higher scale leading to lower costs. This will help fund the installation of
microgeneration technologies in a range of buildings including schools, social and local authority housing,
businesses and public buildings. Further details will be announced by the DTI in due course.



 Carbon abatement technologies cover a range of
generic options for reducing the carbon dioxide
emissions from fossil fuel combustion, including
higher efficiency conversion processes (also
referred to as cleaner coal technologies), co-firing
with biomass, and, the most radical, carbon
capture and storage (CCS), which could be
combined with enhanced oil recovery. Most of
the technologies needed to implement CCS are
currently available through other applications and
the first requirement is to combine and optimise
their operation for carbon dioxide capture.

 Over the longer term, carbon abatement
technologies could make a significant
contribution to reducing the UK’s carbon dioxide
emissions. But as they are not commercially viable
under current market conditions, the strategy
announced £25m, in the form of capital grants,
to support demonstration of these technologies,
including capture ready plant and storage. In the
2005 Pre-Budget report the Government
committed an additional £10m to the
demonstration programme.

 At Budget 2006 the Government published a
consultation document on the barriers to the
commercial deployment of carbon capture and
storage in the UK and the potential role of
economic incentives in addressing those barriers.
The responses will be fed into the Energy Review.
Energy from waste

 With increasing pressure to divert biodegradable
waste from landfill, there will be opportunities to
increase the recovery of energy from residual,
post-recycling waste. This approach provides a
waste management solution, as well as a source
of partially – renewable energy and an additional
tool for reducing carbon emissions. The energy
currently recovered from residual municipal waste
accounts for 
35 per cent of electricity
generation in the UK or 
4 TWh. This could rise
to about 
5 per cent or 6 TWh by 2020 on the
basis of anticipated increases in this waste
management route


 A consultation on the Government’s Waste
Strategy for England is currently in progress.
This outlines the role and benefits of recovering
energy from waste that cannot realistically be
reused or recycled and would otherwise be
disposed of to landfill, and invites views on the
proposed approach.

 Advanced conversion technologies for generating
energy from waste (pyrolysis, gasification and
anaerobic digestion) are supported by the
Renewables Obligation. These technologies
currently make a very small contribution to waste
management and electricity generation in the UK,
but may be expected to expand as pressure to
reduce landfilling of waste increases. The Biomass
Taskforce recommended that more efficient use
should be made of the heat element of energy
from waste. The inclusion in the Renewables
Obligation of ‘good quality’ CHP fuelled by
waste should help to encourage this approach.

 Under the Renewables Obligation definition at
least 98 per cent of the calorific value of the
biomass must be derived from plant or animal
matter. Following the review of the Obligation
the Government has reduced the figure to 90 per
cent to encourage the use for energy generation
of some potential fuels (such as waste woods
which are presently sent to landfill) that are very
largely biomass in content but do not meet the
requirements of the 98 per cent rule.

 Conventional energy from waste technology
offers a considerable climate change benefit
compared to landfill, principally by reducing
methane emissions from landfill. Energy
recovered also displaces fossil fuel use in
conventional power generation. Recovering
energy from one million tonnes of municipal
waste could reduce greenhouse gas emissions by
around 30 ktC compared to landfill
 However,
the carbon benefit will decrease over time as
increased recycling reduces the biodegradable
component of the residual waste. Methane
production, and the resulting energy generation,
from the anaerobic digestion of animal and food
wastes, are discussed in the Agriculture, Forestry
and Land Management chapter.

42
Energy supply
7 Some commentators have produced considerably higher estimates, based on theoretical maximum assumptions about conversion efficiencies and waste
available for energy recovery.
8 Impact of Energy from Waste and Recycling Policy on UK Greenhouse Gas Emissions, ERM report for Defra, 2006:
www.defra.gov.uk/environment/waste/strategy/pdf/ermreport.pdf


Coal mine methane

 The production of electricity from coal mine
methane (CMM) was exempted from the climate
change levy in November 
 The Government
is working with the Coal Authority to develop a
competitive grant scheme to be administered by
the Authority, to support projects aimed at
controlling CMM emissions.
Hydrogen

 Hydrogen offers good prospects for cost-
competitive reductions in carbon dioxide from
2020 onwards, particularly for the transport
sector. It may also have a role in energy storage
for balancing intermittent renewables in grid-
constrained situations.

 Hydrogen can be made via a number of different
routes, thereby contributing to energy security,
but its potential to contribute to carbon reduction
is dependent on the method used. Low or carbon
neutral methods include electrolysis using
renewable or nuclear energy, and hydrogen
production from biomass. Production of hydrogen
from fossil fuels could be used in conjunction
with carbon capture and storage.

 The Government announced in June 2005 a
£15m demonstration programme for hydrogen
and fuel cell technologies, part of a £50m
programme also covering carbon abatement
technologies. State Aids approval for the
programme is currently being sought from the
European Commission. The Government intends
to establish a Hydrogen Coordination Unit to
enable the development and deployment of low
carbon, low cost and secure hydrogen energy
chains for transport, and to ensure that the UK
contributes to and benefits from international
collaboration on hydrogen through global
partners such as the International Energy Agency
and the International Partnership for the
Hydrogen Economy.

 The Government has targets of, as far as
practicable, ending fuel poverty in England in
vulnerable households by 2010 and in all
households by 2016, with other targets being set
in the devolved administrations such that by 2018
no household in the UK should be in fuel poverty.
A range of actions will be required to meet those
targets, particularly in respect of hard-to-treat
homes. Many of these households lack access to
mains gas, the most efficient, cost-effective
conventional fuel for heating, and many would
not be removed from fuel poverty without such
access.
Extending the gas network

 The Design and Demonstration Unit (DDU), a
team of private sector secondees based in DTI,
has undertaken a number of demonstration
projects designed to test a model for providing
gas connections, together with associated
heating and insulation measures to deprived
communities. This model, which uses market
mechanisms and draws on a range of public and
private sector funding sources, has shown that
the costs of providing connections can be
significantly reduced. Whilst primarily designed to
address fuel poverty, connecting a significant
number of additional households to the gas
network, and providing them with central heating
and insulation at the same time, would also offer
other social, health and environmental benefits.
For example, connecting 120000 households
could reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 
1
MtC in 


 The DDU will shortly begin a combined gas
network and community renewables programme
in partnership with the Regional Development
Agencies in the North East and Yorkshire and
Humberside. The gas network element of the
programme will use the proven DDU model. The
renewables projects will draw on a range of
proven technologies that can deliver heat at a
price comparable with that of mains gas, to
homes that could not economically be connected
to the gas network because of the distance from
the existing network or the local terrain.

43
Energy supply


CHAPTER FOUR
Business
Introduction

 Business is a key determinant of the strength and
momentum of an economy. However, increasing
economic activity is putting greater pressure on
our environment and natural resources. The
business sector contributes the most to overall
UK emissions.

 Climate change needs to be tackled if we are
to achieve long-term growth and prosperity. If
climate change is not tackled it means that
economic growth is not sustainable, and so it
is essential that business adapts to the new
conditions it faces. The task is to maintain
economic growth in the short, medium and
long-term at the same time as meeting the
challenge of climate change.

 Business’ commitment to tackling climate change
is growing in the UK. Many firms recognise that
action to reduce emissions can bring wide-
ranging benefits including lower costs, improved
competitiveness and new market opportunities.
Energy-efficient alternatives can provide cost-
effective options for businesses. However, short-
term cost considerations and market failures can
create barriers to investment. Where this is the
case, the Government recognises the role of
different policy instruments in overcoming these
barriers. The decision to intervene needs to be
evidence based and needs to take account of
wider economic and social objectives. If a case for
intervention is seen, the most cost-effective
instrument – or range of instruments – should be
used.

 The Government is committed to developing a
clear, flexible and stable policy framework that
allows for long-term planning and investment in
reducing emissions while ensuring that a healthy
and competitive business base is maintained. The
framework must also recognise the diversity of
the business sector: emissions, energy intensity
and the ability to respond to climate change vary
sharply between commerce and industry, and
between large and small firms.
In 2004, the business sector was responsible for
carbon dioxide emissions of 
5 MtC or around
40 per cent of the UK total. Emissions had fallen
to about 12 per cent below 1990 levels by 2004
and we estimate that, including the expected
impact of the new measures included in this
programme, they could fall further, to almost
18 per cent below 1990 levels by 

Greenhouse gas emissions had fallen by about
28 per cent between the base year and 

We estimate that with the additional measures
introduced in this Programme, they could fall
further to 33 per cent below base year levels
by 

The Government is committed to developing
a clear policy framework that allows for long-
term planning and investment in reducing
emissions while ensuring a healthy and
competitive business base is maintained.
Business has already cut its greenhouse gas
emissions significantly, but further reductions
could be made cost-effectively.
Independent evaluation by Cambridge
Econometrics forecast full carbon savings from
the climate change levy to be 
7 MtC in 

In addition, measures introduced in the Climate
Change Programme 2000 are estimated to save
around 
9 MtC in 
 The main
contributions are from the climate change
agreements, the UK emissions trading scheme,
the activities of the Carbon Trust, and the
Building Regulations 2002 and 

Measures introduced through this programme
will deliver additional carbon savings to 2010:

 additional funding to allow for a significant
expansion in the Carbon Trust’s Energy
Efficiency Loans scheme for SMEs;

 further measures to encourage SMEs to
take up energy saving opportunities.
Together it is estimated that these new
measures will contribute an additional 
2 MtC
of carbon savings, bringing total savings to

1 MtC in 


44

 This section covers emissions from both the
manufacturing and commercial sectors, and also
from industrial processes and waste
management. Business’ share of the emissions
associated with energy supply is taken into
account when estimating the effects of policies.
Business use of transport is covered in the
transport chapter.
Greenhouse gas emissions 
inventory and trends

 In the base year, greenhouse gas emissions from
the business sector (including those from its use
of energy) were 
2 MtC. In 2004, emissions
from this sector were about 28 per cent below
1990 levels and they are projected to be around
33 per cent below base year levels by 2010,
mainly because of fuel switching in the electricity
supply industry, other fuel switching and
improved energy intensity. Emissions are
projected to be around 33 per cent below base
year levels by 

Projections of greenhouse gas emissions from the business sector and
the estimated effect of additional quantified measures, MtC

 Emissions of the other five greenhouse gases
from the business sector have reduced
significantly. More details are given below and in
annexes C to E, but the key points to note are:

 the increased collection of landfill gas for
energy recovery and environmental control;

and


 a large reduction in N2O from adipic acid
manufacture and in HFCs from HCFC-23
manufacture due to introduction of
abatement equipment.
1990 1995 2000 20102005 2015 2020

Mt C5060708090100
Historical trend
Baseline with measures projections
Additional quantified measures

45
Business
Greenhouse gas emissions from business, MtC
Gas Base year 1990 1995 2000 2004 2010 2015 2020
Carbon dioxide 
8 
8 
2 
3 
5 
4 
0 
1
Methane 
8 
8 
8 
6 
7 
6 
1 
8
Nitrous oxide 
0 
0 
1 
6 
0 
9 
9 
9
HFCs 
1 
1 
1 
9 
7 
9 
9 
7
PFCs 
1 
4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1
SF6 
3 
3 
3 
5 
3 
4 
3 
3
Total 
2 
4 
7 
1 
3 
2 
3 
0
Change from base year levels -
9 -
8 -
7 -
9 -
8 -
1
Note: the percentage changes and emission estimates may differ slightly due to rounding


A framework for business action

 Business has asked for a clear, flexible and stable
policy framework that allows long-term planning
and investment in reducing greenhouse gas
emissions. The Government and devolved
administrations are committed to delivering this.

 The policy framework draws together in an
integrated way a range of instruments and
measures including:

 economic instruments – the climate change
levy and, for energy-intensive industries, the
associated climate change agreements;
emissions trading; enhanced capital
allowances for energy-saving technologies
and grant schemes;

 technology deployment – the Carbon Trust
delivers an integrated programme of support
to accelerate the take up of low carbon
technologies and other energy saving
measures;

 regulation – in England and Wales,
implementation of the IPPC directive through
the pollution prevention and control
regulations, which require major industrial
plants to take up best available techniques,
and tightening the energy efficiency
requirements of the Building Regulations in
England and Wales and the Building
Standards (Scotland) Regulations;

 measures to make the market work
better – helping business to respond to
market pressures with advice and information;
improving the energy efficiency of consumer
products and other equipment; and
supporting benchmarking; and

 improving public and company
information – making it easier for business
to measure their emissions and set public
targets for improvement by establishing clear
guidelines for companies reporting on
greenhouse gas emissions.

 The introduction of the EU emissions trading
scheme in January 2005 means that overlapping
policy measures now cover some business sector
emissions. As an input into the review of this
programme, the Government asked the Carbon
Trust, as part of the Energy Efficiency Innovation

46
Business
1 An independent evaluation by Cambridge Econometrics (CE) concluded that CCL would deliver annual carbon savings of 
7MtC by 2010, from an
announcement effect and price effect of the levy. This figure assumes CCL rates are increased in line with inflation from 2005 to 
 The impact of CCL in
the projections is incorporated through the price elasticity of demand for different fuels (‘the price effect’), and there is no separately identified announcement
effect within the UEP baseline.
Existing measures Carbon savings in 2010 (MtC)
Voluntary UK emissions trading scheme 
3
Carbon Trust 
1
Building Regulations 2002 
4
Building Regulations 2005 
2
Climate change agreements 
9
TOTAL 
9
Climate Change Levy1 
7
Potential carbon savings
Additional measures Carbon savings in 2010 (MtC)
Carbon Trust support for investment in energy efficiency 
in SMEs 
1
Measures to encourage or assist SMEs to take up energy 
saving opportunities 
1
TOTAL 
2


Review, to consider the future of measures
impacting on business, in particular the
relationship between the EU trading scheme and
climate change agreements, and to recommend
improvements to the policy mix. A key
consideration was that while the EU emissions
trading scheme will be the most significant policy
instrument, it is unlikely on its own to deliver the
full potential of emissions reductions from
business.

 The Carbon Trust concluded that the current
overlap between the EU trading scheme and
climate change agreements is not an economic
burden at this stage but can create additional
administrative requirements. As the EU emissions
trading scheme becomes more established, the
implications of this for wider UK climate change
policy will be considered. The Government will
explore the medium-term regulatory framework
in the light of developments in the EU emissions
trading scheme.
Climate change levy

 The climate change levy (CCL), introduced in
2001, seeks to encourage businesses to improve
the efficiency with which they use energy.
Improving energy efficiency is an effective way to
lower emissions of carbon dioxide, and can also
help businesses reduce their energy costs. To
support competitiveness, the introduction of the
levy was accompanied by a 
3 percentage point
cut in employers’ national insurance contributions
(NICs), which has led to a net reduction in tax
liability for business.

 The CCL has had a significant impact on business
energy demand which, in turn, has helped
improve energy efficiency and reduce emissions.
An independent evaluation by Cambridge
Econometrics, commissioned by HM Revenue and
Customs and published alongside Budget 2005,
has examined the effect of the levy since its
announcement in Budget 1999 and introduction
in April 
 It concluded that the levy could
deliver cumulative savings to 2005 of 
5 million
tonnes of carbon (MtC) and by 2010, annual
carbon savings of over 
5 MtC a year – well
above the 2 MtC estimated at the time of its
introduction. According to this evaluation, the
impact was largely due to an announcement
effect, with a smaller reduction in demand due to
the price effect of the levy feeding through into
higher fuel prices. The impact of the levy is
incorporated into the baseline with measures
projections but only through the price effect and
there is no separately identified announcement
effect within the UEP baseline. 

 It is also estimated that by 2010, CCL will reduce
energy demand in the economy as a whole by

9 per cent a year – and in the commercial and
public sector by nearly 15 per cent a year –
compared with the levy package not being in
place. The reduction in energy demand, along
with the 
3 percentage point cut in employers’
NICs, has reduced costs for business. Cambridge
Econometrics estimated that the CCL/NICs
package will reduce overall unit costs for business
by 
13 per cent by 2010 compared with the
package not being in place.

 The climate change levy is playing a crucial role in
enabling the UK to meet its Kyoto Protocol
target. Levy rates have not been raised since its
introduction. Budget 2006 announced that, to
ensure the UK continues to make progress in
tackling climate change, CCL rates will increase in
line with current inflation. The inflation increase
will be introduced on 1 April 
 The
Government is committed to returning CCL
revenue to business, discussing with business the
most effective way of supporting investment in
energy efficiency and the environment.

 The levy is a tax on the use of energy in industry,
commerce and the public sector. The levy does
not apply to fuels used by the domestic or
transport sectors, or fuels used for the production
of other forms of energy (such as for electricity
generation) or for non-energy purposes. It does
not apply to oils, which are already subject to
excise duty. Energy used by small firms is also
excluded. There are also several exemptions from
the levy, including:

 electricity generated from new renewables;

47
Business



 fuel used by good quality combined heat and
power (CHP);

 fuels used as a feedstock; and

 electricity used for electrolysis processes, such
as the chlor-alkali process or primary
aluminium smelting.

 The horticulture sector, which is relatively energy
intensive, contains a large number of smaller
companies and is exposed to significant
international competition, was also given a
temporary 50 per cent discount on the levy for a
five-year period, which expires on 31 March

 This sector has now qualified for a full
climate change agreement under the new
eligibility criteria (see below) and growers who
have enjoyed the discount are eligible to join the
new agreement.

 The current rates of levy are 
15p/kWh for gas,

17p/kg (equivalent to 
15p/kWh) for coal,

96p/kg (equivalent to 
07p/kWh) for liquefied
petroleum gas (LPG), and 
43p/kWh for
electricity.

 The levy is structured to incentivise business to
improve their energy efficiency levels. Improving
energy efficiency can help to deliver a double
dividend of both reducing emissions but also
maintaining and enhancing business
competitiveness. To further ensure that the levy
was introduced in a way that supported business
competitiveness, it was accompanied by a 
3
percentage point cut in employers’ National
Insurance contributions, worth approximately
£
2 billion in 2004-05, compared with the
£772 million raised by the levy in the same year,
helping shift the burden of taxation from ‘goods’
to ‘bads’.

 Enhanced capital allowances (ECAs) were
also introduced to encourage the use of
environmentally friendly technologies. ECAs are
now available for 15 different categories of
technology and 13,000 different products. In
addition, the Carbon Trust was established to
provide support and advice to business. Combined
with the incentive to improve energy efficiency
provided by the levy, these other measures have
provided support to help business adapt.
Climate change agreements

 Recognising the need to maintain the
competitiveness of energy-intensive sectors
subject to international competition, climate
change agreements (CCAs) were introduced
alongside the climate change levy. CCAs provide
an 80 per cent discount from the levy for those
sectors that agree to meet challenging targets for
improving energy efficiency or reducing
greenhouse gas emissions.

 The twelve-year climate change agreements are
negotiated between relevant trade associations
and Defra. The agreements operate at two levels
with targets for both sectors and individual
operators. Sector level umbrella agreements detail
the facilities covered by the agreement and the
relevant process. They also list sector targets, and
the conditions which apply to participating
companies. Participants in the agreements can
determine how best to achieve energy savings.
They are able to meet their targets by trading
emission allowances either with other companies
in an agreement or companies in the voluntary
UK emissions trading scheme.

 Eligibility to enter CCAs was dependent initially
on criteria based on the Pollution and Prevention
Control Regulations 2000, which implement the
Directive (EC/96/61) on integrated pollution
prevention and control. There are currently 42
sectors with around 10000 facilities covered by
agreements under this eligibility criterion. The
Pre-Budget Report in 2003 announced that the
eligibility criteria would be extended to cover
other energy-intensive sectors of industry that
qualify if they exceed energy intensity thresholds
and, in some cases, a test of international
competition. A further ten sectors with over 300
facilities have completed negotiations and five of
these have been granted state aid approval by
the European Commission. The remainder are

48
Business


expected to obtain approval in the near future.
The Government is also in discussion with other
potentially eligible sectors.

 In order to continue to receive the discount,
facilities must achieve the energy efficiency or
emissions reduction targets set out in the
agreements. Performance is tested every two
years up to 


 At the second target period in 2004, sectors
again performed well against their targets, with a
total of the absolute savings from each sector
compared to its base year of 
9 MtC (
4Mt
CO2) per annum. Although in the first target
period in 2002, a large proportion of the savings
were a result of reduced output in the steel
sector, in 2004, output had risen by 28 per cent
over the 2002 level, and is forecast to rise further
up to 
 Nevertheless, energy use in the steel
sector rose by only 10 per cent, indicating that
the steel sector is continuing to improve its
energy efficiency.

 Targets for 2006 to 2010 were reviewed during
2004 and 2005 to ensure that they continued to
represent the potential for cost-effective energy
savings taking into account any changes in
technical and market circumstances. The review
took into account the better than expected
performance for the majority of sectors in the
first target period. For the largest sectors that are
also affected by the EU Emissions Trading Scheme
(EU ETS), the revised targets were taken into
account in setting the allocations under the UK
National Allocation Plan.

 The target reviews have, overall, resulted in
forecast additional savings by 2010 (over business
as usual) of 
2 MtC above the 
5 MtC
predicted in 
 The additional savings from
sectors excluding steel is 
4 MtC. The forecast
increase in production from the steel sector up to
2010 which is reflected in the targets allows a
net increase in emissions of 
2 MtC for this
sector.

 On the whole the ten sectors entering
agreements under the new energy intensity
criteria are smaller sectors in terms of number
of companies and energy use, even though they
are energy intensive. Estimated carbon savings
from these ten sectors could amount to 
03 MtC
in 


 It is estimated that the climate change
agreements will, in aggregate, save 
9 MtC per
annum by 
 These savings are included in
the baseline with measures projections.

 Around 500 installations in the first phase of the
EU emissions trading scheme are also at least
partially covered by CCAs. The UK has obtained
temporary exclusion for 331 of these, with the
remainder opting to go into the scheme. To apply
equivalent reporting arrangements with the EU
ETS, which is a requirement of the Directive, the
target units containing a temporarily excluded
installation will report their CCA performance
annually for the duration of the exclusion.

 For those installations opting to enter the EU ETS,
there are overlaps in coverage with the CCAs. It
was necessary to avoid the situation where
companies would be able to sell a surplus arising
from the same emission reduction in both
schemes, or alternatively have to buy in both
schemes to cover the same shortfall. Industry
preferred a mechanism to net off the EU ETS
surplus from the CCA performance to the
alternative of taking out the EU ETS emissions
from the CCA target. This procedure is in place
for the first phase of the EU trading scheme, but
the Government is consulting the sectors through
the UK Emissions Trading Group on arrangements
for the second phase.

49
Business


Carbon Trust

 The Carbon Trust is an independent company
funded by the Government. It was established in
April 2001, at the same time as the climate
change levy was introduced, to help the UK move
towards a low carbon economy by helping
business and the public sector save energy,
reduce carbon dioxide emissions and capture the
commercial opportunities of low carbon
technologies. It provides independent information
and impartial advice on energy saving and carbon
management, through site visits, events, and case
studies.

 Carbon management is a systematic approach to
support core business strategy looking at every
aspect of an organisation’s performance in
relation to climate change. The Carbon
Management Programme has worked with more
than 200 large companies, 63 local authorities
and five major Government departments.

 The Carbon Trust also promotes the Enhanced
Capital Allowances Scheme to encourage
investment by business in qualifying energy
saving technologies and products, and manages
the list of qualifying equipment. Companies can
claim 100 per cent first year allowances against
investment in qualifying technologies.
EU Emissions Trading Scheme

 The European Emissions Trading Scheme (EU ETS),
which was established in 2003 by Directive
2003/87/EC, is the largest emissions trading
scheme in the world, regulating emissions of
carbon dioxide from over 11,500 installations
across Europe. In the UK, the scheme covers over
1,000 installations, responsible for approximately
50 per cent of our carbon dioxide emissions,
including electricity generators, oil refineries,
offshore platforms and industrial plants in the
iron and steel, cement and chemicals sectors.

 The Government believes that, by providing for
emissions savings to be made at the point of least
cost, emissions trading is a cost-effective
mechanism for reducing greenhouse gas
emissions. The 2003 Energy White Paper therefore
made clear that the Government wanted the EU
emissions trading scheme to play a central role in
our future emissions reduction policies.

 Since the Directive was adopted, the European
Commission, the UK and other Member States
have successfully established the institutional
framework necessary for the scheme’s operation.
National Allocation Plans for the first phase of the
scheme which runs from 2005 to 2007 have
been submitted by all Member States and been
approved by the European Commission
 These
plans state the total quantity of allowances to be
issued – the ‘cap’ – and how many allowances
each installation will receive. Since 1 January
2005, operators of installations have been
required to monitor their emissions and to ensure
that they surrender allowances equivalent to their
emissions in any calendar year. The Government
has played an active role in the development of
emissions trading registries which track the
ownership and transfer of allowances and the UK
has licensed its GRETA software to 16 other
States. The ‘carbon market’, which trades in EU

50
Business
3 For further details of the National Allocation Plans of other Member States see: www.europa.eu.int/comm/environment/climat/emission_plans.htm


ETS allowances has developed rapidly across
Europe with the City of London emerging as one
of the main centres of trade.

 The second phase of the scheme runs from 2008
to 2012, coinciding with the first Kyoto Protocol
commitment period. In developing their National
Allocation Plans for the next phase, Member
States will have to demonstrate how they intend
to use the scheme and other policies and
measures to achieve their targets under the
burden sharing agreement. Over the last year, the
Government has been working with the European
Commission and other Member States to ensure
that the lessons learned from the implementation
of the scheme are applied for the second phase.

 For the purpose of assessing the contribution of
the EU emissions trading scheme to the
Government’s 2010 domestic carbon dioxide
goal, the key issue is the total quantity of
allowances to be allocated to UK installations.
Installations in the EU emissions trading scheme
can meet their obligations by purchasing
allowances, which might come from installations
in other EU countries, and credits from the Kyoto
Protocol project mechanisms, which will come
from outside the UK and might come from
reducing emissions of greenhouse gases other
than carbon dioxide. This means that the
emissions reductions expected from the second
phase of the scheme and included in this
Programme (see below), will not necessarily take
place in the UK, nor will they necessarily be of
carbon dioxide. Nevertheless, as the chapter “UK
Emissions Inventory and Projections” explains4,
the Government will include allowances or
project credits surrendered by installations in its
assessment of the UK’s progress towards the
2010 domestic carbon dioxide goal.

 The Government has decided that the overall cap
for the second phase of the EU emissions trading
scheme should be set within a range which
would achieve average annual emission
reductions of between 
0 and 
0 MtC. In the
draft National Allocation Plan, the Government
proposes that the reductions in allowances
against business as usual would be borne entirely
by the electricity supply industry, which is
relatively less subject to international competition
and able to pass on costs.

 The EU emissions trading scheme will continue
after 2012 and, as noted by the European
Environment Council in October 2005, will remain
an essential instrument in the EU’s medium and
Key priorities for the second phase of
the EU emissions trading scheme
1 Contribution to UK emissions reduction
targets: The Government has said that the
total quantity of allowances allocated for
the second phase should be consistent with
ensuring that the trading sector makes an
appropriate contribution to the domestic
goal to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by
20 per cent below 1990 levels by 2010 and
ensure it contributes to making progress
towards the long-term targets set out in the
Energy White Paper.
2 Maintain the competitive position of UK
industry: The Government has been
working with other Member States and the
European Commission to improve
consistency of implementation of the
Directive and welcomes the further
clarification provided by the Commission’s
guidance for the second phase. Application
of the guidance will minimise distortions
that have arisen through different
interpretations in the first phase and the
Government will work to encourage robust
and transparent assessment of National
Allocation Plans for the second phase.
3 Facilitate development of an economically
efficient EU-wide trading market that
incentivises emissions reductions and
provides appropriate signals for long term
investment. A key consideration has been to
look for ways in which to improve the
scheme for the second phase by providing
appropriate messages to industry and
signalling the long term direction of the
Government’s policy.

51
Business
4 paragraph 



long-term strategy to tackle climate change. The
Government recognises the need for more
certainty about the future shape of the trading
scheme post 2012 to encourage investment in the
technologies needed to deliver deeper cuts in
emissions. There is a strong case for strengthening
the scheme beyond 2012 and for developing a
robust scheme that maintains the competitiveness
of European firms, supports investment in
developing countries through the continuation of
the Clean Development Mechanism, and provides
early certainty for industry. The European
Commission’s review of the trading scheme will
provide the best opportunity to address these
issues, by considering the level of emissions
reductions required in future phases and by
moving towards a harmonised approach to
allocation, such as auctioning, which motivates
rather than discourages early investment.

 The review also provides an opportunity to
consider the expansion of the scheme to other
greenhouse gases and activities. This should build
upon the work on expansion to other industrial
sectors and gases undertaken by the UK and
other Member States as part of their preparation
for the second phase. It should also consider the
prospects for applying emissions trading to other
sectors. The Commission is due to report on the
review by 30 June 

UK Emissions Trading Scheme

 In April 2002, the Government established the
first economy-wide greenhouse gas emissions
trading scheme. To enter the UK Emissions Trading
Scheme (UK ETS), the 33 Direct Participants bid
annual, cumulative greenhouse gas emissions
reductions targets set against a 1998-2000
baseline, in return for a share of the incentive
money of £215 million. Direct Participants
committed to reduce their emissions by 
96m
tonnes CO2 equivalent (MtCO2e) (
08 MtC) by

 The voluntary UK ETS was established as a
5 year pilot scheme, and is set to end for Direct
Participants in December 
 Installations
temporarily excluded from the EU ETS due to UK
ETS participation will then move into the EU ETS.

 The three main aims of the scheme were to
achieve cost-effective emissions reductions; to
enable ‘learning by doing’ ahead of international
emissions trading; and, to establish the City of
London as a centre for emissions trading.

 In 2004, an independent National Audit Office
report described the scheme as a “pioneering
initiative” that had achieved “significant
emissions reductions”. Whilst the scheme has
mostly delivered its key aims, there are also
important lessons to be learned, which the
Government will apply in future policy
development.

 To date, the scheme has delivered emissions
reductions of over 
6 MtC – significantly in
excess of planned reductions. While the
Government recognises that the voluntary nature
of the scheme meant that it was more attractive
to businesses with greater potential for low cost
emissions reductions, which led to an oversupply
of allowances and reduced liquidity in the
market, it has nonetheless still delivered
substantial emissions reductions. In particular, the
inclusion of non-CO2 emissions meant that
certain participants were able to install relatively
low cost abatement equipment and then have
large quantities of allowances to sell. Overall, as
results from the first two years show, some
companies were able to meet their targets easily,
resulting in a surplus of allowances in the market,
and a significant fall in the price of allowances.

52
Business



 In November 2004, six leading companies restated
their commitment to the UK ETS by offering an
additional 
4 MtC emissions reductions relative to
their baselines by 
 This helped to reduce the
overall surplus of allowances in the market and to
keep the scheme on track. In considering the
future policy mix (see paragraphs 11 and 53) the
Government will take full account of the
experience gained from the voluntary UK scheme.

 Site closures and other changes of operation are
factored into annually amended baselines. Figure
1 shows planned and actual emissions reductions
due to the scheme.
Direct Participants’ planned and delivered reductions in
emissions levels

 Participants have gained valuable experience in
developing emissions reduction strategies as well
as learning about the mechanics of trading and
how to monitor, report and verify their emissions.
The Government has also learnt valuable lessons
from the development of the scheme, notably the
importance of incorporating emissions projections
into baseline setting, to ensure “real and
additional” emissions reductions, and the fact
that trading has delivered more emissions
reductions than expected.

 The UK ETS has given UK business a ‘first-mover
advantage’ on the global carbon trading market.
Companies providing emissions trading services,
such as brokerage and verification, have gained
experience that places them in a strong position
as EU and international emissions trading
develop. In addition, the UK Emissions Trading
Registry (ETR) has been adapted for use in the EU
scheme and the UK’s EU/UN registry has now
been licensed to 16 other countries.

 In the Pre-Budget Report 2004, the Chancellor
announced that Defra and HM Treasury would
jointly sponsor a review into innovation in energy
efficiency. The purpose of the review was to
examine how a step-change in energy efficiency
in the domestic, business and public sectors in
the UK could be delivered cost-effectively and
how energy efficiency improvement could be
embedded into decision making across the
economy. A summary of the principal conclusions
of the review was published alongside the Pre-
Budget report in December 
 The Carbon
Trust and the Energy Saving Trust published
detailed, independent reports to Government at
the same time.

 The Carbon Trust concluded that there is
significant scope for cost-effective energy
efficiency and emissions reductions in large non-
energy intensive businesses and public sector
organisations. It put forward a proposal for a
new, mandatory auction based UK emissions
trading scheme, which would not be linked to
the existing voluntary market, that would target
energy use by large non-energy intensive
businesses and public sector organisations not
covered by the EU emissions trading scheme or
climate change agreements.

 The Government is considering the proposal,
which raises some important issues, and will
decide in due course whether to take it forward.
As well as exploring the potential environmental
benefits of such a scheme, we will also examine
the impact of such a scheme on different sectors,
including implications for regulatory burden and
competitiveness. We will also consider whether it
would be consistent with the Government’s
Better Regulation principles.
Small and medium-sized businesses

 The Carbon Trust launched a pilot Energy
Efficiency Loan scheme for SMEs in 
 It
2002 2002-

2003Reduction in emissions levels due tothe Scheme (Mt CO2e)
2002-

2004

2002-

2005

2002-

200601234567
Actual Planned

53
Business


provides interest free loans of between £5,000
and £100,000 for up to four years for qualifying
energy efficiency projects. The purpose of the
scheme is to overcome a common barrier to
investment – where the project is financially
viable but the capital budget is constrained by
short-term cash flow requirements. The Scottish
Executive funds an equivalent scheme in Scotland
called Loan Action Scotland.

 In the 2005 Pre-Budget Report, the
Chancellor announced extra funding of £15m
for the Carbon Trust to support the roll-out
of the Energy Efficiency Loans scheme for
SMEs, building on the current pilot. Defra
will provide additional funding to allow the
Carbon Trust to expand the scheme further.
The Government estimates that the scheme could
save 
1 MtC by 


 The Government will introduce further
measures to encourage and assist SMEs to
take up energy saving opportunities. Defra
has commissioned work to examine some
different possible policy options. Initial
analysis suggests that these measures could save

1 MtC by 

Improving company reporting on
climate change

 There is an increasing recognition that good
environmental performance makes good business
sense. Climate change risks and uncertainties
impact to some extent on many companies, and
affect investment decisions, consumer behaviour
and Government policy. Management of energy,
natural resources or waste will affect current
performance; failure to plan for a future in which
environmental factors, such as climate change,
are likely to be increasingly significant may risk
the long-term future of a business.

 Some good progress has been made – the
Carbon Disclosure Project’s third information
request in 2005 received a record high 71 per
cent disclosure rate from Financial Times Global
500 companies, with 54 per cent disclosing
emissions data. In the UK, 140 companies in the
FTSE250 now report on their environmental
performance. However, the number of FTSE All
Share companies linking climate change and
financial performance is markedly lower. For
example, only 17 per cent of companies refer to
climate change risks in their Annual Report and
Accounts, and only 6 per cent provide
quantitative information.

 From April 2005, the EU Accounts Modernisation
Directive introduced requirements for quoted and
large private companies to produce an Enhanced
Business Review. Companies will need to report
on environmental matters to the extent necessary
for an understanding of the company’s
development, performance or position.

 In January 2006, the Government published
‘Environmental Key Performance Indicators:
reporting guidelines for UK business’
 The use
of Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) will help
companies both manage and communicate the
links between environmental and financial
performance, and meet their reporting
obligations under the EU Accounts Modernisation
Directive, which requires, where appropriate,
analysis using KPIs relating to environmental
matters. For most sectors, greenhouse gas
emissions is the most significant KPI, which
means that KPIs provide a mechanism for
Government to challenge the FTSE All Share and
large private companies to report on their climate
change performance in a transparent and
meaningful way.
Investors and climate change

 Investors’ primary interest in climate change is
financial, and based upon the need to protect the
value of the investments under their care. Climate
change brings with it compliance, reputational,
strategic and physical risks for many sectors.
Investors are beginning to check that companies
have carbon management systems in place
(including through the Carbon Disclosure Project).
There are also many opportunities for companies
to create shareholder value, for example through

54
Business
5 www.defra.gov.uk/corporate/consult/envrep-kpi/envrep-kpi.pdf
6 The full statement can be found at www.defra.gov.uk/environment/business/scp/ems.htm


energy efficiency, clean energy and new markets
for low carbon products and services.

 The longer-term nature of climate change (versus
investors’ typically shorter-term investment
horizon) means that among most ‘mainstream’
investors, interest is still at a fairly early stage.
The Government is seeking to enable investors
to engage more effectively in driving business
change and is working with institutional
investors, lenders and insurers. It is also currently
examining policy options on long-term
responsible investment. As part of this, the
Government will look at what can be done to
empower individuals to make sustainable choices
in how their money is invested.

 The UK already has some landmark legislation in
this area. The amendment to the Pensions Act
1995 requiring pension schemes to state the
extent to which they consider social,
environmental or ethical issues in their investment
strategy will continue to raise the profile of
responsible investment. In August 2005, a guide
for pension trustees on climate change, prepared
by Mercer Investment Consulting for the Carbon
Trust and the Institutional Investor Group on
Climate Change, confirmed that considering
climate risk was consistent with fiduciary duty.
The guide offered innovative and practical
guidance to pension trustees for understanding
and addressing climate risk


 In the Charity Sector, the new Statement of
Recommended Practice highlights the need for
charities to communicate with their stakeholders
and the public how ethical considerations, which
include sustainability considerations, influence
their investment decisions.

 The Carbon Trust is also actively engaging with
the financial and investment community to
encourage the emergence of a low carbon
technology sector in the UK, primarily by
supporting direct investment in low carbon
technologies through direct venture capital
investment in companies alongside commercial
investors. In November 2004 one of the Carbon
Trust’s investments, Ceres Power, floated on the
Alternative Investment Market (AIM).

 The Trust also helps technology companies get
ready for the investment market under its low
carbon technology incubator programme. The
Carbon Trust’s investor engagement programme
plays a key independent role in the quantification
of shareholder value at risk from climate change,
and in engaging grassroots mainstream
institutional investor interest.

 The Carbon Trust is building on the G8 Action
Plan by bringing together leading international
investors and policymakers to develop a better
understanding of how policy can accelerate low
carbon technology investment. This group,
known as the Transatlantic Investment Forum,
will feed in to the G8 Dialogue process.

 Many UK institutional investors are engaged in
the United Nations Environment Programme’s
Finance Initiative (UNEP-FI). UNEP-FI has facilitated
the drafting of a set of Principles for Responsible
Investment, expected to be launched in March

 These are primarily designed to be applied
by asset-owners (such as pension funds,
endowments and insurance companies).

 In a similar vein, in 2002, the Corporation of
London initiated the London Principles Project
on the role of the UK’s financial services sector
in promoting sustainable development. This
proposed seven principles by which financial
market mechanisms can best promote the
financing of sustainable development, and is
an example of the City of London’s leadership
in this area.

 In March 2006, the Carbon Trust published its
report on Climate Change and Shareholder Value.
This introduced a clear new methodology to
analyse potential profit risk from climate change
across a range of sectors. Its findings concluded
that what can initially appear a high exposure, can
reduce significantly if properly managed. Under its
base case scenario, only two of the sector case
studies analysed were exposed to value risk in
excess of 10 per cent of Earnings before Interest
and Tax (EBIT) by 
 The report clearly
illustrates that 'value at risk' is not as simple as
mere emissions exposure, and that for many
companies understanding their risk exposure

55
Business
7 It can be accessed through http://www.thecarbontrust.co.uk/trustees


could be complex. The report provides a list of
seven key questions that senior corporate
management should ask themselves, and investors
should ask companies, in order to ensure that
climate risks are being properly addressed.
Industrial processes

 Industrial processes produce significant emissions
of nitrous oxide and fluorinated gases from large
IPPC regulated sites. There has been
understandable uncertainty about HFCs ever since
the agreement of the Kyoto Protocol, and the
Government believes it needs to give a clear
signal to industry and users so that they can
make investment decisions with more certainty.

 Nitrous oxide is emitted during the manufacture
of adipic acid, an intermediate chemical in the
production of nylon. Emissions from this process
accounted for 
8 MtC in 
 DuPont (UK) Ltd
operates the only adipic acid plant in the UK.
Emissions from this source have been reduced
greatly since 1990 due to the introduction of
Common Off-gas Abatement (COGA) equipment
in 1998, and are projected to be about 90 per
cent lower in 


 Manufacture of nitric acid was responsible for
emissions of 
1 MtC in 
 Emissions are
projected to decrease to 
7 MtC by 2010 due
mainly to the closure of one plant. All nine nitric
acid manufacturing facilities in the UK are currently
regulated. IPPC has applied to existing nitric acid
production processes since the end of 


 Total hydrofluorocarbon (HFC) emissions have
fallen significantly between 1990 and 2004
because of action to control emissions as a by-
product of one industrial process. However, this
masks an underlying upward trend in emissions
as HFCs are used as a replacement for ozone-
depleting substances. The Government is
concerned that emissions from these sources are
forecast to grow strongly in the near future. It
believes that this trend is unsustainable in the
longer term and that action should be taken to
limit the projected growth.

 The Government recognises that the successful
phase out of ozone-depleting substances under
the Montreal Protocol is being achieved with a
range of technologies, and accepts that HFCs are
necessary to replace ozone-depleting substances
in some applications. In view of this, the key
elements of the Government’s position on HFCs
are set out below:

 HFCs should only be used where other safe,
technically feasible, cost effective and more
environmentally acceptable alternatives do
not exist;

 HFCs are not sustainable in the long term –
the Government believes that continued
technological developments will mean that
HFCs may eventually be able to be replaced in
the applications where they are used;

 HFC emission reduction strategies should not
undermine commitments to phase out ozone
depleting substances under the Montreal
Protocol; and

 HFC emissions will not be allowed to rise
unchecked.

 This policy takes account of the fact that HFCs
are used in a wide range of applications and that
they will continue to have a role in these
applications where there are no acceptable
alternatives. At the same time, industry and users
are being given a clear signal to look closely at all

56
Business


the alternatives and to select those that are more
acceptable where they do exist.

 The policy also takes account of energy efficiency.
The Government recognises that, over recent
years, industry has made significant improvements
in the energy efficiency of equipment but it
believes there are opportunities for further gains.
The scope for improving energy efficiency mainly
depends upon the size, design, and the
maintenance and operation of equipment. The
choice of refrigerant can have an impact but is less
significant. It is noted that the use of HFCs in
insulation foams can in certain applications provide
higher energy savings than other types of
insulation. 
EU Regulation and Directive on f-gases

 Final agreement on a Regulation on certain
fluorinated greenhouse gases and a Directive
relating to emissions from Mobile Air
Conditioning systems in cars was reached in
January 
 

 The principal objective of these proposals is to
contain, prevent and thereby reduce emissions of
f-gases covered by the Kyoto Protocol. They will
make a significant contribution towards the
European Community’s Kyoto Protocol target by
introducing cost effective mitigation measures.

 The main provisions in the Regulation cover:

 containment through responsible handling
during use;

 recycling and end-of-life recovery;

 training and certification for personnel
involved in the containment and recovery f-
gases;

 reporting on quantities produced, supplied,
used and emitted;

 labelling of products and equipment;

 certain application specific controls on use;

and

 certain placing on the market prohibitions.

 The Directive will modify the European Whole
Vehicle Type Approval Directive (70/156/EEC),
which lays down the procedure Member States
use to ensure vehicles comply with technical
requirements before they are placed on the
market. The Directive will therefore place
restrictions on the types of Mobile Air
Conditioning (MAC) systems fitted to vehicles
before vehicles are approved for sale. Specifically,
the Directive will introduce:

 a two-step phase out of MACs that use f-gases
with a GWP greater than 150: 1 January 2011
for new types of vehicle, and 1 January 2007
the sunset date for all new vehicles;

 maximum annual leakage limits to cover the
interim period before the phase out; and

 controls on refilling the retrofitting for these
systems.

 These measures will minimise emissions of f-gas
from MAC by ensuring only environmentally
responsible technology may be fitted to any vehicle.

 The Regulation will enter into force in mid 2006
with the main body of the provisions in the
Regulation set to apply from one or two years
after that date. The Government will work with
key stakeholders to ensure that the key
information is targeted to those who need it in
timely way. We expect that the Directive will
enter into force in mid 2006 and it will be
transposed by the Vehicle Certification Agency.
Waste management

 Methane is the dominant greenhouse gas
emission from the waste sector, and of this,
landfills contributed 98 per cent of national
methane emissions from that sector in 

Landfill methane emissions are falling mainly
because of increased collection of landfill gas for
energy recovery and environmental control.
Future reductions will be dominated by growth in
alternative waste management routes.

57
Business



 The EU Landfill Directive will have a significant
effect on emissions; partly because it imposes
strict engineering requirements on landfills, partly
because it requires landfill gas (methane) to be
captured and used, and partly as it imposes limits
on the amount of biodegradable municipal waste
that can be landfilled. The targets (based on the
amount of waste produced in 1995) and
timescales that apply to the UK are:

 a reduction to 75 per cent of the total
amount by 2010;

 to 50 per cent of the total amount by 2013;

and

 to 35 per cent of the total amount by 


 The Government has introduced a number of
policy measures to divert biodegradable waste
from landfill, including landfill allowance schemes
to specifically meet these targets for
biodegradable municipal waste, as well as more
generally through increasing landfill tax. These
are described in chapter 1 Diverting
biodegradable municipal waste from landfill to
meet these targets will result in additional carbon
savings, through avoided methane emissions, of

7 MtC by 2010 and 
3 MtC by 2020
(compared to 2000 levels)
 The total reduction in
methane emission from UK landfills relative to the
level in 1990 is between 6 and 7 million tonnes
of carbon equivalent. Additionally the increase in
energy recovery from biomass waste at
incineration plant is projected to save a further

2 MtC in 
 This is built in to the baseline
with measures projections.

 Other waste management routes produce
significantly less GHG emissions per tonne of
waste managed than does landfill. The principal
reason for this is that methane emissions from
landfill are avoided by managing the waste some
other way. In addition, however, recycling
generates significant CO2 savings as a result of the
reduced need to extract and process raw materials
(although much of this benefit accrues overseas),
whilst recovering energy from the biogenic
fraction of waste yields other, relatively modest,
savings. All waste management options, including
landfill, result in CO2 emissions from the transport,
treatment and recovery or disposal of waste.

 There may be additional CO2 savings not in the
baseline arising from savings in fossil fuel CO2
emissions due to an increase in energy from
waste beyond the level allowed for in the DTI
model; as a result of landfill allowance schemes
(for municipal waste) and increases in landfill tax
that will also impact on commercial and industrial
waste streams. To the extent that the resulting
changes in waste management practices
(including increases in recycling) divert greater
amounts of waste from landfill than is assumed in
the DTI model, and displace additional fossil fuel
generation, there will be further greenhouse gas
emissions savings. These have not been quantified.
Working with others to deliver change

 Businesses play a crucial role in supporting
Government to move become innovative and
develop low carbon emission technologies needs
to stretch beyond 
 Alongside companies
that are already taking action to cut their
emissions, there are already those that are
developing innovative low-carbon products and
services. To ensure this effort is maintained and
enhanced, the Government is committed to carry
on working to support the deployment of new
technologies and products and to help develop
vibrant markers to provide businesses with the
confidence for long-term investments.

58
Business
8 UK Landfill Methane Emissions: Evaluation and Appraisal of Waste Policy and Projections to 2050, Golder Associates report for Defra, 




 In the 2005 Pre-Budget report9, the Government
announced support for alternative sources of
energy and committed to consult on carbon
capture and storage (CCS) and work with Norway
to develop its understanding of this technology
further. In addition, Budget 200510 announced a
new UK Energy Research Partnership (UKERP)
bringing together private and public sectors to
develop a common vision for energy research an
innovation. The Government will work closely
with the UKERP and will consider further the
scope for supporting innovation and
technological development as part of the
Comprehensive Spending Review 


 In October 2005, Defra, DTI and the Climate
Group co-hosted “Climate Change: The Business
Forecast”, a major international conference. The
event was attended by over 300 delegates, and
produced a set of “business insights” on climate
change. The consistent message from the
discussions was that climate policy should be long
(long-term), loud (to compete with other CSR
issues) and legal (underpinned by regulation).

 Looking ahead, Defra is funding work by the UK
Business Council for Sustainable Energy and the
Climate Group to examine business issues and
concerns around the ‘post-2012’ debate, the
date when the first commitment period ends
under the Kyoto Protocol.

59
Business
10 www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/media/FA6/45/pbr05_chapter7_
pdf
11 www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/media/AA7/59/bud05_chap07_
pdf

BT
BT’s targets for sustainable environmental improvement include capping their CO2 emissions at no more
than 25 per cent below 1996 levels by 
 BT are currently running at a 53 per cent reduction below 1996
levels and expect this figure to change significantly due to increases in electricity consumption as a result of
increased broadband usage and the need to run two networks in parallel during installation of our new
21st Century Network.
The annual CO2 savings arising from their energy and fleet efficiency initiatives alone, which began in 1991,
equate to almost 
4 million tonnes of CO

In 2005 BT signed the world's largest green energy contract which means that almost all of its UK electricity
needs will be met from environmentally-friendly, sustainable sources, including wind generation, solar,
wave and hydroelectric schemes or low carbon fuel-efficient energy from CHP (combined heat and power)
sources. In terms of CO2 emissions savings, this equates to an additional 325,000 tonnes each year
(equivalent to the amount of CO2 produced by more than 100,000 cars) on top of the considerable savings
we have already made in the last 10 years.
The G8 Davos Climate Change Roundtable is a collaborative project between the UK Government and the
World Economic Forum in the year of the UK’s G8 Presidency. It was conceived as a way of providing global
business leaders with an opportunity to present the Prime Minister with their perspectives on climate
change ahead of the G8 Summit.
The Corporate Leaders Group (CLG) was convened by the University of Cambridge Programme for Industry,
under the auspices of HRH The Prince of Wales’ Business & the Environment Programme. In a letter to the
Prime Minister, the CLG offered advice and help in taking forward action on climate change, including
proposing a partnership between business and the UK Government. Secretaries of State for Defra and DTI
met the CLG on 20 July 2005 to discuss how to take forward this offer.
Representatives of both the Davos Roundtable and the Corporate Leaders Group presented their messages
to the Prime Minister at a meeting on 9 June 2005, ahead of the G8 Summit.


Environment Agency

 The Environment Agency for England and Wales
plays a major role in managing climate change.
With the exception of offshore installations that
are regulated by DTI, the Agency is the main
Competent Authority to implement the EU
emissions trading scheme in England and Wales,
and it handles the registry for the UK.

 The Environment Agency promotes the
implementation of waste minimisation action
plans at industrial and commercial sites action
plans and seeks to ensure the use of Best
Available Technology (BAT). In the future, the
Environment Agency will seek to assess the scope
for reducing non-carbon dioxide greenhouse
gases using IPPC measures and by promoting
waste and land/soil management practices that
reduce methane emissions and nitrous oxide
emissions. It will also promote renewable energy
technologies onshore and offshore and will
prepare to handle the regulatory impact of
emerging technologies (such as hydrogen,
carbon capture and storage).

 The Environment Agency also has an important
role on work adapting to climate change. It has
core responsibilities on coastal and river flood risk
management and water resource planning and
ensures that general environmental protection
responsibilities are incorporated in its operations.
Representative groups and trade
unions

 There is great potential for the trade unions to
work in partnership with Government and
businesses to tackle climate change in the
workplace. The Trade Union Sustainable
Development Advisory Committee (TUSDAC) can
mobilise the trade union movement to engage
companies on these issues and provide pertinent
advice to Government. In June 2005, the trade
unions launched Greening the Workplace , a
forward-looking strategy to tackle climate change
and other environmental issues. The strategy
places a strong emphasis on a sustainable energy
and transport policies for the UK and on the
actions that trade unions can take in the
workplace, in their own operations and in the
management of their pension funds to deliver this.

60
Business


CHAPTER FIVE
Transport
Introduction

 It is important to be clear why transport
emissions are rising, especially at a time when
emissions from most other sectors are falling. As
the economy grows, people travel much further
than they used to and buy more goods from all
over the world.

 As they get more prosperous, they also tend to
choose to travel in a way that uses more carbon.
Instead of walking, they are more likely to take
the bus and instead of taking the bus they go by
car or by train. They also heat their homes more
and their businesses use more fuel. But the
impact on travel is larger because in a growing
economy the demand for transport fuel grows
faster than the demand for other kinds of fuel
and so transport's share of total emissions is likely
to increase.

 This is why road transport CO2 emissions grew by
8 per cent between 1990 and 2000 even though
average new car fuel efficiency has improved by
10 per cent since 
 And this is why forecasts
indicate that road transport emissions will grow
by another 8 per cent between 2000 and 2010,
although the link between traffic growth and
economic growth has weakened in recent years.

 This is the difficult backdrop against which the
Government’s decisions are made. What we need
to do is on the one hand reduce the
environmental impact of the journeys people
In 2004, the transport sector was responsible
for around 27 per cent of total UK carbon
dioxide emissions. Emissions had risen to about
10 per cent above 1990 levels by 
 We
estimate that including the expected impact of
the new measures in this Programme, emissions
are expected to be at the same levels in 

Similarly greenhouse gases had increased by
around 12 per cent between the base year and
2004 and we estimate that they will be at
about the same level in 2010 with the new
measures described in this chapter.
The Government is committed to reducing the
impact of travel on the environment and with
the devolved administrations is promoting
policies to reduce the fossil carbon content of
transport fuels, increase the fuel efficiency of
vehicles and encourage a move towards more
environmentally friendly forms of transport.
Measures included as part of the 2000 Climate
Change Programme are projected to save around

1 MtC by 
 The voluntary agreement package
(including reform of company car taxation and
graduated vehicle excuse duty – 
3 MtC),
wider transport policies (
8 MtC), sustainable
distribution (in Scotland – 
1MtC) and the fuel
duty escalator (
9 MtC) are the main contributors.
New measures delivering savings to 2010 include:

 the Renewable Transport Fuel Obligation
which will require 5 per cent of all UK fuel
sales to come from renewable sources by
2010-11; and

 further improving the fuel efficiency of new
vehicles, for example through use of fiscal
incentives and by working to develop
options on how to move forward beyond the
first phase of the EU voluntary agreements
with automotive manufacturers after 

Together it is estimated that these new
measures will contribute an additional 
7 MtC
savings in 2010, bringing total savings in 2010
to 
8 MtC. Further unquantified carbon
savings will be delivered through measures to
help people make smarter travel choices,
including using more fuel efficient vehicles.
Also, looking beyond this programme, we will
continue to work towards the inclusion of
aviation in the EU emissions trading scheme.

61
make and on the other hand help people make
more informed travel choices, which will benefit
both them and the environment.

 And in making a significant contribution to
meeting the Government’s long-term emissions
reduction goals there will also be opportunities
for the transport sector and for UK industry, with
the potential to benefit from domestic and global
demand for innovative products and services
geared towards greener transport.
Greenhouse gas emissions inventory
and projections

 Transport accounted for about 21 per cent of UK
greenhouse gas emissions in 
 Carbon
dioxide is the most significant greenhouse gas
emitted from this sector, accounting for over 95
per cent of emissions in 
 Nitrous oxide is
emitted during the catalytic conversion of vehicle
exhaust, and hydrofluorocarbons are emitted
from vehicle air conditioning systems and
refrigerated transport. Methane is emitted in
small amounts by natural gas powered vehicles.

 Greenhouse gas emissions from road transport
grew by some 12 per cent between 1990 and
2004, and would be expected to be 
6 per
cent above 1990 emissions by 2010 in the
absence of the further measures described in this
chapter. The table below shows the baseline
‘with measures’ projections for transport to 

These projections include the effect of policies
introduced since Kyoto but not the additional
policies and measures in this programme.1
Potential carbon savings

 The Government appraises all its road schemes
for their environmental impacts, including carbon
dioxide emissions. Beyond this the Government
has a range of policies in place to reduce the
environmental impact of transport and these are
already delivering significant carbon savings.

 But we want and need to do more, and so this
programme adds a set of carbon-saving policies
including:

 the Renewable Transport Fuels Obligation;

 measures to help people make smarter travel
choices; and

62
Transport
Greenhouse gas emissions from transport, MtC
Gas 1990 1995 2000 2004 2010 2015 2020
Carbon dioxide 
2 
8 
9 
1 
8 
7 
3
Methane 
6 
6 
4 
3 
1 
1 
1
Nitrous oxide 
4 
8 
3 
6 
7 
8 
9
Total 
2 
2 
6 
0 
5 
5 
2
Change from 1990 levels 
3 
8 
8 
6 
0 
4
Note: the percentage changes and emission estimates may differ slightly due to rounding
Existing measures Carbon savings in 2010 (MtC)
Voluntary Agreement package, including reform
of company car taxation and graduated VED 
3
Wider transport measures2 
8
Sustainable distribution (in Scotland) 
1
Fuel duty escalator3 
9
TOTAL 
1
1 Transport's use of energy including refineries is included in the carbon dioxide estimates given in the table. The estimates also include emissions from
domestic aviation, but not emissions from international aviation which are currently excluded from international target assessments.
2 As set out in 'Transport 2010: The 10 Year Plan for Transport' and built upon in 'The Future of Transport: A network for 2030'.
3 The fuel duty escalator was in place from 1993 to 
 Carbon savings have been estimated by comparing the level of emissions with the fuel duty
escalator in place with what would have happened had fuel duty been increased annually in line with inflation.



 further improving the fuel efficiency of new
vehicles, for example by enhancing fiscal
incentives to choose less polluting vehicles
and working to develop options on how to
move forward beyond the first phase of the
EU voluntary agreements with automotive
manufacturers after 


 Overall, these additional policies are designed to
reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 
7 million
tonnes per annum in 
 This is over and
above the carbon savings from the measures that
have been previously agreed and does not
include the potential benefits from including
surface transport in emissions trading schemes.
Projections of greenhouse gas emissions from the transport sector
and the estimated effect of additional quantified measures, MtC
Impact of transport on carbon emissions from 1990-2010, MtC
Notes: VAs = Voluntary agreements, VED = Vehicle Excise Duty, CCT =
Company Car Tax, RTFO = Renewable Transport Fuel Obligation

 The Government estimates that, as a result of the
additional measures we are taking, transport
carbon dioxide emissions in 2010 will be 5 per
cent lower than they would have been from the
original programme (the with measures
projections), and 13 per cent lower than they
would have been if we had not acted at all (if we
had not taken the measures set out in the
original climate change programme). This does
not mean that we expect total transport
emissions to fall.
-6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12
Measures including RTFO and sustainable distribution
Better car fuel efficiency due to VAs package,
including reforms to VED and CCT
Higher real fuel prices 1990-2000
Lower real fuel prices 2000-2010
Increased traffic growth due to GDP growth
1990 1995 2000 20102005 2015 2020

Mt C343638404244464850
Historical trend
Baseline with measures projections
Additional quantified measures

63
Transport
Additional measures Carbon savings in 2010 (MtC)
Renewable Transport Fuel Obligation (RTFO) 
6
Future EU level agreement with car manufacturers
to reduce CO2 emissions from new cars 
1
TOTAL 
7


Policies and measures

 The Government is committed to promoting
sustainable transport and cutting transport
emissions in the medium to longer term. The task
of tackling emissions growth in this sector from
strong sustained economic growth is challenging
and a range of approaches will be required,
including regulation, taxation, public spending
and voluntary measures.

 Carbon dioxide emissions from transport depend
on three key variables:
I) the fossil carbon content of fuel consumed;
II) the fuel efficiency of vehicles; and
III) the distance travelled and the means of
transport chosen.

 It is essential that we address all three of these in
the most cost-effective and practical way
possible. To achieve this we need to take action
on a range of levels and that is exactly what we
are doing by developing policies for:

 reducing the fossil carbon content of road
transport fuels;

 improving the fuel efficiency of vehicles;

 encouraging a move towards more
environmentally friendly means of transport;

and


 promoting the inclusion of aviation in
emissions trading schemes and developing the
evidence base around the possibility of
including surface transport in emissions
trading schemes in the future.
Reducing the fossil carbon content
of road transport fuels

 The 2003 Energy White Paper made clear that for
transport to play its part in putting the UK on the
path to a 60 per cent reduction in CO2 emissions
by 2050, with real progress by 2020, there has to
be a move towards low carbon and renewably
produced fuels. 

 The Government published the Alternative Fuels
Framework as part of Pre-Budget Report 

This set out the Government’s commitment to
promoting the development of sustainable
alternatives to fossil fuel, and affirmed the need
for fiscal incentives to reflect environmental
benefits. The framework committed the
Government to a three-year rolling guarantee for
biofuels and road fuel gas duty rates, offering
certainty to support investment. Budget 2006
announced that the 20 pence per litre duty
incentive for bioethanol and biodiesel will be
maintained to 2008-


 In November 2005 the Government announced it
would introduce a Renewable Transport Fuel
Obligation (RTFO). The RTFO requires transport
fuel suppliers to ensure a set percentage of their
sales are from a renewable source. It will be
introduced in 2008-09, with the obligation level set
at 5% in 2010-
 We estimate that this will lead
to a 
6MtC reduction in emissions. This figure
follows the internationally agreed methodology for
allocating emissions to individual states, which
prevents global double counting of emissions.
As such it does not take into account the carbon
emitted during the production of biofuels which
are produced abroad and used in the UK. When
this is taken into consideration the net global
reduction in carbon dioxide emissions is around
1MtC, equivalent to taking one million cars off the
road, without stopping people from travelling.

64
Transport



 Budget 2006 announced that the level of
obligation will be 
5% in 2008-09 and 
75% in
2009-
 This will ensure significant growth of
biofuels prior to reaching the 5% level in 2010-

 RTFO levels beyond 2010-11 will be set in
due course, but the Government intends that in
principle the target should rise beyond 5% after
2010-11, so long as infrastructural requirements
and fuel and vehicle technical standards allow,
and subject to the costs being acceptable to the
consumer. This will deliver additional carbon
savings from road transport.

 In the short term, the fuels that will be used to
meet the Obligation are almost certain to be
biofuels, which are available today and can easily
be blended into today's petrol and diesel and
used in any vehicle. Drivers filling up at petrol
stations will not notice any difference, as biofuels
used in low percentage blends do not change the
performance of cars.

 Today most biofuels come from crops including
oilseed rape and wheat. Biofuels can be blended
with fossil fuels and used in ordinary cars. In the
future we could see more advanced biofuels
made from waste and possibly even renewable
hydrogen. The Government is considering
how best to use the Obligation to
encourage innovation in this area, including
the development of advanced biofuel
production techniques to promote greater
carbon savings.

 The Government has also announced, subject to
State aids agreement, an Enhanced Capital
Allowance (ECA) scheme for the cleanest biofuels
production plant, to support innovation and help
develop the lowest-carbon biofuels production
methods. This will provide a 100% first-year
allowance for biofuels plant that meet certain
qualifying criteria and which make a good carbon
balance inherent in the design. The Government
has now applied for State aids approval and
envisages the scheme starting early in 


 To ensure that biofuels are sourced sustainably,
the Government is developing a robust carbon
and sustainability assurance scheme as part of the
Obligation. Obligated companies will be required
from day one to report on the level of carbon
savings achieved and on the sustainability of their
biofuel supplies.

 The Government is consulting on the details
of how the Obligation will work, and aims
to publish draft Regulations by early 


 We are also working to support the use of clean,
low carbon fuels:

 the Hydrogen and Fuel Cells Demonstration
Programme (referred to in the Energy
Chapter) will provide £15m support over the
next four years to demonstrate hydrogen and
fuel cells, including the use of hydrogen as a
transport fuel; and

 The Government has announced a new grant
programme to support an alternative re-
fuelling infrastructure. This could, for
example, include funding for hydrogen,
electric, bio-ethanol and natural gas/biogas
refuelling points

Improving the fuel efficiency
of vehicles

 We are taking action on a range of levels, from
voluntary agreements to fiscal measures to
information campaigns, to create incentives to
encourage consumers to make more
environmentally friendly choices and to make sure

65
Transport
4 Details of the grant programme are at www.est.org.uk/fleet/funding/infrastructurep.


that they can make informed decisions. And the
Energy Review will also be considering the medium
to long-term potential of technologies to reduce
carbon dioxide emissions in the transport sector.

 We have seen steady progress in improving the
average fuel efficiency of new cars sold in the
UK. New cars sold in the UK in 2004 were on
average some 10 per cent more fuel-efficient
than in 
 The rate of progress has slowed in
recent years, however, and new cars sold in 2005
were only 
9 per cent more fuel efficient on
average than new cars sold in 
 There is also
an increasing split between the company car
market, where average emissions of new vehicles
continue to fall, and that for private cars, where
progress has stagnated.

 The Government will also continue to
support the development, introduction and
take-up of new vehicle technologies to help
cut carbon dioxide emissions. The 2002
Powering Future Vehicles Strategy, which will be
reviewed during 2006, sets out the main policies
and targets in this area and a grant programme
supports research and development into low
carbon vehicle technologies
 The Government
will continue to fund the Low Carbon Vehicle
Partnership (LowCVP), a stakeholder
organisation set up in 2003 to help the shift
towards low carbon vehicles and fuels.

 The Government is committed to the Voluntary
Agreements on new car fuel efficiency
between the European Commission and the
automotive industry, which aim to improve the
average fuel efficiency of new cars sold in the EU
by 25 per cent by 2008-9 against a 1995
baseline. These have already led to improvements
in average new car fuel efficiency across the EU,
but, as indicated in the figure below, indications
are that the target is unlikely to be reached in
full. The target has been set at EU level, and, as
such, not all countries need to individually meet
the target in order for it to be reached on
average. However, by 2003 average new car
carbon dioxide emissions had been reduced by
only 12 per cent across the EU. The Government
is pressing for new targets beyond 140g/km after
2008 to be finalised as soon as possible. This
might deliver carbon savings of 
1 MtC in 2010,
potentially increasing to 
7MtC by 2015,
depending on the form it took.
European Community Strategy to reduce CO2
emissions from cars
The voluntary agreements on new car fuel
efficiency represent one of the three pillars of
the European Community’s Strategy to reduce
CO2 emissions from cars, launched in 
 The
aim of the strategy is to reach – by 2010 at the
latest – an average CO2 emission figure of 120
g/km from new passenger cars sold in the
European Union. The objective of the voluntary
agreements is to reduce average new car CO2
emissions to 140g/km by 2008-9, mainly
through technological developments. The other
two pillars of the Strategy are to improve
consumer information on the fuel-economy
of cars and market-based measures to
influence motorists’ choice towards more
fuel-efficient cars.
More information on the strategy can be found
at http://europa.eu.int/comm/environment/
co2/co2_home.htm The strategy is currently
being reviewed as part of the wider review of
the European Climate Change Programme.
The Low Carbon Vehicle Partnership is an
action and advisory group, established in
January 2003 to take the lead in accelerating
the shift to clean low carbon vehicles and fuels
in the UK.
LowCVP is a partnership of organisations from
the automotive and fuel industries,
Government, academia, environmental NGOs
and other stakeholders who are working
together on shared goals to make the shift
happen.

66
Transport
5 Details of the grant programme are at www.est.org.uk/fleet/funding/lowcarbonresearch/.


Average new car CO2 emissions in grams per km for the UK and EU
since 1995 (the base year of the voluntary agreement).
Note: ACEA = European Automobile Manufacturers Association
JAMA = Japanese Automobile Manufacturers Association
KAMA = Korean Automobile Manufacturers Association

 The Government is committed to using
vehicle taxation frameworks alongside other
policy instruments to support the move to
lower carbon transport. The Government
reformed Vehicle Excise Duty in 2001 to move to
a carbon dioxide-based graduated system, and
reformed company car tax in 2002 to move the
benefit in kind charge similarly to make it carbon-
based. It is estimated that this saved 200,000 to
300,000 tonnes of carbon in 2005 – and it is
expected to save up to 
65MtC in 


 The company car tax fuel benefit charge was also
reformed in 2003, and the Government
published, alongside Budget 2006, a consultation
on capital allowances for new business cars,
including options to introduce a range of first
year allowances for cars depending on carbon
emissions.

 Budget 2006 also announced further reforms to
Vehicle Excise Duty (VED) for cars, to sharpen
incentives to choose fuel-efficient cars. A new
higher band of VED (Band G) has been set at
£210 for the most polluting new cars, while VED
for the very lowest-emission vehicles has been
reduced to £0, to assist the development of the
low carbon vehicles market.

 To further promote environmentally friendly
vehicles, Budget 2006 announced that the
threshold for the minimum percentage charge
rate for calculating the company car tax benefit
in kind will be reduced from 140g CO2/km to
135g CO2/km in 2008-
 A new rate of 10% for
cars of 120g CO2 and below will also be
introduced from 2008-


 The chart below demonstrates the significant
annual savings that can be made on VED and
company car tax through opting for less polluting
vehicles. The figures are illustrative (as the
company care list price is held constant), however
they demonstrate the level of savings available to
motorists for a given company car list price.
Annual VED and company car tax paid on a typical petrol company car

 It is important that consumers have the best
possible information available to them when
they buy a car, so that they can make informed
choices, reflecting the benefits that lower
emissions vehicles bring. With this in mind, most
UK car showrooms now display colour-coded
fuel efficiency labels, developed and delivered
in close co-operation with the vehicle industry
and LowCVP, which are directly linked to the
Vehicle Excise Duty (VED) bands and which will
be familiar to consumers used to similar labels
for their household white goods.

£0£500

£1,000
£1,500
£2,000
£2,500

≥245240235230225220215210205200195190185180175170165160155150145140135130125120115110105≤100VED
Company car tax

CO2
 (g/km)

CO2 (g/km)120130140150160170180190200

2010200520001995

Year


ACEAUKEU
JAMA/

KAMA67
Transport


An example of the fuel economy label, reflecting the recent changes
to VED (note official VCA version not available at time of print)

 We are also awaiting a legislative proposal from
the European Commission which is likely to
propose a mandatory system of colour coded
fuel-efficiency labelling across the EU. The UK
strongly supports this approach, provided that
flexibility is built into the system so that Member
States can ensure compatibility with other
national policy measures.
Logistics

 In 2006 we will also look at how and
whether to expand the sustainable
distribution programmes to encourage
efficient operating practices in the
haulage/logistics industry through which we
have been able to give practical advice on
how to cut down on lorry mileage, on fuel
consumed and on accidents. This work should
deliver increasing carbon savings over time and
help reduce congestion as transport operators
integrate this best practice fully into their
everyday activities. In the meantime, we have
decided to allocate a one off budget increase of
£
5m to the Safe and Fuel Efficient Driving
scheme (SAFED) which aims both to provide
relevant training and to identify best practice
for truck and van drivers.

 Using rail instead of road to transport freight can
also cut carbon emissions. The amount of freight
moved by rail in terms of tonne kilometres has
increased by over 55 per cent since 1995/
 The
Government is currently spending around £20m
each year on grants for rail freight, which take
about 800,000 lorry movements off the road
each year.
The Food Industry Sustainability Strategy,
published by Defra in April 2006, challenges
the food and drink industry (manufacturers,
wholesalers, retailers and the food service
sector) to make significant reductions in the
external costs associated with the domestic
transportation of food, including road
congestion and carbon dioxide emissions, by
building upon current best practice and the
logistical improvements of the last decade.
Emissions from food transportation by the food
industry in the UK were about 
6MtC in 


68
Transport
Hydrogen and hybrid buses
The number 25 bus route runs the gamut of London traffic conditions in its journey between Oxford Circus
and Ilford, which makes it a perfect choice for the first hydrogen fuel cell trial bus route. These buses emit
only steam from their tailpipes, because they work by generating electricity from a fuel cell on the vehicle,
in which hydrogen reacts with oxygen from the air to form an electrical charge which powers the vehicle. If
the hydrogen can be produced from carbon-free sources such as renewable electricity, these vehicles could
lead to totally carbon-free transport.
In February 2006, the Mayor of London announced the addition by Transport for London (TfL) of six new,
environmentally friendly hybrid vehicles - the first ever such vehicles in London - to the London Buses fleet.
The hybrids operate on route 360, run by London Central. A leafy motif on the buses will help passengers
recognise their environmentally-friendly status. They use less fuel than a standard diesel bus, leading to a
substantial reduction in carbon dioxide emissions.


Encouraging a move towards more 
environmentally friendly means of 
transport

 We are putting record investment into public
transport to improve reliability and to give people
a real alternative to travelling by car.

 The UK now has the fastest growing railway in
Europe and we expect it to continue to grow.
Encouraging more people to use rail rather than
road helps because the average person travelling
by rail produces around half the carbon dioxide
emissions of the average person travelling by
car
 The Government will consider how new
technologies can improve energy efficiency
and reduce fuel consumption to get even
more environmental benefits from rail.

 A good bus network plays a similar role in cutting
congestion and carbon dioxide emissions. In the July
2004 Future of Transport White Paper we announced
further measures to develop the potential of
Quality Contracts, which give local authorities
greater powers to determine the bus network.

 The Government has also greatly increased
funding for local authority expenditure on
infrastructure schemes such as bus lanes, and has
funded many new services through the rural bus
grants and urban bus challenge.

 Alongside this investment in public transport, we
support a range of measures, called ‘smarter
choices’ which are aimed at helping people
choose sustainable travel options.

 The Government has also been encouraging local
authorities to make smarter choices an integral
part of their transport plans and have three
headline projects:

 with the Department for Education and Skills
we are working on a Travelling to School
initiative which aims to have active travel
plans in every school in England by the end of
the decade. We have already achieved our
interim target for 25% of schools to have an
active travel plan by March 2005;

 the Sustainable Travel Towns initiative aims to
create three showcase sustainable travel towns to
act as models for other local authorities and
show what can be achieved. Over five years, the
Department for Transport is providing revenue
funding for Darlington, Peterborough and
Worcester to help them achieve this; and

 we have set up an expert advisory body,
Cycling England, with an annual budget of
£5m a year for the next three years. Its work
programme includes £
8m a year for the
next three years for six cycle demonstration
towns to test the hypothesis that by
providing investment at the level sustained
by certain European towns which have seen
cycling increase, cycling in English towns can
be similarly increased. The towns are
Aylesbury, Brighton, Darlington, Derby, Exeter
and Lancaster (with Morecambe).
Woodfield Infant and St George’s Junior
Schools, Shrewsbury
The share of children at these schools who
walk, cycle or take the bus to school has risen
steadily from 46 per cent in 2000 to 56 percent
in 2004 – an impressive result as car use
continues to rise nationwide. Of particular note
is an almost doubling of the level of cycling at
both schools, to 7 per cent.
This success is down to a mix of imagination
and commitment. In 2001 many parents told
the schools that they were worried about the
traffic around the school entrances and about
the dangers of crossing local roads on their
route to school. By 2002, the schools had
produced their first joint travel plan offering:
cycle training, walking buses, Walk to School
Weeks and an innovative trailer bike loan
scheme for parents. This travel plan was
publicised at social and community events such
as a summer fete and with a ‘walk and cycle to
school’ winning entry in the 2003 Shrewsbury
Carnival. In 2004, the children themselves were
asked how they preferred to travel. Some
73 per cent chose walking and cycling – only
10 percent chose travelling by car.

69
Transport
6 Average emission factors are calculated using 2002 National Atmospheric Emissions Inventory CO2 emissions estimates by mode/vehicle type and data on
passenger kilometres and load factors from DfT Transport Statistics



 Other aspects of transport policy can help
support and reinforce the measures described
above. These include using technology to enable
the improved management of transport
networks and to help manage demand. For
instance in some local authority areas
sophisticated real time information and traffic
management systems are being used to provide
bus priority at traffic signals and information for
real-time passenger information displays.
Transport information services, such as Transport
Direct, can also help to encourage a move to
more environmentally friendly means of transport
by offering information on different forms of
transport, and helping travellers to make better-
informed travel decisions.

 Demand management on the road network can
include anything from relatively simple parking
measures to sophisticated road pricing schemes.
The Government is examining how pricing could
be used to address congestion in areas where it is
a problem today or soon will be. It is also
committed to using pricing in these areas in ways
that allow piloting of technology for a national
scheme in the longer term. Complementary public
transport and travel information, together with
pricing, can form an overall transport solution to
make a town or city a better place to live and
work. The Government is prepared to invest up to
£200m per annum between 2008/09 and
2014/15 from the Transport Innovation Fund to
support schemes involving road pricing, if suitable
packages are developed by local authorities.
Emissions trading schemes

 The Government has been examining the scope
for including surface transport in CO2 emissions
trading mechanisms. Whilst the results of our
work suggest this could be a means of delivering
carbon reductions at relatively low cost, there are
many issues to be addressed before a definitive
view can be taken about the desirability of
including surface transport in emissions trading.
These issues include the route for
implementation, the regulatory burden on current
and future participants, whether carbon savings
achieved occur within the surface transport sector
itself, the impact on carbon prices and the impact
on UK competitiveness.

 Drawing on the work we have already
carried out, we will engage with key
stakeholders, the European Commission and
other EU member states to help develop a
robust evidence base on the costs and
benefits of including surface transport in CO2
emissions trading at an EU level. We will also
continue to investigate the desirability of
introducing surface transport CO2 emissions
trading at a UK level, either as preparation
for EU-wide adoption or as a self-standing
measure.
Aviation

 At present, the emissions from international
aviation are not included either in the Kyoto
Protocol target, or the domestic carbon dioxide
goal, as there is no international agreement yet
on allocating these emissions to national
greenhouse gas inventories. We are continuing to
pursue such agreement with a view to their
inclusion within any future international climate
change regime. The Air Transport White Paper,
published in December 2003, acknowledged the
growing contribution that aviation emissions are
making towards climate change and recognised
the need for the aviation sector to take its share
of responsibility for tackling the problem of
climate change.

70
Transport



 UK forecasts suggest that by 2030 carbon dioxide
emissions from UK aviation could amount to
some 16 to 18 MtC7, of which over 90 per cent
would be from international flights. It has been
estimated that the climate change impact of
aircraft emissions are 2-4 times greater than that
of CO2 alone. Further research is required to
clarify the exact figure, but it is clear that the
impact of aviation on climate change is greater
than that due to direct CO2 emissions alone, due
to some of the other emissions released and their
specific effects at altitude (including increased
tropospheric ozone, contrail formation and a
small amount of methane destruction). Hence, as
set out in the Air Transport White Paper, aviation
could amount to about a quarter of the UK’s total
contribution to global warming by 


 We believe that the best way of ensuring that
aviation contributes towards climate stabilisation
is through a well-designed emissions trading
regime, because it allows a specific emissions
limit to be set and achieves that limit in the most
cost effective way.

 In light of this the Government made the
inclusion of aviation in the EU emissions trading
scheme by 2008 or as soon as possible thereafter,
a priority of the recent UK Presidency of the
European Union. Therefore we welcome the fact
that in December 2005 under our chairmanship
the EU Environment Council recognised that
emissions trading seems to be the best way
forward. The European Commission is taking
forward work through an Aviation Working
Group (within the European Climate Change
Programme) and will aim to bring forward draft
legislation by the end of 
 We are taking an
active role in this Working Group and will consult
on this legislative proposal in due course, taking
account of the full range of impacts, including on
the existing trading scheme.

 In line with our approach to Better Regulation, a
rigorous impact assessment will be central to
policy decisions. Some of the key issues to
consider are:

 how the non-CO2 impacts of aviation should
be covered;

 the geographical coverage of aviation
emissions under the scheme;

 the trading entity – who should be made
responsible for surrendering allowances and
be allowed to trade;

 allocation methodology – how many allowances
should be available, who should allocate them
and how they would be allocated;

 how to integrate aviation into the EU scheme,
given that emissions from international
aviation are not covered by assigned amount
units (AAUs) under the Kyoto Protocol;

 monitoring, reporting and verification – the
emission measurement or calculation method
to be used and the agent responsible for
monitoring and reporting emissions; and

 the impact on the allowance price of the
current scheme – forecasting allowance prices
is complicated and uncertain but an
understanding of the impact on the allowance
price should form part of the impact
assessment of any legislative proposal.

 The Government is also continuing to press for
the development and implementation, through
the International Civil Aviation Organization, of
emissions trading at the international level. It is
also pressing for other ways of tackling aviation
emissions, including:

 the adoption by airports, airlines and air traffic
controllers – including the European
Organisation for the Safety of Air Navigation
(EUROCONTROL) – of working practices that
minimise the impact of their activities on
climate change;

71
Transport
7 The Future of Air Transport, DfT 2003
8 As an analytical device, UK aviation is defined here as all domestic services plus all international departures from the UK, there being no international
agreement yet on how to divide international emissions into national contributions.



 research and development by aerospace
manufacturers of new technologies to reduce
the climate change impact of future aircraft;

and


 voluntary action by airlines, airports and
aerospace companies to control greenhouse
gas emissions and develop sustainability
strategies (such as the Sustainable Aviation
strategy). Such action should include emissions
reporting and targets at a company level.

 All these measures provide a solid foundation for
action in tackling aviation’s global impacts, but
we realise that they may not provide a total
solution. In view of this, the Government will
continue to explore and discuss options for the
use of economic instruments for tackling
aviation's greenhouse gas emissions. The
Government has made it clear that it reserves the
right to act alone or bilaterally if progress at an
international level proves too slow.
Carbon offsetting

 We recognise the potential of carbon offsetting
to help raise awareness of the environmental
impact of travel and other activities. Investment in
high quality offset projects (for example through
the Clean Development Mechanism) can deliver
certified emission reductions to offset
unavoidable emissions and often provide
additional sustainable development benefits.

 Carbon offsetting of air travel emissions played a
large part in minimising the environmental impact
of the UK’s G8 Presidency. As a result, the Kuyasa
low-income housing energy upgrade project (the
first Clean Development Mechanism project to be
accredited in Africa) was selected to offset the G8
Presidency. Emissions arising from the UK’s
Presidency of the EU are to be offset in a similar

way.


 We are developing this approach to offset
emissions arising from central Government air
travel through a Government Carbon Offsetting
Fund from April 
 We are also encouraging
other sectors to consider the value of offsetting
and we welcome recent airline initiatives,
allowing customers to voluntarily calculate and
offset emissions from their flights.
Shipping

 The UK is also playing an active role in reducing
emissions from Shipping.

 In the medium to long term, technological
improvements may deliver carbon savings. For
example, developments in marine engine
manufacturing, the use of propulsion systems
other than diesel engines and alternative fuels
could all offer ways to cut carbon dioxide
emissions.

 Working within the International Maritime
Organization (IMO), the UK made a significant
contribution at the latest Maritime Environment
Protection Committee (MEPC) negotiations on
the adoption of Interim Guidelines for Voluntary
Ship CO2 Emission Indexing for Use in Trials. Ships
under the United Kingdom flag are being
encouraged to participate in these trials, which
will help identify a ship’s greenhouse gas index.
Other Measures

 The Highways Agency is working hard to
improve its environmental performance and has
made substantial progress. The energy it uses to
light the network and provide communications
systems is now sourced in a greener way: 15 per
cent will come from clean energy and the rest
through good-quality Combined Heat and Power.
The Agency has also adopted innovative
construction techniques and materials, cutting
both the embodied energy needs of roads and
the energy used in transporting materials. On
recent projects such techniques have saved tens
of thousands of lorry trips. Beyond that, it is
investigating the wider use of solar panels and
inter-seasonal heat transfer systems.

72
Transport



 On the issue of the extra carbon dioxide
emissions that road improvements generate, we
estimate that the road improvements this decade
will only have a small impact – offsetting just 10
per cent of the net carbon savings expected from
the Renewable Transport Fuel Obligation in 


 We will also conduct a feasibility study into the
potential carbon emission reductions, and other
environmental benefits, of an accreditation
scheme for UK companies that implement best
practice and show improvements in the
environmental performance of their transport
operations. Such a scheme could cover a wide
range of issues, from the efficiency of HGVs
and/or company cars to the travel modes used
by employees when commuting and travelling
for work.

73
Transport


CHAPTER SIX
Domestic

74
In 2004, the domestic sector was responsible for around 27 per cent of total UK carbon dioxide emissions on
an end user basis. Emissions had fallen to about 2 per cent below 1990 levels by 2004 and we estimate that,
including the expected impact of the new measures included in this Programme, they will fall further, to
almost 16 per cent below 1990 levels by 

Greenhouse gas emissions had fallen by about 5 per cent between the base year and 
 We estimate
that with the additional measures introduced in this Programme, they could fall further to almost 16 per
cent below base year levels by 

The Government is committed to taking action to cut carbon dioxide emissions from the domestic sector.
Tackling household energy usage is an effective way not only to reduce emissions but also to support
progress towards wider economic and social objectives. Although most energy efficiency measures are very
cost-effective, generating net benefits to consumers, significant barriers remain, especially the lack
of consumer demand for energy efficiency measures.
Measures introduced in the Climate Change Programme 2000 are estimated to save around 
6 MtC in 

The Energy Efficiency Commitment (
6 MtC), Building Regulations (
5 MtC), and fuel poverty programmes
(
4 MtC) are the main contributors in carbon terms, with product policy and information, advice and
support also playing a key role.
New measures that will deliver additional carbon savings to 2010 are:

 seeking to achieve substantially higher carbon savings from the Energy Efficiency Commitment in 2008-

 We will consider with stakeholders how to provide as much flexibility as possible in the range of
measures that can be employed;

 the Code for Sustainable Homes which has minimum standards for energy and water efficiency at every
level of the Code, with the lowest levels raised above the level of mandatory building regulations;

 the update to the Building Regulations in April 2006 to raise energy standards of new build and
refurbished buildings. The cumulative effect of these and the 2002 and 2005 changes to the Building
Regulations is substantial, giving a 40 per cent improvement in the energy efficiency of new buildings.
We are also conducting a review of measures to improve the sustainability of existing buildings, which
will be completed by summer 2006;

 more reliable consumer product information and setting effective standards for energy-using products
via voluntary agreements, in particular a new initiative with major retailers, the Eco-design of Energy
Using Products (EUP) framework Directive and other national, EU and international policy measures and
initiatives, including public procurement;

 enabling consumption feedback to households via improved billing and metering;

 continuing to tackle fuel poverty through the Warm Front and Decent Homes programmes; and

 continuing to support the activities of the Energy Saving Trust and the Climate Change Communications
Initiative to raise awareness about climate change and the action individuals can take to help tackle it.
We are launching a major new initiative designed to strengthen consumer demand for energy efficiency,
working closely with local authorities, energy suppliers, and others, with funding of £20m over the next
two years.
Together, it is estimated that these new measures will contribute an additional 
2 MtC of carbon savings in
2010, bringing total savings in 2010 to 
8 MtC.


Introduction

 In 2004 the domestic sector was responsible for
about 30 per cent of total UK energy use and
about 27 per cent of carbon dioxide emissions on
an end user basis. That energy is used by a wide
range of different appliances in the home – with
around 60 per cent used for heating, 20 per cent
for hot water and the remainder for lighting and
appliances.

 A range of different approaches are required to
tackle domestic energy efficiency effectively.
These include the provision of information and
advice to consumers, such as energy labels on
new appliances, incentives, such as reduced VAT
on energy saving materials, voluntary agreements
with retailers and manufacturers, regulations,
such as minimum standards for buildings and
appliances, or supplier obligations such as the
Energy Efficiency Commitment.

 There are many potential barriers to the take-up
of energy efficiency measures in the home.
People can be reluctant to introduce energy
efficiency measures, even when they are
demonstrably cost effective, for a variety of
reasons – lack of awareness and information, lack
of capital for the up-front investment required or
other spending priorities, inertia, or an
unwillingness to become involved in even limited
building improvements, because of the ‘hassle
factor’ for example. To correct these market
failures, the Government recognises that different
policy interventions are sometimes necessary.
The case for government intervention needs to
be built on a firm evidence base, with decisions
taking account of wider economic and social
objectives. Where the case for intervention is
seen, the most cost-effective and well-targeted
package of measures need to be used. But the
Government cannot deliver this alone – it will
need changes in consumer attitudes and
behaviour if we are to successfully make a step-
change in energy efficiency and tackle the trend
towards rising energy demand that has been
predominant for recent decades.
Greenhouse gas emissions inventory
and projections

 In 1990 greenhouse gas emissions from this
sector were 
8 MtC1, they had fallen to 
7
MtC in 2004 and they are projected to be 
7
MtC in 
 Carbon dioxide emissions in 1990
were 
4MtC, and fell by 
6MtC over the
decade to reach 
8MtC in 
 This small net
change was the result of the interaction between
several much larger individual contributions over
the decade. Three factors had a major influence
on carbon dioxide emissions:

 growth in demand for the underlying energy
services (such as warmer homes, hot water,
and home entertainment) – up nearly 30 per
cent, i.e. 
5 MtC;

 background improvement in energy efficiency
– over 1 per cent per annum or a 12 per cent
reduction, i.e. 
5 MtC; and

 reduction in the carbon intensity of grid
electricity resulting from the switch from coal
to gas generation – worth over 20 per cent of
household emissions, i.e. 8 MtC.
Together with other smaller factors (such as fuel
switching by householders and changes in
external temperatures), which reduced emissions
by around 1 MtC, these resulted in an overall net
reduction of 6 per cent, or around 
5 MtC.

75
Domestic
1 Emissions from the generation of electricity used by this sector are included in the total figures

76
Domestic

 Over 2000-10, before the effects of policies in
this programme are taken into account, emissions
under Business as Usual (BAU) would now be
expected to remain almost constant, increasing
by only 
3 MtC, from 
8 MtC in 2000 to

1 MtC in 
 However, policy savings,
which are calculated net of BAU savings, are
expected to reduce annual emissions by 
8 MtC
below the BAU emissions figure for 2010, so that
emissions in 2010 are projected to be 
3 MtC.
These policy savings consist of 
6 MtC from
policies in the 2000 programme and a further

2 MtC from the new measures introduced in
this programme. These savings will keep us on
track to meet our 2010 targets for household
energy efficiency


 As with the previous decade, the very small net
change in estimated BAU emissions for 2000-
2010 is the result of several larger effects: this
time, they more or less cancel out.
These are:

 upward pressure from service demand
increases (slightly less than in the 1990s as
gas central heating installations saturate) at
nearly 25 per cent, i.e. around 
5 MtC;

 decreases from the background level of
energy efficiency improvement (ie before the
additional effects of policies are counted), very
similar to that over 1990-2000, at 12 per
cent, i.e. around 
5 MtC;
2 Our targets are: savings of 
5 MtC from households in England by 2010 (as set out in the Energy Efficiency Action Plan 2004, in fulfilment of the
Sustainable Energy Act 2003); and to improve household energy efficiency in England by 20 per cent by 2010, from a 2000 baseline (Housing Act 2004).
Cooking

8%
Space
heating

41%
Water
heating

18%
Lights &
appliances

33%

Solid

10%Gas37%
Electricity

48%Oil5%
Cooking

5%
Space
heating

53%
Water
heating

20%
Lights &
appliances

22%

Solid

3%Gas54%
Electricity

36%
Source: Defra
Domestic carbon emissions
20031990
By fuel
By end use

Oil7%


 smaller reduction than in the 1990s from
changes in the generators’ fuel mix, probably
around 3 MtC; and

 a net reduction from smaller factors,
i.e. around 1 MtC.
The overall Business as Usual (BAU) effect is
projected to be a small increase of 
3 MtC over
the decade.

 The main sources of other greenhouse gases from
the domestic sector are methane from domestic
waste disposed in landfill and hydrofluorocarbons
from domestic refrigeration. Landfill methane
emissions are expected to be around 70 per cent
lower in 2010 than 1990, as a result of measures
to collect and burn landfill gas and reduced
waste disposal in landfill. Hydrofluorocarbon
emissions are expected to increase from 
1 to

8 MtC from 1990 to 2010, due to their use as
replacements for ozone-depleting refrigerants.
Projections of greenhouse gas emissions from the domestic sector and
the estimated effect of additional quantified measures, MtC
1990 1995 2000 20102005 2015 2020

Mt C3032343638404244464850
Historical trend
Baseline with measures projections
Additional quantified measures

77
Domestic
3 Figures may not add up due to rounding
Greenhouse gas emissions from the domestic sector, MtC
Gas Base year 1990 1995 2000 2004 2010 2015 2020
Carbon dioxide 
4 
4 
1 
8 
7 
5 
0 
0
Methane 
2 
2 
3 
6 
2 
2 
0 
8
Nitrous oxide 
2 
2 
2 
1 
1 
2 
2 
1
HFCs 
1 
0 
1 
6 
7 
8 
8 
8
Total 
9 
8 
7 
1 
7 
7 
9 
7
Change from base year -
2 -
3 -
7 -
8 -
0 -
9
Note: the percentage changes and emission estimates may differ slightly due to rounding
Existing measures Carbon savings in 2010 (MtC)
EEC (2002-05) 
4
EEC (2005-08) 
6
EEC (2008-11) 
6*
Building Regulations 2006 including 2005 condensing
boilers update 
8
Building Regulations 2002 
7
Warm Front and fuel poverty programmes 
4
Other measures 
2
TOTAL 
63
*Note: This does not include the proposed increase to EEC savings – see below.


Energy Efficiency Commitment (EEC)

 The Energy Efficiency Commitment (EEC) is the
principal policy mechanism driving increases in
the efficiency of existing homes. Under EEC,
electricity and gas suppliers are required to
achieve targets for the promotion of energy
efficiency improvements in the domestic sector.
These targets do not prescribe how suppliers
should attain these improvements. Suppliers can
fulfil their obligations by carrying out any
combination of approved measures including
installing insulation or supplying and promoting
low-energy light bulbs, high efficiency appliances
or boilers. The only constraint on the suppliers’
activity is that they must achieve at least half of
their energy savings in households on income-
related benefits and tax credits.

 The first phase of EEC ran from April 2002 to
March 
 Energy suppliers successfully met
their targets and were able to bank additional
activity into the next phase of the scheme. EEC
2002-05 is expected to save 
37 MtC annually
by 
 The current phase of EEC running from
April 2005 to March 2008 will deliver roughly
double the level of activity of EEC 2002-05 and is
expected to achieve carbon savings of around

62 MtC annually by 


 Since April 2002 EEC has delivered energy saving
measures to consumers, with overall cost-
effectiveness of about £300 per tonne of carbon
saved (i.e. net benefits) and costs to suppliers of
around £
20 per customer per fuel year
 The
assumed average cost of the current phase of
EEC to energy suppliers is estimated at less than
£9 per fuel per customer per year. To put this
indicative figure in context, energy bills in Great
Britain currently average around £340 and £530
per year for electricity and gas respectively5, so
this contribution equates to around 2 per cent of
household bills. On average, these costs will be
more than outweighed, by the end of EEC2, by
the benefits householders enjoy in the form of
reduced fuel bills or increased comfort from
installing the subsidised energy efficiency
measures on offer. These benefits continue for
the lifetime of the measure


 The Energy Efficiency Innovation Review7 looked
in detail at the scope to further expand EEC, and
has concluded that it would be feasible and cost-

78
Domestic
4 Assessment of EEC 2002-05 Carbon, Energy and Cost Savings, (Defra 2006), www.defra.gov.uk/environment/energy/eec/pdf/eec-assessment.pdf
5 Source: Energywatch, March 

6 Assuming around 12 years for appliances and 40 years for cavity wall insulation, for example
7 www.defra.gov.uk/environment/energy/eeir/index.htm
Additional measures Carbon savings in 2010 (MtC)
Increased activity in EEC (2008-11) 
5*
Provision of advice to stimulate early replacement of
inefficient boilers and implementation of the
Energy Performance of Buildings Directive 
2
Package of measures to improve energy efficiency
in buildings 
1
Better billing and metering 
2
Products Policy: consumer information and standards
for lights and other energy-using products (EUPs) 
2
TOTAL 
2
* This is the median figure from the range of proposed EEC (2008-11) levels


effective to do so. However, an increasing share
of EEC activity is likely to come from the
installation of insulation in privately owned
homes, compared to the earlier years when
activity in social housing predominated.
Awareness needs to be raised to increase
demand. To encourage consumers to take
up energy efficiency measures, the
Government is launching a major new
initiative, working closely with local
authorities, energy suppliers and others to
help overcome consumers’ reluctance to
invest in measures, with funding of
£20m over the next two years.

 With the current phase of EEC underway for less
than a year, it is too early to set a firm target for
the next phase. The Government believes that
in its third phase, which runs from 2008-11,
the Energy Efficiency Commitment could
offer more options for delivery of carbon
savings, with a larger range of eligible
measures and more scope for innovation and
competition among companies to encourage
consumers to reduce their energy demand.
The scheme must, however, remain cost-effective
and practical and the overall policy framework
needs to continue to take account of wider social
considerations. The design and scale of the
scheme will be set following the review (which
has already started) and public consultation in

 The Government believes that it could
deliver about 
9 to 
2 MtC per year by 


 The Government intends to consider with all
stakeholders how to provide as much
flexibility as possible in the range of
measures that can be employed to meet EEC
targets, for example microgeneration,
renewables, smart metering and behavioural
measures. Legislative amendments currently
being considered as part of the Climate Change
and Sustainable Energy Bill would allow the
Government more flexibility in extending the
range of measures suppliers could use to meet
obligations in the domestic sector. The provisions
would only be implemented following full
analysis and consultation on the practical
implications, potential benefits and disbenefits
of such an approach, and would be included in
our consultation process for the next phase of
the EEC.

 The Government recognises the important role
that market mechanisms can play in delivering
environmental benefits at least cost and in a way
that gives flexibility and stimulates innovation by
business and has therefore commissioned a study
to critically evaluate existing mechanisms and the
potential to introduce new market-based
mechanisms to deliver energy efficiency, with a
particular focus on households. The Government
has recently published this work and will use its
conclusions to inform the EEC review, particularly
the question of whether and if so, how enhanced
trading should be incorporated into the EEC
framework from 


 The Government also recognises that appropriate
transitional arrangements between one phase of
the EEC and the next are essential to ensure
effective delivery of higher targets. The
Government intends to allow unlimited
carry-over of activity from the current phase
of EEC to the next and will establish
effective transitional arrangements
following appropriate consultation and
analysis providing clarity as soon as possible
on practical arrangements. Budget 2006
announced that suppliers will be able to count
extra work carried out in this EEC period towards
their targets in the next period. As a result, British
Gas, EDF, npower, PowerGen, and Scottish and
Southern Energy have already announced that
they will carry out between them an extra
250,000 subsidised installations of home
insulation over the next two years. This will bring
forward annual carbon savings of 35,000 tonnes
and reduce annual household bills by around
£20 million.

79
Domestic


Building Regulations

 Building Regulations8 are steadily driving up the
energy standards of new and refurbished
buildings. Since 1990, the energy efficiency of
new buildings has increased by 70 per cent. For
example, a house built to the 2002 standards
uses about half the energy consumed in the
average existing house. The 2002 Building
Regulations are expected to deliver reductions in
carbon dioxide emissions in 2010 of 
7 MtC in
the domestic sector.

 In September 2005, the Government announced
further changes to the Building Regulations to
make buildings more energy efficient. From April
2006 these new measures will deliver increased
energy efficiency standards for new buildings of
up to 27 per cent in non-domestic buildings,
22 per cent in houses and 18 per cent in flats.
On average the energy efficiency improvement in
dwellings will be 20 per cent, which reflects the
growing proportion of flats being built with more
people now living alone.

 The new measures, taken together with the 2002
revisions, will improve new build standards of
energy efficiency by 40 per cent and cut fuel bills
by up to 40 per cent for new homes built from
2006 compared to pre-April 2002 new build. The
latest changes to new building standards and
requirements for condensing boilers are expected
to deliver carbon savings of around 
75MtC per
year by 
 One provision of the revised
Building Regulations came into force in April
2005, requiring all new and replacement boilers
to be at least B-rated condensing boilers, subject
to some exemptions. This has been a major
success and has had the effect of rapidly
increasing the market share of the most efficient
condensing boilers.

 The Building Regulations do not currently address
the fabric of a significant proportion of the existing
building stock, which dominates the overall impact
of buildings. There is significant potential to reduce
carbon emissions further through an improvement
in the energy efficiency performance of existing
buildings. The Government is currently
undertaking a wide-ranging review to
identify measures to improve the
sustainability of the existing building stock,
including energy efficiency and will put
recommendations to ministers by the summer
of 


 The Government is aware of the need for greater
compliance with the Building Regulations.
Therefore, as part of the 2006 revisions to the
Building Regulations, the Government has
engaged in an unprecedented dissemination
programme aimed at ensuring that all
stakeholders can acquaint themselves with the
changes and what they mean in practice. This
programme includes “train-the-trainer”
workshops for over 200 industry trainers,
seminars and regional road-shows for Building
Control Bodies. An e-learning pack that walks
through the new Part L as applied in an example
building situation will be issued to every Building
Control Surveyor. We have also introduced a
requirement for random sample air leakage
testing of buildings. This will help secure better
compliance by showing where there is
unacceptable air leakage, which can reduce the
energy efficiency of the building.

80
Domestic
8 The same Building Regulations do not apply UK-wide: those in England and Wales are shared, while Northern Ireland and Scotland have separate
Regulations.
9 Note that the carbon savings quoted here are larger than those recently published by the Office of the Deputy Prime Minister (ODPM), for a number of
reasons: the figure here applies to the UK (ODPM to England and Wales only), include savings for an additional year, allow for increased demand for comfort
and hot water by 2010, and assume a slightly larger number of boiler replacements each year.


Code for Sustainable Homes

 The Code for Sustainable Homes will set out
voluntary standards beyond those required by
Building Regulations and further contribute to
decreasing the environmental impact of housing
growth. The lowest level will be above Building
Regulations. It will cover a range of
environmental impacts including energy, water
and waste, with minimum standards of energy
and water efficiency at every level of the Code.
This will ensure that builders cannot trade energy
and water efficiency for other kinds of
improvements. To encourage on site energy
generation, new homes that use micro-renewable
technology such as wind turbines will gain extra
Code points.

 Importantly, the Code will form the basis for the
next set of improvements to building regulations
to ensure that industry can have certainty in the
longer term regarding the minimum levels they
will be expected to build to. The Code will apply
to all new buildings, with the initial focus on
new housing.

 Once the Code is launched, all new homes
funded by the Government or its agencies,
including through relevant public-private
partnerships, will have to meet Code level 

As an interim measure, these homes will have
to meet the new EcoHomes Very Good 2006
standard from 1 April, which is broadly equivalent
to Code level 
 The Government is now looking
at how to encourage new homes to be built to
the highest levels of the Code.
Setting an example
The Government, working with partners,
including English Partnerships, is showing
leadership in creating exemplar sustainable
new settlements in the growth areas, of which
Northstowe, Cambridgeshire will be one of
the first.

81
Domestic

0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%

1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Jan-06
A B C D E F G Unknown

2 
4


8


9 
4


2



2



8

Weighted Average 
Transformation of the market for domestic boilers 1999-2005: boiler deliveries by efficiency (coloured bands) with increasing average efficiency
(black line) (Source: Society of British Gas Industries)


Energy Performance of Buildings
Directive

 The Government will also be implementing
elements of the EU Energy Performance of
Buildings Directive (EUPD) from April 

The Directive lays down requirements on the
application of minimum standards for the energy
performance of new buildings and on the
performance of large existing buildings
undergoing major renovation. It also requires the
provision of energy performance certificates
when buildings are constructed, sold or rented
out, and the display of these certificates in public
buildings over 1000m


 One of the key provisions of the Directive is the
regular inspection of boilers, or an equivalent
national advice system, and the inspection of air
conditioning systems in buildings
 We estimate
that the effect of this, including the early
replacement of boilers brought about by advice
could deliver additional savings of up to 
2 MtC
in 


 Other key provisions of the Directive are:

 minimum energy performance requirements
for all new buildings;

 minimum energy performance requirements
for large existing buildings subject to major
renovation; and

 requirement to consider renewable energy
and CHP in new buildings over 1000sqm.

 The energy used in buildings represents around
45 per cent of carbon dioxide emissions in the
UK. There is significant potential for cost-effective
energy savings in the stock of existing buildings –
only some 2 per cent of the building stock at any
given time is under construction or undergoing
refurbishment that is subject to current Building
Regulations.

 Given this potential, we have commenced a
review of the existing building stock as
mentioned earlier in the chapter. It will not only
examine what more can be done to improve
energy efficiency but go further and consider
how existing buildings can make more efficient
use of other resources – especially water. The
review will be wide ranging and cover the whole
spectrum of tools available to us from regulatory
and non-regulatory measures to demonstration
through leadership and market pull. It will
identify cost effective measures that can be
readily employed to improve the sustainability
of the existing building stock.

 The Government is exploring what more can be
done to implement the EPBD in ways that
encourage greater carbon savings.

 In the Energy Efficiency Action Plan we
committed to procuring buildings in the upper
quartile of energy performance. The technical
basis for this commitment will be developed as
part of ODPM’s work to develop the non-
domestic energy rating methodologies necessary
under the Energy Performance of Buildings
Directive.

 Better communication and advice is highlighted
as one way of tackling the failure to recognise
the economic case for energy-saving measures.
One means through which the Government will
be delivering this is the requirement of the Energy
Performance of Buildings Directive for an energy
performance certificate to be made available to
the prospective owner or tenant when buildings
are constructed, sold or rented out. Home
Information Packs, being introduced in June 2007
under the Housing Act 2004, will deliver this for
residential properties on marketed sale. The Packs
will include a ‘Home Condition Report’, part of
which will be an energy survey for prospective
buyers that will specify the energy efficiency of
the property. The survey will also provide
information on energy efficiency measures
together with a potential SAP rating12 that the
property could achieve if those measures were
carried out.

 The Government estimates that the
Sustainable Buildings Code, the Energy
Performance in Buildings Directive, the
commitment on procuring public buildings,

82
Domestic
10 www.europa.eu.int/eur-lex/pri/en/oj/dat/2003/l_001/l_00120030104en
pdf
11 In accordance with article 8(b) of the Energy Performance Buildings Directive.
12 The Standard Assessment Procedure is the Government's recommended system for energy rating of dwellings.


and further measures coming out of the
review of the existing building stock,
together could deliver additional carbon
savings of 
1 MtC in 
 ODPM and Defra
will work together to establish how this
level of carbon savings could be delivered.
In addition to this, the provision of advice to
stimulate the early replacement of inefficient
boilers and the effective use of heating and
hot water controls could deliver additional
carbon savings of up to 
2 MtC in 

Encouraging consumer choice
and raising standards

 Most household energy is used by gas heating
equipment. Nevertheless almost a quarter of all
the electricity used in the UK is used by domestic
appliances and lighting systems. As products
such as washing machines and TVs achieve near
universal take-up, new services, such as digital TV
and broadband communications, pose new
challenges. Not only are these appliances energy-
hungry, but also, as users, most of us are also
energy-lazy. For example, we leave appliances to
consume around £650m worth of electricity
annually (£25 per household) while on standby
and power supplies and chargers permanently
plugged in.

 Our targets for saving energy in households
depend on a policy package which, over time,
removes the inefficient products from use, and
builds markets for the most resource efficient
goods and services. Consumer education is
important, encouraging better behaviours and
raising expectations that goods and services
should be designed to be energy efficient and
not waste energy. But there is also the need for
Government to work with industry to set and to
drive up product performance standards that can
meet those expectations.

 The Government’s Market Transformation
Programme (MTP)13 works with industry and
other stakeholders to drive and underpin
sustainable improvements in the energy efficiency
and other environmental characteristics of
products. It does this via policy measures which
assess and rank the performance of energy-using
products, establish performance information,
including labels, to encourage innovation and
competition, and identify appropriate levels for
rising minimum, average, or best practice
standards which show how product performance
would need to develop over time if the
sustainability commitments are to be met.

 The Government committed last July in
Gleneagles to promote an international 1-Watt
Initiative to reduce these emissions, and is
concerned that progress in reducing them is too
slow. The Government believes that voluntary
agreements can be an effective way to raise
standards and reduce carbon emissions. Budget
2006 announced a new initiative, in
partnership with major retailers and the
Energy Saving Trust, to introduce voluntary
schemes in the retail sector that encourage
the purchase of more energy efficient
alternatives in consumer electronics.

 The Eco-design of Energy Using Products (EUP)
framework Directive now provides a formal
mechanism for establishing product standards.
EUP permits Member States and the EU to signal
to industry their product innovation priorities, to
negotiate and, if necessary, to set mandatory
energy and other eco-design requirements for
energy-using products which are placed on the
EU market. The Commission estimates that this
measure alone could reduce EU energy
consumption by around 10 per cent
 Clearly,
if successful, this could avoid the costs that can
arise from overlapping national programmes
which aim to achieve the same result. EUP will
integrate with a wide range of existing EU
measures dealing with the energy performance of
domestic appliances including mandatory energy
labelling of domestic appliances, minimum
standards directives which remove the worst
performing appliances from the market place and
a number of existing industry self commitments.
Although the focus of the directive is on setting
mandatory standards, a clear intention is to
encourage voluntary action by manufacturers to
improve their products, which would make

83
Domestic
13 www.defra.gov.uk/environment/consumerprod/mtp/ and www.mtprog.com/
14 By way of comparison, a recent IEA study on energy savings in California attributes 30 per cent of all energy saved to product standards of the type
envisaged in EUP.


regulatory action unnecessary. The Government
would prefer voluntary agreements where
they are effective and has already committed
to proactively follow this policy approach
and, supported by the Market
Transformation Programme, is actively
determining UK priorities to negotiate with
the Commission and other Member States.
The Commission has identified 14 priority
product sectors including consumer
electronics, lighting, heating, white goods
and electric motors.

 The first implementation measures under EUP will
be introduced at the earliest in 2008 and therefore
the Government is actively pursuing other
measures, both in the UK and internationally,
to raise product standards. These include:

 industry voluntary agreements – such as
the new initiative mentioned above and the
Code of Conduct on Digital TV Services. As a
result of this code over half the set-top boxes
in UK homes now consume significantly less
than they would have done and the UK has
been able to avoid carbon emissions of an
estimated 
4 MtC per annum at virtually
no cost;

 embedding product standards into
Building Regulations – such as raising the
standards of new and replacement boilers
through the Building Regulations;

 product endorsement via schemes such as
the Energy Saving Trust’s ‘Energy Saving
Recommended’ logo;

 procurement policy – the Government and
the wider public sector can use their market
leverage to promote energy efficient products
and buildings. The UK Procurement Task Force
is due to publish an action plan in April 2006;

and


 the International Task Force on
Sustainable Products – a UK initiative,
responding to G8 and wider international
commitments to promote more co-operation
on labelling and standards policy, encouraging
international benchmarking, looking ahead at
least 10-20 years.

84
Domestic



 Statutory labels15 providing relative performance
information for traded goods need to be
established at the EU level but are often
supported by additional national schemes
promoting the best appliances, for example the
Energy Saving Trust’s Energy Saving
Recommended logo
 In conjunction with the
Energy Efficiency Commitment, regulations and
other policy instruments, labelling has
transformed the market for key domestic
appliances as shown below.
Market Share of A Rated Cold Appliances (Source: GfK Retail Audit)
Market Share of A Rated Wet Appliances (Source: GfK Retail Audit)
Consumer engagement

 The Energy Saving Trust’s (EST) activities are
designed to underpin and complement the work
of other actors in energy efficiency markets. In
particular it seeks to work with key Government
policy drivers for domestic energy efficiency –
EEC, Warm Front, Decent Homes and Building
Regulations. Its principal activities are aimed at
increasing demand for energy efficiency by raising
awareness, providing advice and support for
action. It also supports the supply of energy
efficiency products and services to meet this
demand by developing partnerships, stimulating
innovation, supporting training and providing
accreditation.

 The EST’s energy efficiency activity is grant
funded by Defra. The Trust also receives funding
from Scottish Executive, from the Department of
Transport to run transport programmes and from
the Department of Trade and Industry to run
renewable energy programmes.

 The EST is piloting the development of a
Sustainable Energy Network (SEN), a network of
regional delivery agencies that aims to support
national awareness raising of sustainable energy
and translate householder awareness into
practical action. EST has set up three Sustainable
Energy Centres which build on the approach of
existing Energy Efficiency Advice Centres by
providing increased resources, more support for
action and covering small-scale renewable energy
and transport as well as energy efficiency. Defra
has provided additional funding of £10m over
three years for the SEN Pilot.

 An increasing share of energy efficiency activity
under EEC is likely to come from the installation
of insulation in privately owned homes, compared
to the earlier years when activity in social housing
predominated. The Energy Efficiency Innovation
Review identified barriers to the uptake of energy
efficiency measures that will need to be
overcome:

 the widespread misapprehension about
installing insulation with regard to its costs,
benefits, and the disruption it causes; and

Share(%)0102030405060708090100
Dishwashers Washer
Dryers
Washing
Machines
2004-052002-032000-011998-991996-97

Share(%)
Includes A+

0102030405060708090
Freezers Fridge Freezers Refrigerators
2004-052002-032000-011998-991996-97

85
Domestic
15 The mandatory EU Energy label currently covers domestic refrigeration appliances, washing machines, electric tumble dryers, washer dryers, dishwashers,
lamps, electric ovens and air conditioners (see www.defra.gov.uk/environment/consumerprod/energylabels/index.htm)
16 www.est.org.uk/myhome/efficientproducts/recommended/



 consumers’ lack of confidence in offers made
by energy suppliers and the installation
industry, and lack of awareness of the
independent 25-year guarantees for cavity
wall insulation fitted by registered installers.

 The EEIR also recognised that acting alone, the
EEC suppliers are unlikely to be able to tackle
these barriers. As part of the Government’s
ongoing work to help overcome these barriers,
we will continue to highlight the benefits of
energy efficiency measures and the links between
what EEC offers and our wider climate change
targets. As set out above, the Government will
launch a £20m programme, working closely with
local authorities and energy suppliers, to help
raise levels of consumer demand for energy
efficiency measures.
Energy Services

 In January 2006, HM Treasury hosted a high-level
summit to explore the potential for energy
services – energy services is a shift away from
providing units of energy towards a focus on the
services delivered from the use of energy. Energy
services appear to have the potential to overcome
a number of the barriers to delivery of efficiency
in the domestic sector. Participants agreed that
growing public awareness of climate change and
high energy prices provide new opportunities for
alternative ways to deliver energy. Following the
summit, an independent industry group has
undertaken to explore options for energy services,
and to contribute to the Energy Review process.
Billing and metering

 Providing customers with better information
about their energy use and its costs may
encourage energy-saving behaviour among
households, such as switching off unnecessary
lights and appliances, or purchasing more
efficient products. ‘Smart’ electricity and gas
meters and associated feedback devices can
provide real-time information on energy costs to
users in a more visible way than a regular bill.

 The Government is committed to seeking
measures to achieve savings of 
2 MtC by
2010 through better billing and metering in
the UK and believes one way this could be
achieved is if all new and replacement meters are
‘smart’ meters, also providing consumption
feedback. More informative billing and feedback
devices attached to existing meters can also play
a role. However, there is considerable uncertainty
about the scale and duration of these carbon
savings. The Government announced at
Budget 2006 a £5m fund to co-finance with
energy suppliers a pilot study of feedback
devices such as ‘smart’ energy meters that
could potentially reduce energy demand and
facilitate other market efficiencies.

 Smart meters have not only the potential to
reduce consumption but they could also be a
useful tool for reducing peak loads e.g. via
time-of-day tariffs. Smart meters can therefore
contribute to improving energy security, as some
network re-enforcement and new generation
capacity could be avoided. Smart metering could
also be beneficial for addressing fuel poverty, by
helping consumers to better manage their energy
use and avoid waste. In addition, meters with an
“import-export” facility are required for any
consumers installing micro-generation such as
small scale wind, solar (PV) panels or micro-CHP.

 Despite their potential benefits very few smart
meters have been installed in the UK. Ofgem’s
recent review of metering looked at international
experience of smart metering and, in the light of
this evidence, examined the potential costs and
benefits of innovative metering in the UK context.
Ofgem conducted a public consultation, which
closed in March. The results are due in May 2006
and will inform the nature of the pilot study and
future decisions on what measures need to be
taken to secure carbon savings and other benefits
from improved metering and billing.

 The recently agreed Energy End-Use Efficiency
and Energy Services Directive will require
installation of ‘actual time of use’ metering for all
new connections and for replacement meters

86
Domestic


where “technically possible, financially reasonable
and proportionate to the potential savings”.
Economic instruments

 In line with its 1997 Statement of Intent on
Environmental Taxation, the Government has
used the tax system to support progress towards
environmental goals. Fiscal measures – as part of
a range of measures – can help to address
market failures. In 1998, the Government
introduced a reduced VAT rate of 5 per cent VAT
for the grant-funded installation of certain
energy-saving materials (ESMs) in the homes of
elderly, less well off and vulnerable households.
This reduced VAT rate applied to all insulation,
draught stripping, hot water and central heating
controls. In Budget 2000, the Government
extended this scheme to all households, even if
the service is not grant funded. Budget 2000 and
2002 also introduced further reduced VAT rates
for ESMs when they are part of grant-funded
installations into vulnerable households –
including central heating systems, heating
appliances, and factory-insulated hot water tanks.

 The Government has also introduced reduced
VAT rates for microgeneration in order to support
the development of micro technologies that use
renewable energy sources and can help to
improve energy efficiency. Since Budget 2000,
reduced VAT rates have been introduced for solar
panels; micro wind and water turbines; ground
source and air source heat pumps; micro-
combined heat and power (micro-CHP); and
wood fuelled boilers.

 The Government consulted in 2002 and 2003 on
the possible use of economic instruments for
domestic energy efficiency. Responses indicated
that there was little incentive for private landlords
to improve the energy efficiency of the residential
properties that they let, as the benefit of
investment often flows to the tenant rather than
to the landlord. In response to this, the
Government introduced the Landlord’s Energy
Saving Allowance (LESA) in 
 This offers up-
front relief (up to £1500) for capital expenditure
on investment in cavity wall and loft insulation.
This was extended in 2005 to include solid wall
insulation, and again in 2006 to include draught
proofing and hot water system insulation. The
Government will also seek to improve awareness
of LESA among landlords, and examine the
possible extension of LESA to corporate landlords.

 In the 2005 Pre-Budget Report, the Government
also announced that it intended to implement a
Green Landlord Scheme by reforming the existing
Wear and Tear Allowance and making it
conditional on the energy efficiency level of the
property. The Government continues to explore
how the Allowance should be reformed to make
it incentivise landlords to invest in the energy
efficiency of their properties, with a view to
introducing the new allowance structure alongside
the forthcoming Energy Performance Certificates.
Tackling fuel poverty

 Fuel poverty17 is caused by a combination of
poorly insulated, energy inefficient housing and
low incomes. The latest available figures18,
indicate that the number of fuel poor households
had fallen between 1996 and 
 The
published figures show that there were
approximately two million households in fuel
poverty in the UK in 2003, down from six and a
half million in 
 Of this figure, around one
and a half million vulnerable households were in
fuel poverty in the UK in 2003, down from five
million in 
 However, it is expected that
recent increases in energy prices will have begun
to reverse the process that has been made to
date. Analysis of the overall effects of changes in
fuel prices and incomes, excluding consideration
of energy efficiency improvements, suggested
that the total number of vulnerable households in
fuel poverty is likely to rise by around one million
households in England between 2003 and 2006,
with proportional rises in the Devolved
Administrations.

 In Fuel Poverty In England: The Government’s
Plan for Action, published in November 2004, the
Government set out how the 2010 target in

87
Domestic
17 A household is in fuel poverty if in order to maintain a satisfactory heating regime it would be required to spend more than 10 per cent of its income
(including Housing Benefit or Income Support for Mortgage Interest) on all household fuel use
18 Taken from The UK Fuel Poverty Strategy: Third Annual Progress Report, published in July 



England19 will be met and announced extra
funding of £140m between 2005-08 to tackle
fuel poverty. This has since been boosted by the
announcement in the 2005 Pre-Budget Report of
an additional £300m over the same period to
tackle fuel poverty across the UK. £250m of this
funding will help tackle fuel poverty in England,
taking total fuel poverty funding over the 2005-08
period to over £800m. Carbon dioxide savings
from Warm Front and other fuel poverty
programmes are expected to be 
4 MtC by 


 The document also set out a number of changes
to the Warm Front Scheme, the Government’s
key tool for tackling fuel poverty in the private
sector in England, which seeks to target
vulnerable households to provide a range of
heating and insulation measures that can be
tailored to suit each individual property. These
changes have now been implemented. Warm
Front now offers central heating to all eligible
households and gives them the option to receive
the full range of appropriate measures over a
period of time, subject to the maximum amount
of grant that can be paid. Since the launch of the
Scheme in June 2000, over one million
households have been assisted.

 A range of challenges lie ahead in tackling fuel
poverty. The Energy Review will consider whether
there are any further steps that the Government,
working with a wide cross-section of key
stakeholders, can take to ensure we meet our UK
goal of eradicating fuel poverty by 2016-

Decent Homes Standard

 Since 2001 there has been a 31 per cent
reduction in the number of social sector homes
failing the Decent Home standard on the thermal
comfort criterion (from 
3 to 
9 million homes),
which is a key criterion of the standard. Also
since 2001, over 470,000 dwellings have received
work to improve their energy efficiency under the
decent homes programme or as part of wider
local authority work to update the stock. This
work is continuing. Local authorities typically
work very closely with EEC suppliers when
tackling their housing stock, so most of the
carbon savings from the Decent Homes
programme are attributed to EEC, and to a lesser
extent to Building Regulations. But some
additional activity does take place that is not
accounted for elsewhere, and savings from this
are conservatively estimated at 
02 MtC per year.

 The average SAP rating20 of the social sector
stock rose to 58 by 2004 from 48 in 1996 and is
likely to rise further over the coming years. The
Decent Homes standard is a ‘trigger point’ for
action to improve energy efficiency. As social
landlords undertake works beyond the standard,
energy efficiency improvements are continuing, in
turn reducing carbon emissions.
Community Energy

 In January 2002, the Government launched
Community Energy, a £50m UK-wide capital
programme for installing and refurbishing
community heating. Schemes are mainly based
on CHP with innovative approaches also
encouraged. The funding was provided by
Treasury’s Capital Modernisation Fund.

 In December 2004, Defra announced an extra
£10m to extend the programme. The decision to
do this was based on initial strong demand and a
number of larger schemes with significant
outputs. However, experience has shown that
many larger schemes under the initial programme
could not complete within the 31 March 2007
spend deadline and did not go ahead. The
smaller schemes that can complete tend to be
expensive in relation to their outputs. The
following table summarises how the programme
has delivered against its targets and shows that
the programme has fallen well short of delivering
its objectives on all fronts.

 The high drop out rate for larger schemes is the
main reason for the limited estimate of spend.
The situation would not improve appreciably if
we extended the spend deadline, as these larger
schemes cannot complete within a timescale

88
Domestic
19 “To eradicate fuel poverty in vulnerable households in line with the Government’s fuel poverty strategic objective”.
20 SAP (2001) rating is on a scale from 1 to 
 This will be replaced on the 6 April 2006 with the SAP (2005) rating scale which comes into effect with the
Building Regulations.


suitable for government funding, in some cases
after 


 The review of the 2000 Climate Change
Programme has given us the opportunity to
conduct a wide ranging appraisal of the
effectiveness of existing climate change policies.
In the light of the considerations above we have
decided to neither extend the time span for the
£50m programme nor continue with the £10m
extension. In considering the relative cost-
effectiveness of programmes, we have decided
that there are other programmes that more cost-
effectively deliver carbon savings. These include
taking forward support for biomass community
heating through the new heat support scheme,
which will include CHP.

89
Domestic
Comparison of outputs against targets for the Community Energy programme
Programme targets Estimated programme outputs
Funding £50m £
3m (45%)
Carbon Savings (tC/yr) 150,000 19,481 (13%)
Leverage of other funding £200m £50m (25%)
CHP capacity ( MWe) 130 
9 (22%)
People on low incomes helped 100,000 18,453 (18%)


CHAPTER SEVEN
Agriculture, forestry and land management

90
Introduction

 Agriculture, forestry and land management1 have
a key role to play in addressing climate change,
by providing alternative energy sources and low
energy materials, by helping to mitigate adverse
climate change events, and by direct mitigation
of greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture,
forestry and land management activities.

 Action to address climate change issues in the
land management sector forms a key part of the
Strategy for Sustainable Farming and Food. The
1 Agriculture and forestry are devolved issues and therefore while the discussion of land management’s role applies to the UK, the specific policy measures
discussed apply only to England except where otherwise noted.
The agriculture and forestry sector contributes 7 per cent of UK greenhouse gas emissions. The major focus
is on non-CO2 gases, with, in 2004, this sector accounting for 46 per cent of methane and 66 per cent of
nitrous oxide emissions, but only 1 per cent of carbon dioxide. Annual total emissions fell by 22 per cent
between 1990 and 2004, with methane emissions reducing by 13 per cent, and nitrous oxide emissions by
17 per cent.
The major issue for this sector is in tackling direct emissions of nitrous oxide and methane emissions, rather
than carbon dioxide emissions. The agriculture and forestry sector has a contribution to make to creating a
low carbon economy through the production of bioenergy. Agriculture and forestry is the first sector to
feel the direct effects of a changing climate. The challenge is to adapt to new threats and opportunities,
whilst still maintaining a sustainable agriculture and forestry sector. As with many other sectors climate
change has not, until recently, been a priority. This programme seeks to raise awareness of the issues across
the sector and develop measures for the sector to allow it to play a full part in tackling climate change.
Since 2000 we have introduced the Energy Crops Scheme, the Bioenergy Infrastructure Scheme and an
overarching Non-Food Crops Strategy, saving 
1MtC by 

In addition the Government is committed to:

 Promoting resource efficient farm management, including making the best use of the latest research
findings and technology, in order to reduce nitrogen and other inputs which contribute to greenhouse
gas emissions.

 Examining the scope and feasibility of a market based mechanism to facilitate trading of greenhouse
gas reductions from agriculture, forestry and other land management sectors.

 Developing a communications strategy to raise awareness and communicate climate change issues to
land managers.

 Exploring how Environmental Stewardship can make a greater contribution to achieving the
Government’s climate change objectives.

 Considering the case under the new EU Rural Development Regulation for providing support for land
managers to establish energy crops and develop biomass and woodfuel supply chains.

 Launching a further round of the Bioenergy Infrastructure Scheme in 2006-07 to help further the
development of biomass supply chains.

 Taking forward the Non-Food Crops Strategy to substitute renewable products for those based on
fossil fuels.

 Ensuring that the development of measures under the Catchment Sensitive Farming Programme and
Nitrate Action Plan also support our climate change goals.

 Engaging the Rural Climate Change Forum fully in delivering this programme.


Government’s priority is to facilitate a farming
and food industry in this country which makes a
major contribution to sustainable development.
This means a partnership to:

 help UK farming and food industries compete
successfully both at home and abroad;

 produce quality food and non-food products
that the market will buy;

 ensure an appropriate reward structure for the
positive contribution our farmed landscape
makes to the countryside and the natural
environment; and

 play an increasing part in tackling the biggest
threat, climate change.

 To date, most UK and EU agricultural, forestry
and land management policies have not included
greenhouse gas mitigation or climate change
adaptation as specific goals. This means that
identifying their precise contribution to
addressing climate change can be difficult. In
future, more explicit recognition of their
contribution will be needed. This will also need
to be consistent with the Government’s intention
to prepare and consult on a new PPS setting out
how its expects participants in the planning
process to work towards the reduction of carbon
in the location, siting and design of new
development.

 Equally, the agricultural and forestry industries
need to do more to ensure that climate change is
regarded as a high priority. Agriculture and
forestry are among the first activities to be
directly affected by changes in climate, and are
already beginning to adapt to climate change
through, for example, new crops, changed
planting and harvesting regimes, and dealing
with new pest threats.

 The Government believes that it is vital that land
managers change their behaviour in order to help
to deliver emission reductions, to allow them to
take advantage of the opportunities to their
businesses of adopting a resource efficiency
approach, contribute to the shift to a low carbon
economy, and to incentivise innovation of all
kinds. This chapter of the Climate Change
Programme is intended to establish the context
and set out the broad policy framework in which
such change can take place.

 A second element of the Programme is to ensure
that future policies affecting land managers are
‘climate change proofed’ so that they deliver,
directly or as an ancillary benefit, positive climate
change outcomes.
Greenhouse gas emissions inventory
and projections

 Land management activities both absorb and
release greenhouse gases. Although agriculture
and forestry contributes to carbon dioxide
emissions (primarily through the use of fossil fuels
and electricity, as in other sectors), the major
focus is on non-CO2 gases, with agriculture
accounting for 46 per cent of methane and
nearly 66 per cent of nitrous oxide emissions in
the UK in 
 Emissions of these gases arise
mainly from the digestive processes of animals,
animal wastes, and fertiliser use.

 Land management can help to remove carbon
from the atmosphere through increases in forest
coverage and organic matter in the soil, and
avoidance of degradation of those stores and so
avoid carbon loss. Woody and other non-food
crops also have an important potential to provide
renewable sources of energy and alternatives to
fossil fuel based materials and products.

 The Government funds a continuing programme
of research looking at the contribution of
different land management practices to
greenhouse gas emissions. However, comparisons
between different farming methods and land use
change are complex and the research findings are
dependent on the scale considered. Limited
evidence comparing different farming systems is
available, and reduced emissions in one
greenhouse gas may be offset by increased
emissions of another, so whole life cycle analyses
are needed. The Government will continue to
support research, at a cost of £1m over three

91
Agriculture, forestry and land management
2 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/statistics/globatmos/gagccukem.htm


years, to improve the inventory of emissions from
agriculture and will continue to invest in research
to improve the overall environmental
performance of different farming systems,
including organic, to improve our understanding
of, and their ability to optimise their contribution
to climate change objectives.

 In 1990, greenhouse gas emissions from
agriculture, forestry and land management were
18 MtC or about 9 per cent of the UK’s total
greenhouse gas emissions. This includes net
emissions and removals from the land use, land
use change and forestry (LULUCF) sector
estimated to be 
8 MtC in 1990 (see Annex F for
the breakdown by gas). Annual emissions from
agriculture, forestry and land management are
estimated to have fallen by 22 per cent between
1990 and 2004, and are projected to continue to
fall to 32 per cent below 1990 levels by 

Projections of greenhouse gas emissions from the agriculture, forestry
and land management sector and the estimated effect of additional
quantified measures, MtC

 As is clear from the figures, the UK land
management sector’s potential contribution to
addressing climate change arises at least as much
from tackling methane and nitrous oxide as CO

Opportunities to reduce methane and nitrous
oxide must therefore take a more important place
than previously if this sector is to play its full part
in addressing climate change.

 Raising awareness of the issues and working with
stakeholders to develop practical and sustainable
options is vital to help land managers play their
part in addressing climate change. There are a
wide range of mitigation and adaptation options
that offer benefits for land managers, the
environment, and wider society.

 The Government sees it as vital to highlight the
challenges of climate change for land managers
and to provide leadership in developing a policy
framework that will encourage practical action.
The Government set up the Rural Climate Change
Forum4 (see box) as a high level forum for
discussion, input into policy development, and
communication with land managers on climate
change mitigation and adaptation. The Forum
has discussed practical actions for mitigation,
how best to communicate key messages on
climate change to this sector, and has advised
the Government on the development of this
Programme. It will also have a role in advising
on the most effective ways to deliver this
Programme.

 To raise awareness in the land management
sector of the risks, responsibilities and
opportunities of climate change, the Government
will put in place a sector specific communications
strategy, as part of the its wider Climate Change
Communications Initiative. The Rural Climate
1990 1995 2000 20102005 2015 2020

Mt C1213141516171819
Historical trend
Baseline with measures projections
Additional quantified measures

92
Agriculture, forestry and land management
3 Largely due to reducing livestock numbers and more targeted input use.
4 For more information on the work of the Forum see http://www.defra.gov.ukweb/environment/climatechange/uk/agriculture/rccf
Greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture, forestry and land management, MtC
Gas 1990 1995 2000 2004 2010 2015 2020
Carbon dioxide 
2 
5 
9 
5 
7 
3 
7
Methane 
9 
8 
5 
2 
4 
4 
4
Nitrous oxide 
9 
5 
0 
4 
1 
1 
0
Total 
0 
8 
4 
0 
3 
8 
1
Change from 1990 levels -
0 -
7 -
3 -
0 -
1 -
1
Note: the percentage changes and emission estimates may differ slightly due to rounding.


Change Forum will be invited to advise on the
delivery of this communications strategy.

 A number of the Carbon Trust’s programmes (see
Chapter 4) are available to businesses in the
agriculture, forestry and land management sector.
The Government will work with the Carbon Trust
to identify new opportunities for action by them
which could support the agriculture, forestry and
land management sector.

 Climate change and agriculture is a matter of
importance not only for the UK but also for our
European partners. In September 2005, the UK
under its Presidency of the EU, hosted the first
ever Joint Informal Meeting of EU Agriculture and
Environment Councils, where international experts
presented a range of issues on climate change
and agriculture. They underlined that sustainable
agriculture and land-use can play a significant
role in addressing climate change and still provide
the economic and social benefits rural areas
need. We have encouraged the Commission and
future Presidencies of the EU to consider how to
take forward work on the issues highlighted at
the Ministerial meeting, and the UK will continue
to encourage our European partners to give this
issue the importance it deserves, including in the
revised European Climate Change Programme.

 Scenarios presented at the Informal and
elsewhere suggest that climate change impacts
do not appear to threaten the viability of UK
agriculture industry as a whole, due to the
adaptability of UK systems
 But particular regions
and individual farmers need to be aware of
changes so they are able to deal with the risks
and opportunities in good time. This is discussed
in more detail in the adaptation section of this
Programme and will be developed in the
Adaptation Policy Framework. The Government
will continue to fund research on impacts
and adaptation responses for land managers.

93
Agriculture, forestry and land management
5 For example, the review of the Defra’s research on climate impacts on agriculture concluded that “the negative impacts of climate change on UK
agriculture’s productivity will be small and that in all likelihood the effects will be positive, with the exception of low lying areas susceptible to flooding”.
Rural Climate Change Forum
The Rural Climate Change Forum was launched in March 2005 to provide a high level forum for dialogue
with Government, and authoritative advice and leadership for rural stakeholders, on climate change and
rural land management.
The Forum's objectives are to:

 raise awareness among stakeholders at all levels about the impacts of climate change in rural areas
through existing and/or new knowledge networks, to help develop and promote appropriate responses
to climate change;

 identify, propose and promote practical actions and policy options, including the uptake of research
findings:
– to reduce and offset greenhouse emissions from rural land uses;
– on adaptation measures for rural land uses (including for conservation purposes and new agricultural
uses); and
– on the potential for managing the impacts of climate change, e.g. Flooding, through changed land
management practices.

 identify relevant research needs and priorities; and

 contribute to relevant policy review and development.
The Forum is co-chaired by Elliot Morley MP, Minister of State (Climate Change and Environment), Defra,
and John Gilliland, Member of the Sustainable Development Commission.



 Understanding of these issues is supported within
Defra by an ongoing research programme of
£4m into both the impacts of climate change on
agriculture, and means through which agriculture
can contribute to reducing emissions. This work
is complemented by knowledge transfer
programmes, including through partners such
as UKCIP (See Section 3), to ensure that policy
makers and land managers receive relevant and
timely information. The Government’s approach
to addressing climate change in this Climate
Change Programme is informed by these
principles, and we will continue to promote
action to address climate change across the full
range of issues covered by the Strategy for
Sustainable Farming and Food.
Impact of reforms of the
Common Agricultural Policy

 Over the past thirty years the European Common
Agricultural Policy (CAP) has had a dominant
influence on UK agriculture. Since the launch of
the Climate Change Programme in 2000, there
have been two significant reforms of the CAP.
Firstly, Agenda 2000 led to some moderation in
production subsidies and greater emphasis on
rural development measures. Independent
economic evaluation and the Government’s own
economists suggest that the impact of Agenda
2000 on greenhouse gas emissions was limited.

 The CAP reform agreement reached in June 2003
was more fundamental in nature, particularly in
breaking the link between production and direct
payments through the introduction of the Single
Payment Scheme. Although not designed for the
purpose of climate change mitigation, and
though it is still too early to know exactly how
farmers will respond to the 2003 CAP reforms,
the associated changes in agricultural practice
and market responses are likely to have an impact
on greenhouse gas emissions. Decoupling of
direct payments from production is likely to lead
to a reduction in livestock numbers and an
associated decrease in methane emissions
estimated at some 
68 MtC per annum in 

Similarly, it is expected that trends towards lower
input agriculture and better soil nutrient
management will be reinforced with a
consequent reduction in nitrous oxide emissions.

 The 2003 model of reform has subsequently been
applied to the sugar sector. There is expected to
be a reduction in sugar beet growing in Europe,
although in England it is noted that beet growing
currently occupies only 2 per cent of crop and
grassland areas. Direct climate change
implications are uncertain, but the sugar reform
is encouraging processors to look at
diversification into bioethanol. Demand will
depend on competitiveness of beet compared
to other feedstocks and wider renewable
energy policy drivers.

 The 2003 CAP reforms also introduced
mandatory cross-compliance measures linked to
all CAP direct payments to farmers, including
those under the Single Payment Scheme. This will
result in an increasing focus on some aspects of
environmental management that, together with
changes driven by decoupling, are likely to have
positive effects on greenhouse gas mitigation.
Notably our aim is that cross compliance will
generally improve soil management through the
implementation of Soil Protection Reviews, and
so reduce soil carbon loss. The Government
will consider whether monitoring of cross-
compliance can help to identify ancillary
benefits in addressing climate change. This
monitoring is due to be undertaken in 


 These are significant changes that will affect the
agricultural sector. We are committed, through
the Agriculture and Environmental Change
Observatory to monitoring the changes in order
to improve our understanding of the implications
for the industry and the environment, including
climate change. The Government will ensure
that the Agricultural Change and
Environment Observatory contributes data
to assess current and predicted greenhouse
gas emissions from agriculture, and the
factors underlying the change.

94
Agriculture, forestry and land management


Reducing nitrous oxide emissions

 The use of inorganic nitrogen as fertiliser is a
major source of nitrous oxide. Nitrous oxide
emissions also arise from manures during storage.
There are a number of effective practical actions
and technologies that can be taken up by farmers
to optimise the efficiency of the use of fertilisers,
reduce inorganic nitrogen use and maximise the
benefit of organic nitrogen, thereby reducing
nitrous oxide emissions. These would contribute
to greater resource efficiency and more
sustainable farming overall, and include:

 regular fertiliser spreader testing to ensure
accuracy of application;

 operator registration and training;

 crop nutrient management planning;

 soil nutrient status testing – to better match
application of fertiliser to need;

 maximising the use of technology to target
nutrient use and reduce machinery
operations;

 integration of manures into fertiliser regimes
and reduction in inorganic fertiliser use
(particularly grassland fertiliser applications);

and


 improved slurry handling.

 For example, we estimate that a 5 per cent
reduction in overall fertiliser use could be
achieved through improving spreader efficiency
and related measures. This would save the
equivalent of 
15 MtC per year by 


 The practices needed to reduce nitrous oxide
emissions are, in many cases, similar to those
required to address other negative impacts of the
use of nutrients. As part of a resource efficient
approach to farm management, these actions
would also reduce farmers’ fertiliser costs as
a proportion of overall production costs and
also contribute to a reduction in the overall
negative environmental impact of agriculture.
The Government’s aim is to encourage action
which will maximise the multiple benefits
that can be achieved from changes in farm
practice, and to simplify the messages to
land managers about the change in
behaviour required.

 Farm practice changes can be incentivised by an
appropriate policy framework, which may range
from voluntary initiatives and supportive
measures (including incorporation of some
changes in revisions of agri-environment
schemes), through market mechanisms to
well-designed and targeted regulation. This range
of policy measures is being examined by the
Government as part of the Catchment Sensitive
Farming (CSF) Programme aimed at tackling
diffuse water pollution from agriculture (DWPA)
to help meet objectives of the Water Framework
Directive. For water quality outcomes, the CSF
programme focuses on all pollutants and takes
account of delivery of commitments under the
Nitrates Directive through the Nitrate Vulnerable
Zones (NVZ) Action programme. CSF and NVZ
Action Programmes are discussed in detail below.

 The Water Framework Directive requires all inland
and coastal waters to reach ‘good status’ by

 Diffuse pollution from agriculture is a
significant problem; 60 per cent of nitrates and
44 per cent phosphorus loads in UK surface
waters comes from agriculture. Defra’s
Catchment Sensitive Farming (CSF) Programme
seeks to tackle this issue and help land managers
meet their obligations under the Directive. The

95
Agriculture, forestry and land management


Nitrates Directive will be a basic measure under
the Water Framework Directive and will be a key
mechanism for helping to meet the Directive’s
nitrates targets.

 The CSF Programme and measures under NVZ
Action Programmes are not however designed to
tackle climate change directly. The final package
of measures for tackling diffuse water pollution
from agriculture will not be finalised until 2008-

 Work on predicting the ancillary benefits of
future and current policy options (including
impacts of the England CSF Delivery Initiative and
Nitrates Directive), such as greenhouse gas
reduction, is under way, as is monitoring of the
effectiveness of the current CSF Delivery Initiative.
The monitoring activity is unlikely, however, to
provide clear results until 
 The Nitrates
Directive is aimed at reducing water pollution by
nitrate from agricultural sources.

 The final package of CSF policy measures, which
will most likely go further than the England CSF
Delivery Initiative and the Nitrates Directive, will be
based on the most cost-beneficial options for
meeting the Water Framework Directive, which will
include consideration of impacts on climate
change. At this stage, and before final decisions
are made, it is difficult to predict the precise
greenhouse gas reductions resulting from these
measures. However, information available on the
impacts of the Nitrates Directive suggests that the
changes in organic and inorganic nitrogen use that
NVZ Action Programmes may bring about, are
expected to lead to some reduction in greenhouse
gas emissions. The Government will encourage
agricultural practice changes which both
deliver water quality outcomes and at the
same time reduce greenhouse gas emissions
and will ensure that the developing measures
under the Catchment Sensitive Farming
Programme and NVZ Action Programme are
also designed, where possible, to maximise
benefits for climate change goals.

 There may also be a need in future for further
action on greenhouse gas emissions if other
policies, such as the Catchment Sensitive Farming
Programme, are assessed as not delivering
sufficient change, or where there is continued
uncertainty as to their effect on greenhouse gases.
The Government will explore this further in
the context of a broader approach to resource
efficiency in agriculture, as part of future
work on delivering the Sustainable Farming
and Food Strategy.
Reducing methane emissions

 Methane is an important greenhouse gas, with
46 per cent of UK emissions arising from
agriculture. 80 per cent of this methane comes
from enteric fermentation in the digestive systems
of animals, and 20 per cent from animal waste

Methane levels have been decreasing over the
recent years. The likely decline in animal numbers
as a result of decoupling following the latest CAP
reform, and ongoing increases in productivity and
fertility in the livestock industry, suggest that
overall emissions of methane are likely to
decrease further in the period to 


96
Agriculture, forestry and land management
6 www.defra.gov.uk/environment/statistics/globatmos/gagccukem.htm



 Emissions of methane result from diffuse sources
and through variable biological processes, making
them difficult to quantify. Actions to directly
reduce methane emissions from livestock may
include changes to feed regimes: recent research
suggests that substantial methane reductions
could be achieved by this approach. Improving
the longevity of dairy cows will also result in
decreased methane production as a result of a
reduction in the total number of animals needed
to produce the same quantity of milk. In the
longer-term it may be technically feasible to
directly reduce emissions by manipulating enteric
fermentation processes, for example through
genetic improvement. Defra’s research portfolio is
examining all these options in a programme
costing some £
5m in 2005-


 Some of the potential options may however be
inappropriate: they may not always be compatible
with the Government’s wider goals for
sustainable agriculture, may not be cost effective,
have unacceptable animal welfare implications,
or may risk additional environmental impacts
involved in growing a high resource input
alternative, for example maize instead of grass
based feed.
Anaerobic digestion

 Anaerobic digestion is a widely-used technology
for the purification of industrial and municipal
waste waters, which reduces their environmental
impact and also produces a useful by-product in
the form of biogas, mainly methane. The
technology can be applied to the treatment of
animal manures. The resulting biogas can be used
for heat and power, thereby providing an
additional income source for farmers and further
reducing greenhouse gas emissions through
fossil-fuel substitution, especially in areas where
animal slurries are available year-round, for
example in intensive livestock units. Compared to
the original manures, the remaining solid
digestate can have improved properties for use as
an organic fertiliser.

 Manures can also be co-digested with other
waste streams, such as from the food chain. The
latter already provides a composting and disposal
opportunity for some farm businesses. Co-
digestion also enhances the nutrient content of
the digestate, further improving its value as a
fertiliser source. Industry has called for a standard
for the digestate produced by anaerobic digestion
plants, and the Government is currently scoping
what further work might be required on this
issue.

 The understanding of the technologies, practical
management options, issues such as biosecurity,
and the market potentials for dealing with
methane from the agriculture sector is still
evolving. The Government views this as an
important area for further work, and the Biomass
Taskforce recently recommended that options to
pursue anaerobic digestion technology and
biogas production were explored. The UK is also
committed to identifying solutions as part of the
G8 inspired international Methane to Markets
Partnership and co-chairs a new Agriculture Sub-
committee of the Partnership. The Government
will convene a high level international
seminar of experts before the end of 2006 to
identify opportunities, barriers and
technologies for addressing methane
Research into use of feed additives to
reduce methane emissions 
Researchers at the Rowett Institute in
Aberdeen have been conducting research into
developing a feed additive for ruminants that
inhibits methane formation and improves feed
efficiency. By adding a form of fumaric acid to
the diet, lamb growth trials have shown that
up to 70 per cent inhibition of methane
formation can be achieved. This inhibition also
gives rise to an improved feed efficiency of 10
per cent, i.e. the lambs gain weight 10 per cent
faster for the same consumption of feed

Further economic and environmental
evaluations are now being conducted.

97
Agriculture, forestry and land management
7 www.rowett.ac.uk/Reducing_Methane_JWallace.htm


emissions from agriculture under the
auspices of the Methane to Markets
Partnership Agriculture Sub-committee.
Market-based mechanisms

 The measures described above for reducing
emissions of nitrous oxide and methane are
intended to deliver gains in the short to medium
term. To allow the agriculture forestry and land
management sector to play its full part in
meeting the challenge of climate change, and to
ensure real engagement by individuals and
businesses, the Government believes that a long
term policy signal is required. This needs to offer
the prospect of bringing financial gain in return
for behavioural change, and of promoting
innovation. The Government will examine
the scope and feasibility of a market based
mechanism, compatible with the
Government’s aspirations for the EU
Emissions Trading Scheme and UK Emissions
Trading Scheme, to facilitate trading of
greenhouse gas reductions from agriculture
and other land management sectors.
Rural Development Regulation
and Environmental Stewardship

 The impact on greenhouse gas mitigation of
existing agri-environment agreements is not easy
to evaluate, as the schemes were not designed to
achieve this goal. However, they have encouraged
low-input agriculture and are likely to have
contributed to decreased emissions, for example
through decreased fertiliser use, buffered
waterways against fertiliser run off, and reduced
grazing intensity. The Government sees it as
essential to improve our knowledge base on this
issue, and will support further relevant research.

 The Government is currently preparing a strategy
for England for expenditure under the new EU
Rural Development Regulation for 2007-2013, of
which Environmental Stewardship will be a key
part. The EU Strategic Guidelines for Rural
Development require that resources devoted to
environmental issues should contribute to three
EU level priority areas: biodiversity, water, and
climate change.

 The Regulation contains many relevant measures,
for example support for agri-environment
schemes, forestry and energy crops. The strategy
for England is currently the subject of
consultation, which provides an opportunity for
consideration on how the England Rural
Development Programme might best assist in
future in addressing climate change.

 The main vehicle in England for environmental
land management is Environmental Stewardship,
introduced in 2005 under the England Rural
Development Programme. It builds on the success
of the previous schemes, but has wider objectives,
and it comprises Entry Level, Organic Entry Level,
and Higher Level strands. The requirements of
Entry Level Stewardship go beyond those of cross-
compliance regulations and it is hoped that the
majority of agricultural land will be covered by ELS
after the first few years of operation.

 Building on the first phase of Environmental
Stewardship, the Government will review
progress in 2007-8 to ensure that
expenditure is effectively directed to policy
priorities, including the potential for
Environmental Stewardship to contribute to
climate change objectives. Through its
research programme the Government will
improve its understanding of the
contribution which improved land
management practices (including
Environmental Stewardship measures)
can make to climate change mitigation.
Integrated Pollution, Prevention and
Control (IPPC)

 The UK Pollution Prevention and Control
Regulations will apply to large intensive pig and
poultry producers in the agricultural sector.
Measures being considered under IPPC are
focused primarily on ammonia reductions, but are
likely also to contribute to nitrous oxide emission
reductions.

98
Agriculture, forestry and land management


Reducing carbon dioxide emissions

 Although the majority of greenhouse gas
emissions from land-based sectors are non-CO2
gases, there are ways in which land-based sectors
can reduce their own carbon dioxide emissions.
Additionally, agricultural practices can help to
mitigate carbon dioxide emissions from other
sectors, through carbon sequestration in soil and
timber, and by substituting for fossil fuels and
fossil fuel-based products.
Energy efficiency

 The intensive pig and poultry farming sectors
have been involved in climate change agreements
since 2001 and have targets to reduce their CO2
emissions by some 100k tonnes over their
baselines.

 Members of the horticulture sector of the
National Farmers’ Union also receive a 50 per
cent discount from the climate change levy until
the end of March 2006 In the 2003 Pre-Budget
Report the Chancellor announced an extension to
include some other energy intensive businesses in
the climate change agreements. The horticulture
sector is now eligible for a full climate change
agreement under the new criteria and has agreed
challenging energy reduction targets.

 Government research to identify methods to
improve energy efficiency in the glasshouse
horticulture sector is ongoing. Early results
indicate it is possible to achieve significant
reductions in energy use in commercial situations,
often combined with the use of combined heat
and power.
Non-food crops

 Crops grown for alternative uses to food can be
used as energy crops or as a source of renewable
raw materials to replace other fossil fuel based
products. The Government is committed to
supporting the development of non-food
crops and in November 2004 launched the
Strategy for Non-Food Crops and Uses
 The
Biomass Taskforce, headed by Sir Ben Gill, was
established to help Government and industry
optimise the development of biomass energy
in support of renewable energy targets and
sustainable farming, forestry and rural objectives.
The Taskforce published its final report9 on
25 October 2005 and the Government will
respond at the end of April 

Carbon Aware Land Management
The Country Land and Business Association
(CLA) is pioneering the use of a farm-level tool
for land managers to audit their net
greenhouse gas emissions and sinks. The CLA
has developed CALM as a way of raising
awareness of climate change amongst rural
land based businesses. Doing a greenhouse gas
audit will give individual farmers an idea of the
magnitude of their emissions and will enable
them to look at ways to reduce those emissions
while working with the grain of their business.
For example, this could include more efficient
use of fuel, budgeting nutrient inputs and
sequestering carbon in soil and timber, where
these are practical and in some cases supported.

99
Agriculture, forestry and land management
8 Strategy for Non-Food Crops and Uses, November 2004: www.defra.gov.uk/farm/acu/pdf/nfc-strategy.pdf
9 Biomass Task Force Report 25 October 2005: www.defra.gov.uk/farm/acu/energy/biomass-taskforce/btf-finalreport.pdf



 The Biomass Taskforce has made
recommendations directly relevant to land
managers on energy crops research and support
for supply chains. We are considering these
proposals as part of the Government's response
to the Taskforce report. Subject to State Aids
approval, the Government intends to launch
a further round of the Bio-energy
Infrastructure Scheme during 2006-
 The
Taskforce recommendations are considered
further in the energy supply chapter, as part of
the discussion on renewable energy, and in the
public sector chapter.

 In 2000 we introduced the Energy Crops Scheme
to support farmers growing energy crops. This
runs to 2006, and the Government is consulting
on further measures to apply from 2007 under
the new EU Rural Development Regulation. Defra
also supports an extensive energy crop breeding
programme to develop varieties which offer
increasing yields but require little in the way of
fertilisers and pesticides.

 Plantings to 2006 under the existing Energy Crops
Scheme are expected to lead to carbon savings of
11 ktC in 
 Additional savings from a new
scheme with plantings from 2007 onwards,
including interim arrangements already made by
Defra, would be expected to be around 13ktC in
2010, rising to 43 ktC by 
 In addition to the
contribution to emissions reduction through fossil
fuel substitution, the expansion of energy crops
also enhances on-site carbon stocks. It is
estimated that in 2010, the projected uptake
associated with standing biomass stocks (stumps
and roots) from planting under a new scheme
from 2007, would be 47 ktC, with ongoing new
savings of 27 ktC and 12 ktC by 2015 and 2020
respectively.

100
Agriculture, forestry and land management
Energy Crops Scheme
Renewable Energy Growers Ltd in South Yorkshire,
and Thames Valley Bioenergy Coppice in Berkshire,
are two producer groups established with funding
from Defra's Energy Crops Scheme. Grants have
been provided to help with the administrative set-
up costs for the producer groups and the purchase
of equipment such as harvesters and trailers. The
groups aim to recruit 30 and 50 short rotation
coppice growers respectively during the five year
funding period. Members will work together to
harvest their crop and supply it to a variety of end-
users including small-scale local heat boilers, Slough
Heat and Power (a large CHP plant) and Drax Power
Ltd (a large power station which is trialling the
co-firing of energy crops with coal).



 Non-food crops can also provide renewable raw
materials to replace fossil fuel based products such
as plastics and chemicals. In principle, crop derived
products can usually be considered to be carbon
neutral, or offer further carbon savings when
assessed over their whole lifecycle, subject to
efficient production and proper recovery. The
Government-supported National Non-Food Crops
Centre is driving forward innovation in the non-
food crops sector and is working with farmers,
universities and research institutes, and industry,
to help bring new sustainable products and
technologies to market. The Government will
continue its research on non-food crops with
funding of around £2m a year, and the
monitoring of the Non-Food Crops Strategy
for its contribution to climate change policy
outcomes.

 The Strategy encompasses a range of concerted
actions to incentivise and support development of
markets for non-food crops, including provision
of advice and information and funding scientific
research into their use. This policy could save

1MtC by replacing crude oil, used as a
feedstock in various industrial processes, with
renewable raw materials (RRM). It is estimated
that up to 10 per cent of crude oil consumed in
the EU is used for these purposes especially in the
production of polymers but also in the production
of lubricants, solvents, surfactants and fibres. At
end of life disposal of such materials a transfer of
carbon from fossil deposits to the atmosphere
occurs though incineration, or over a significantly
longer timescale through material decay. Using
plant-derived RRM ensures that at least some of
this carbon cycle is closed by substituting
atmospheric carbon for fossil carbon in products.
Sustainable forestry policy

 The practical framework for the delivery of
sustainable forestry in the UK is the UK Forestry
Standard, which has been endorsed by the
administrations of England, Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland and built into their separate
forestry policies.

 Growing trees provide an important ‘carbon sink’
by capturing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere
and storing it as wood and in associated forest
soils. The proportion of land under woodland in
the UK has increased from 5 per cent in 1924 to
nearly 12 per cent in 
 These woodlands
contain 150 MtC in tree biomass and are
currently removing about 4 MtC annually.
Increasing and protecting such sinks through
afforestation, reducing deforestation and good
management, are therefore important aspects of
climate change mitigation and adaptation. Forest
soils in the UK contain significantly more carbon
than the trees and it is essential that these carbon
reserves be maintained through good
management practice. Updated guidance will be
available following the ongoing revision of the
Forests and Soil Conservation Guidelines


 Forestry policies which support planting or the
sustainable management of woodland are a
useful tool in delivering carbon benefits. For
example, woodland established since 1990 under
the English Woodland Grant Scheme will remove

5MtC between 2006 and 2020, assuming
planting continues at current levels
 The
dynamics of tree growth mean that any increase
in woodland creation would have limited initial
impact, with maximum carbon savings achieved
beyond 
 As an illustration, increasing the
area planted threefold between 2006 and 2020
would only realise relatively modest additional
emissions reductions of 
025 and 
3 MtC in
2010 and 2020, rising to 
4MtC in 


 Forestry can contribute to mitigating climate
change through providing wood as a renewable

101
Agriculture, forestry and land management
10 FC (1998). Forests and soil conservation guidelines. Forestry Commission, Edinburgh.
11 Modelling carried out by CEH using methodology employed in UK GHG inventory projections (www.nbu.ac.uk/ukcarbon).


fuel source, as identified by the Biomass Taskforce
and the existing Forestry Strategies. In England,

7Mt of woodfuel (equivalent to carbon savings
of 
25MtC) could be provided annually without
serious disruption to existing wood-using
industries
 The majority would be sourced from
the use of arboricultural arisings, harvesting
residues and small dimension or poor quality
stemwood from ongoing management activity.

 Increases in the growing stock have outstripped
removals through harvesting over a number of
decades, particularly for broadleaf species in
privately owned woodlands. Many woodlands are
currently overstocked and not being actively
managed. If barriers to active management were
removed, up to an additional one million dry
tonnes per annum of woodfuel could be sourced
from existing English woodland between now
and 2020, corresponding to savings of 
12MtC
in 2010 and 
4MtC in 
 Utilisation of this
existing woodfuel resource could satisfy much of
the immediate need for woody biomass, enabling
the strategic development of capacity in
bioenergy. The Government will continue
to develop the woodfuel supply chain,
increasing the operationally available
resources and focusing on local capabilities
though the Regional Forestry Frameworks.

 As with other non-food crops, wood can make a
substantial contribution to emissions reductions
by substituting for materials that have a higher
fossil fuel input required for their production,
such as concrete or steel. Development of wood
technology and an increased usage of wood in
the construction industry will maximise these
benefits. The Government will continue to
promote the role of wood as a renewable
material in sustainable development though
schemes such as ‘wood for good’ which
transfers knowledge of timber systems to
the construction industry.

 The Government will continue to develop
adaptation strategies to make woodlands
more resilient against the impacts of climate
change, both to prevent stored carbon being
released into the atmosphere and to protect the
environmental, social and landscape functions of
woodland. We will ensure that adaptation policy
operates at a landscape scale and is an integral
part of other rural and urban policies. We also
recognise that woodlands can assist society in
coping with the some of the challenges of a
changing environment such as protecting
threatened habitats and species, reducing
pollution impacts on water resources and
achieving sustainable flood management.
The Government will ensure that the current
and future reviews of the England Forestry
Strategy take full account of the
opportunities and risks for forestry from
climate change. These include forestry’s
role in mitigation and its contribution to
adaptation strategies to minimise the effects
of climate change.
Soil management

 Soil is a major reservoir of carbon: UK soil carbon
stocks are in the order of 10,000 billion tonnes,
and soils of the English uplands contain more
carbon than all the trees in the UK and France
added together. Evidence suggests that over
the last 25 years there has been a general decline
in soil organic matter in agriculturally managed
soils, more so in some soils than others.
The mechanism for this, and that of carbon
sequestration in soils, is complex and still not
fully understood.

 The Government has a programme of work in
place to increase our understanding of which
soils are vulnerable to carbon loss (among other

102
Agriculture, forestry and land management
12 McKay H. (2003). Woodfuel resource in Britain. Final contract report to DTI, Scottish Enterprise, Welsh Assembly Government and the Forestry Commission
(www.dti.gov.uk/renewables/publications/pdfs/bw300787main.pdf).


key threats), and identify and encourage land
management practices that will conserve soil
resources, for example through erosion control
and cultivation practices. The Strategy for
Sustainable Farming and Food includes targets to
encourage practices to halt the decline of soil
organic matter caused by agricultural practices in
vulnerable soils by 
 These measures are
currently being implemented through a number
of policies; more may be needed in the future.
Specifically, sequestration of carbon in soil is not
a simple process and requires a long-term
commitment to consistent land management in
order to be viable.

 Under Action 30 of the First Soil Action Plan for
England, Defra and UKCIP have also funded initial
work on the impacts of climate change on soil
functions. This work is reviewing research to date
to provide us with a comprehensive, current view
of potential climate change impacts on soils and
the ecosystem services they provide; and to
identify high risk land management practises
and potential mitigation/climate-proofing options.
This research also aims to identify suitable soil
reference sites for use in assessing climate change
effects in the years ahead. The Government
will commission further work on the cause
of soil carbon decline and will host a
conference to address the state of our
knowledge of the issue and what could
be done to address it.

103
Agriculture, forestry and land management


CHAPTER EIGHT
Public sector

104

Introduction

 The public sector is in a key position to lead on
carbon emissions reduction by setting a
behavioural and strategic example to the private
sector. By setting high standards of energy
efficiency and reducing carbon emissions, the
public sector can not only reduce its own
emissions but also influence the supply chain for
buildings and energy-using appliances.

 However, like the private sector, public sector
organisations, face barriers in identifying and
driving through carbon saving opportunities.
A key consideration is finding the up-front
investment that could lead to savings in future
years. Equally important is the need to engage
senior management and to attract staff resources
dedicated to tackling energy waste. By
overcoming these barriers in its own organisation,
the Government can set an example for the
wider public and the private sector to follow.
In 2004, the public sector estate, including the devolved administrations, was responsible for carbon dioxide
emissions of 
7 MtC on an end user basis or about 5 per cent of the UK total. Central government
departments were responsible for about one-tenth of this that share.
Emissions had fallen to about 28 per cent below 1990 levels by 2004 and we estimate that, including the
expected impact of the new measures included in this programme, they will remain at about this level
through to 2010, as electricity consumption has been increasing per unit of floor area with the introduction of
open plan working, increased IT equipment and air conditioning, and flexible and extended working hours.
The Government recognises that demonstrating leadership by reducing carbon dioxide emissions from its
own estate is important and can be achieved by reducing energy demand, improving energy efficiency and
continuing to source more electricity from renewables. Local authorities can have a significant influence
over emissions in their local areas, particularly through how they exercise their functions and discharge
their statutory duties. The Government is also currently responsible for around 30 per cent of total new
build spending and will only procure buildings in the Central Government estate that are in the top-
quartile in terms of energy performance.
Measures introduced in the Climate Change Programme 2000 are estimated to save around 
2 MtC in

 Activity undertaken to meet targets in the central Government estate and NHS, public sector
engagement with the Carbon Trust, and improvements in the standard of buildings as a result of the
Building Regulations are the main contributors, with product policy also playing an important role.
Some of the new measures that will deliver additional carbon savings to 2010 are:

 provision of £4 million in new funding to create a local authority best practice support and
improvement programme to be launched in 2006-7 and consideration of how to ensure that the local
government performance framework will include an appropriate focus on action on climate change,
sufficient to incentivise more authorities to reach the levels of the best.

 a new revolving loan fund of £20m to finance investment by the public sector in energy efficiency. This
will provide support to at least 20 local authorities in 2006-07 and 20 other public sector organisations
by the end of 2008; and

 delivering the DfES Building Schools for the Future and other capital programmes to make a substantial
improvement in energy efficiency and carbon emissions standards of new and refurbished schools in
England.
Together it is estimated that these new measures will contribute an additional 
3 MtC of carbon savings in
2010, bringing total savings in 2010 to 
5 MtC.


Greenhouse gas emissions inventory
and projections

 In 2004, public sector greenhouse gas emissions
were around 6 MtC on an end user basis, around

3 percent of total UK emissions and had reduced
by some 30 percent since 
 Annual emissions
by 2010 are expected to be 23 per cent below
1990 levels. These emissions include those from
the central government estate, the NHS estate,
local authorities, and the education sector

Projections of greenhouse gas emissions from the public sector and
estimated effect of additional quantified measures, MtC
The role of local government

 Action by local authorities is likely to be critical to
the achievement of Government’s climate change
objectives. Local authorities are uniquely placed
to provide vision and leadership to local
communities, raise awareness and help change
behaviours. In addition, through their powers and
responsibilities (housing, planning, local transport,
powers to promote well-being and through
activities such as their own local procurement and
operations) they can have significant influence
over emissions in their local areas.

 During the review of the Climate Change
Programme the Government commissioned a
study to assess the scope for carbon savings from
local and regional activity
 This showed that
some local authorities are already taking
exemplary action on climate change. For
example, in response to their responsibilities
under the Home Energy Conservation Act
(HECA)
 Examples of such action have been
showcased in the Round 6 Sustainable Energy
Beacon Councils Theme and through initiatives
such as the Nottingham Declaration on Climate
Change.
1990 1995 2000 20102005 2015 2020

Mt C567891011
Historical trend
Baseline with measures projections
Additional quantified measures

105
Public sector
1 Local authority housing is covered by the domestic sector.
2 ‘Local and Regional Action to Cut Carbon’, Centre for Sustainable Energy, July 

3 Under the 1995 Home Energy Conservation Act, local authorities with housing responsibilities are required to report on energy efficiency improvements for
all residential accommodation within their boundaries. They must also prepare a strategy for improving energy efficiency within residential accommodation,
produce annual progress reports and set targets for themselves.
Greenhouse gas emissions from the public sector, MtC
Gas 1990 1995 2000 2004 2010 2015 2020
Carbon dioxide 
9 
2 
1 
7 
9 
0 
5
Methane 
5 
4 
2 
2 
5 
4 
4
Nitrous oxide 
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1
Total 
5 
7 
3 
9 
5 
6 
0
Change from 1990 levels -
5 -
0 -
1 -
7 -
5 -
4
Note: the percentage changes and emission estimates may differ slightly due to rounding
Additional measures Carbon savings in 2010 (MtC)
Additional effort by local authorities 
2
Revolving loan fund for the public sector 
1
TOTAL 
3
Existing measures Carbon savings in 2010 (MtC) 
Central Government estate energy efficiency target, 
NHS Estates targets, UK universities and English schools 
2
TOTAL 
2



 The Government welcomes and supports the work
by these exemplary local authorities, and recognises
the value they have added. However, the study
raised concerns about the extent that local action
depends critically on interested, committed
individuals within local government to succeed.

 The Government recognises that the local
government performance framework does not
currently include the outcome-focused content
on climate change which would reflect the
importance of tackling climate change and the
potentially critical role local government will need
to play in this in the short, medium and long
term. But the Government also has a
commitment to avoid placing unfunded new
burdens on local government, and to move
existing responsibilities to a more flexible,
outcome-focussed basis, with greater flexibility to
deliver on national priorities in the most effective
way for that locality.

 Local Area Agreements (LAAs) offer great
potential for delivering shared central local
priorities, including sustainable development
outcomes. Climate change and energy outcomes
are included in the current LAA Guidance and
associated Outcomes Framework.

 The Government wants to see a significant
increase in the level of engagement by local
government in climate change issues. The current
local government performance framework,
including the Comprehensive Performance
Assessment, is currently under review. It is
intended a new framework will be introduced
post 2008, following the Comprehensive
Spending Review, which is considering the
overall performance framework for public
services. In this context, the Government will
consider how to ensure that the local
government performance framework will
include an appropriate focus on action on
climate change, sufficient to incentivise more
authorities to reach the levels of the best.

106
Public sector
Sustainable Energy Beacon Councils 
In 2005, the Government launched a
Sustainable Energy Beacon Councils scheme.
Seven councils were selected as Beacons:
Cornwall with Caradon, Carrick, Isles of Scilly,
Kerrier, North Cornwall, Penwith, and
Restormel has an ambitious and far-reaching
strategy for sustainable energy development,
published by the Cornwall Sustainable Energy
Partnership.
Within its Environmental Management Audit
Scheme (EMAS) partnership framework, High
Peak takes responsibility for delivering its
climate change, fuel poverty, energy efficiency,
energy costs and air quality objectives.
Leicester has set itself a very ambitious 50 per
cent reduction target for CO2 emissions by

 Innovative projects include innovative use
of metering and monitoring; and recycling of
sustainable electricity export receipts from
households. 
Lewisham’s work includes large-scale domestic
energy efficiency and fuel poverty
programmes; providing sustainable energy
advice; energy auditing surveys and use of
remote energy management controllers.
Nottinghamshire has reduced CO2 emissions
from council buildings by 25% in the past 4
years. The council has delivered projects
covering energy management, CHP, wood-
fuelled boilers, transport and fleet management. 
Shropshire engages in partnership working
with various communities including Women’s
Institute groups, church congregations and
focused action in specific market towns. Action
and targets are formulated with the
communities. 
Woking operates a private wire distributed
generation system, using technologies
including fuel cell CHP, solar PV and ground
source heat pumps A save-to-spend approach
maintains momentum.



 The Government will also publish a report
on ways in which local authorities can
reduce greenhouse gas emissions and
alleviate fuel poverty, within 18 months of
the Climate Change and Sustainable Energy
Bill’s commencement. Local authorities will
have to have regard to this report in carrying
out their functions. The Bill, currently before
Parliament, is sponsored by Mark Lazarowicz and
supported by the Government.

 The Government will ensure that there are no
unfunded new burdens created. In keeping with
this commitment the Government and its
agencies will:

 fund a new £4m local government best
practice support programme, to be
launched in 2006-
 This programme will be
delivered through the new local authority led
Improvement Partnerships being set up in
every region in conjunction with the 7
Sustainable Energy Beacons. The programme
will aim to proactively benchmark the
performance of local authorities on climate
change and sustainable energy and target
those who need the most help to raise their
performance. It will help local authorities to
access existing sources of expertise, support
and funding, on sustainable energy and
climate change by the EST and the Carbon
Trust, as well as external sources of support,
such as the Nottingham Declaration and UK
Home Energy Conservation Association;

 to assist this HM Treasury announced in
Budget 2006 that it will host a seminar that
will bring together central and local
government to encourage the further
dissemination of best practice and innovation;

 provide further resources to local
authorities to invest in energy saving on
their own estate through the Carbon
Trust’s Local Authority Energy Financing
Scheme, which will be developed into a
public sector revolving loan fund following the
announcement of an additional investment
of £20m in the 2005 Pre-Budget Report.
This is discussed in more detail elsewhere
in this chapter;

 as set out in the Domestic Sector chapter, the
Government has announced £20 million over
the next two years, to help local authorities
and others work in partnership with energy
companies to promote and incentivise energy
efficiency measures to households; and

 work with the Local Government
Association (LGA) and others, to review
thoroughly existing requirements on, and
guidance to, local authorities on
sustainable energy and climate change.
Within this, the Government is committed to
a realignment of existing resources away from
process (for example the preparation of
reports) and towards outcomes (for example
carbon savings, delivered in a way most
appropriate for the local area) – so that,
combined with funding available to local
authorities, consideration of the inclusion
of a focus on climate change in the new
performance framework does not represent a

107
Public sector
The Nottingham Declaration on climate change
The Nottingham Declaration was launched in October 
 The Declaration is a voluntary pledge to
address the issues of climate change, signed by the Leader and Chief Executive of a council. In signing it,
councils are committing to ensure that tackling climate change is a cornerstone of the council's strategy. 
So far, over 100 local authorities have signed the Declaration, each pledging to actively tackle climate
change within their area.
The Declaration was recently re-launched and will soon be accompanied by a much improved support
package that shows councils how to develop a sustainable energy strategy.


new unfunded burden and provides greater
flexibility to deliver on national priorities in the
most effective way for that locality.

 We believe that together these measures can
deliver additional savings of 
2MtC in 

Given the critical role of local government in
achieving our climate change objectives, the
longer term benefits may be much more
significant.

 Datasets will be important if local authorities are
to begin to effectively monitor their performance
on climate change issues. In October 2005, the
Government published experimental statistics on
carbon dioxide emissions at local authority and
Regional Government Office level. These
estimates will be updated in 2006 and there will
be further engagement with local and regional
government and other stakeholders to establish
what other monitoring approaches may be useful.

 The Government recognises the important role
Sustainable Community Strategies, Local Strategic
Partnerships (LSPs) and Local Area Agreements
have to play in helping to tackle climate change.
In order to strengthen the delivery of sustainable
development at local level, the Government has
committed to reshaping Community
Strategies into Sustainable Community
Strategies. As previously mentioned, under
the Climate Change and Sustainable Energy
Bill, the Government will publish a report
which local authorities will have to have
regard to in exercising their functions. The
Sustainable Community Strategy framework
may be a suitable route to show how they
will take this forward with partners on LSPs.
Planning

 The location, design, construction and siting of
built development and economic and social
activity can significantly affect the level of
greenhouse gas emissions. Statements of
planning policy, issued by the Government and
the devolved administrations, set out a national
policy framework for plan making at regional and
local levels and may be relevant to individual
planning decisions. These statements take
account of the impacts of climate change. The
Government is examining ways to enhance the
role of the planning system in tackling climate
change.

 The Government has already set out in Planning
Policy Statement 22 its policies for the promotion
of renewable energy in England. It is committed
to a review of the permitted development rights
enjoyed by householders, to see if the rules could
be made easier and clearer, especially as regards
the installation of renewable energy technology
on the exterior of houses and in domestic
gardens. It is currently in the process of
strengthening guidance on managing flood risk
in development. The Government now intends
to prepare and consult on a new PPS setting
out how it expects participants in the
planning process to work towards the
reduction of carbon emissions in the
location, siting and design of new
development.
The role of communities

 Local communities have a major role to play in
tackling climate change, for example, by raising
awareness locally or through local projects on
cleaner transport or the use of renewable energy
in community buildings. All types of community
groups can make a difference including
neighbourhood groups, residents’ groups, sports
or social groups, faith groups and tenants’
groups.

 Many communities are already making a big
difference through programmes such as the
Energy Saving Trust’s Community Action for
Energy initiative, which is designed to promote
and facilitate local community-based energy
projects. It provides advice, case studies and
support to groups who are interested in getting
involved in local action


 The Prime Minister made a commitment to
re-invigorate community action on sustainable

108
Public sector
4 The LAA Guidance outlined how LAAs can help deliver SD. A section of the LAA Toolkit deals with the ways in which LAAs can deliver on cross-cutting
outcomes such as climate change. This can be found at: www.idea-knowledge.gov.uk/idk/core/page.do?pageId=910763
5 For further information call the helpline on 08701 261 
 or visit the website at www.est.org.uk/cafe/


development and, at the launch of the
Sustainable Development Strategy in March
2005, he announced Community Action 

This is a programme of action to improve support
for wider community action on the sustainable
development priorities
 Community Action 2020
is part of the Government’s overall commitment
to work together with local people to secure a
more sustainable future

The role of English Regions

 The Energy White Paper (EWP) highlighted the
key role played in England by regional bodies,
such as Regional Development Agencies (RDAs),
Regional Assemblies and Government Offices and
local authorities in delivering UK objectives on
climate change and sustainable energy.

 Regional bodies have powers and responsibilities
that will impact on the long-term shift to low
carbon such as the responsibility RDAs have for
regional economic development. Regional bodies
are uniquely placed to help coordinate local, sub-
regional and regional activity with national policy,
and reduce overlaps to optimise outcomes.

 In response to the Energy White Paper’s call for
the English regions to develop strategic
approaches to energy, energy partnerships, part-
funded by central Government, now exist in all
regions. These partnerships have been taking
forward a variety of practical regional projects
aimed at reducing emissions, linking closely with
the regional sustainable development agenda.
Through work to integrate climate change into
the new performance framework for local
authorities, the Government proposes to look
over the next year at what might be done to
further enhance the role.

109
Public sector
6 More information, ideas and useful links can be found at the community action webpage: 
www.sustainable-development.gov.uk/delivery/global-local/community.htm
7 Further information about the Government’s Together we can initiative can be found at the following website:
www.communities.homeoffice.gov.uk/civil/together-we-can/
The Greater London Assembly (GLA)
London’s directly elected Mayor and Assembly, came to power in July 

The Mayor has stated that energy and climate change are key issues for London and in 2004, through his
own initiative, set out how the capital could contribute to reducing UK emissions in the London Energy
Strategy. One of the aims of the strategy was to set up the London Energy Partnership to ensure that
London’s energy sector attracted both investment and intellectual capital. 
In 2005, the London Climate Change Agency was established with a remit to support climate change
projects in the capital utilising public and private funds.
The GLA has also published a draft Supplementary Planning Guidance document on Sustainable Design and
Construction to complement the Spatial Development Strategy (London Plan). The Guidance includes new
policies on energy efficiency and renewable energy.
The Government welcomes these steps. The consultation on the review of GLA powers in 2004-5, asked
specifically whether the GLA should be given statutory responsibility to produce an energy strategy to
enhance the impact of a wider range of regional strategies, and act as a focus for cooperation between
regional partners.
The Government will be reviewing responses to this consultation and will consider how the Assembly’s
role in promoting sustainable energy and climate change may be enhanced.
London's programme of activities may generate additional carbon savings, which may impact on progress
towards our domestic goal. GLA are developing a roadmap for emissions reductions, which they intend to
publish in summer 
 The Government will work closely with GLA over the coming months to
determine how any savings that emerge should be factored into the UK Programme.



 The Government is working with representatives
of the Regional Development Agencies to
respond to Recommendation 13 of Ben Gill’s
biomass taskforce report, which recommends that
all RDAs should set themselves targets for carbon
reduction. Initial discussions have been
positive, and the Government and RDAs
expect to bring forward proposals jointly
over the coming year.
Funding schemes for public sector
organisations

 In the 2005 Pre-Budget Report the Chancellor
announced an increase in funding for the Carbon
Trust by £20m over the next two years to
establish a revolving fund for energy
efficiency work in the public sector, building
on the pilot Local Authority Energy
Financing (LAEF) Scheme. In such a scheme
loan funding for organisations is conditional on
maintaining a ring-fenced energy management
fund, with initial funding supplied by the scheme
and sometimes all or part matched by the
participating organisation.

 Most energy efficiency measures in public sector
buildings have a payback period of within five
years or less. A scheme which creates revolving
funds would be a net benefit to public
expenditure after around four years, and
continuing for the lifetime of the measures
installed, in many cases, at least another ten
years. Financial mechanisms of this type drive
change by encouraging procurement managers
and decision makers to look again at the way
they plan, invest and save within their portfolio
giving them real reasons to ‘invest to save’ for
the long term. Not only does this improve
environmental and efficiency standards within
estates, but it can also stimulate more
widespread adoption of energy saving and
carbon reduction measures.

 With the additional funding of £20m, Salix
Finance, which was set up by the Carbon Trust to
administer the new revolving fund, will initiate a
major escalation in funding support for public
sector organisations in 2006-
 The scheme is
expected to deliver additional carbon savings
of 
1MtC by 
 Salix will seek proposals
from local authorities with the aim of
increasing the size of its existing LAEF
programme by around 60 authorities and
will begin work on new funding vehicles to
support central Government departments,
higher education and the NHS, with the aim
of supporting at least 20 new public sector
organisations in 2007-


 The experience that Carbon Trust and Salix
Finance have gained through the development of
the Local Authority Energy Finance Scheme has
shown that successful delivery of the fund will
depend on client organisations developing
innovative approaches to overcoming financial
barriers to providing up-front investment in
energy management. Therefore the
Government, with the Carbon Trust, will
establish a high level steering group to
oversee the early development of the fund
and to tackle barriers as they are
encountered.

 Overcoming financial barriers is important but
they do not exist in isolation. Alongside the
development of a revolving fund mechanism, the
role of advice and support is central to the public
sector achieving its goals. The Carbon Trust’s
Carbon Management programme is tailored
to large public sector organisations such as
Government Departments, local authorities and
higher education organisations. The programme
helps organisations assess how to combat the
risks and take advantage of the opportunities

110
Public sector


associated with climate change. It goes beyond
energy management, enabling organisations to
consider their strategy and operations in the
context of climate change. As well as reducing
carbon emissions, the benefits include cost
savings, clarity around responses to legislation
and operational improvements.
Public sector procurement

 The Government is ideally placed to lead by
example, through its procurement of goods,
services and buildings. With a budget of over
£125bn, the wider public sector can build
markets for new and improved products and
services, such as systems for the generation of
renewable electricity and renewable heat and
through pursuing higher standards of energy
performance. Sustainable procurement is a key
lever to achieve this, from developers to
architects, engineers, construction companies and
facilities managers, the skills and mentality to
deliver and operate low-carbon buildings could
develop quickly across both public and private
sectors if the public sector takes the lead.

 In 2003 the Government implemented a range
of measures to encourage central government
departments to apply minimum environmental
standards across a wide range of commonly
purchased products. To help Government
departments meet these standards the Sustainable
Procurement Group identified 19 energy
consumption-focused ‘Quick Wins’ which are
off-the-shelf procurement specifications. These
were published in the OGC Buying Solutions
(OGCbs) website9, along with corresponding
procurement frameworks. The Government has
since committed to extending and updating the
list of Quick Wins. Proposals to extend them to
31 energy consumption focused products have
been published in the Government’s Market
Transformation Programme and OGC’s websites.

 The future direction and scope of this initiative
will take into account the views of the
Sustainable Procurement Task Force. Established
in May 2005 under the chairmanship of Sir
Neville Simms, the Sustainable Procurement Task
Force is set up to draw up an action plan by
spring 2006, to bring a step-change in
sustainable public procurement so that the UK
is among the leaders in the EU by 


 Energy is also set to play its part in meeting the
wider target, set by the Gershon report, to
generate £22bn public sector savings by March

 The Public Sector Efficiency Review for
Energy is a project, managed by OGCbs, to
generate £200m energy savings, through
developing innovation in energy procurement,
improving the management of energy through
better metering and clearer billing and increasing
conservation activity. A Pan-Government Energy
Forum, which includes key stakeholders from the
public and private sectors, will ensure that the
project leverages good work, and avoids
duplication of activity in different departments.
Central Government

 Targets for the Government Estate are being
reviewed as part of the UK Sustainable
Development Strategy commitment to improve
the Government’s performance and ensure it
leads by example. Targets on energy and climate
change are two key areas for the review.

 The Government launched the Sustainable
Development Framework for the Government
Estate10 in 2002 which included a range of
environmental targets. The six energy targets
focus on reducing the amount of energy used,
and hence carbon dioxide emitted, increasing
energy efficiency and sourcing energy from more
sustainable sources. There are also transport
targets for reducing emissions from road
transport.

 Progress is being made in many areas. For
example most departments have continued to
reduce their fossil fuel use per unit floor area since

 Overall, the combined average total of the
amount of electricity sourced from renewable
sources for the departments and their agencies is
19 per cent, suggesting that the central

111
Public sector
9 www.ogcbs.gov.uk/environmental/newsroom/articles/downloads/Min Env Standards.DOC
10 www.sustainable-development.gov.uk/delivery/integrating/estate/energy-intro.htm


Government Estate has already met its renewable
electricity target of 10 per cent by 
 All nine
of the departments that have initiated new estate
management contracts since August 2004 have
included clauses to ensure opportunities are
identified, and measures are taken to reduce
carbon dioxide emissions, leading to greater
improvements in the management of the Estate in
the future. Departments have already met, or are
close to meeting, their transport carbon dioxide
emissions reduction target.

 Key targets on reducing absolute carbon
emissions and electricity use per unit floor area
are not currently being met. The Government
is therefore reviewing the existing targets
in the Framework to deliver strengthened
strategic targets by summer 2006, to ensure
a step change in the way that Government
departments manage their own energy and
emissions is achieved. Making sure that the
correct set of targets is in place and issues with
the collection and quality of data are tackled is
necessary to guarantee a high level of confidence
in the progress of this sector. Equally important is
securing commitment to changing behaviour. To
tackle the issue of engaging top management
attention, new annual reporting procedures are
being developed, and larger public sector
organisations are being encouraged to sign up
for the Carbon Trust’s Carbon Management
programme
 Defra was the first department to
do so. The Sustainable Development Commission
already provides an independent report and
commentary on the performance of central
Government departments. In the future, each
Secretary of State will be required to sign-off
their department’s annual progress report.

 However there are significant challenges ahead.
For example the Civil departments, excluding the
Ministry of Defence, have experienced a 7 per
cent increase in total floor area since 1999-2000;
their electricity consumption per unit floor area
has also been increasing with the introduction of
open plan working, increased IT and air
conditioning, flexible and extended working
hours. Sustainable Development Ministers12 have
agreed that all central Government
Departments will sign up for a Carbon Trust
energy audit to identify cost effective
savings and develop the action plans needed
to deliver them.
The wider public sector

 The whole public sector estate, including the
devolved administrations, is responsible for about
5 per cent of the total UK carbon dioxide
emissions. Since central Government is
responsible for only about 15 per cent of this
total, it is necessary to extend focus on the wider
public sector.

 In December 2005 Sustainable Development
Ministers committed to establishing reporting
mechanisms on activity to improve energy
efficiency for all parts of the public sector. To
deliver this the Government will carry out an
examination of energy management information
in the wider public sector with a view to making
recommendations for improvements in the
completeness and quality of energy data before
the end of 
 This will help Government
achieve its own public sector target of achieving
a 
5MtC reduction in emissions from it’s own
operations, by 2010 which was set in 


 All sectors of the Government Estate will review
their carbon emissions reduction strategies. While
a raft of energy efficiency measures are currently
being deployed to good effect across the Estate,
further opportunities exist to reduce emissions
from fossil fuels. A key approach is by using
renewable fuels in place of gas and oil. This
approach goes further than buying renewable
electricity from the grid, it looks to the
Government to produce its own renewable
electricity and heat. Regarding heating for
example: if 20 per cent of the heating boilers,
which annually are replaced or refurbished on the
Government Estate, were replaced by boilers
equipped to run on biomass, the annual carbon
savings from the replacements by 2020 would be
between 
12 – 
15MtC by 
13

112
Public sector
11 Carbon Management is a tool developed by the Carbon Trust to help large public and private sector organisations develop effective management
procedures for the efficient use of energy.
12 www.sustainable-development.gov.uk/government/ministers.htm
13 Assumes 20-year replacement/refurbishment cycle; total Government Estate heat demand of 
7TWhth/a (of Public Estate total heat demand of

1TWhth/a); 
65TWh/a replaced; and carbon saving of 
05 – 
06 MtC per TWh.


Schools

 The education sector accounts for approximately
10 per cent of carbon emissions for all commercial
and public buildings. Annual energy returns from
schools, collected by the Government for the
period 1999-00 to 2002-03 show that, due to
increased use of information and communications
technologies and extended opening hours, there
has been a substantial increase in electricity
consumption. Greater use of renewable energy
technologies in schools has the potential to help
address increased consumption and reduce carbon
emissions from the schools estate.

 Building on the Sustainable Development
Action Plan for Education and Skills launched
in 2003, the Government will emphasise
the sustainability and energy efficiency
requirements for school buildings through
a Sustainable Schools launch and
consultation in 
 The intention is to provide
a framework for sustainable development for
existing schools which is designed to assist them
in producing and delivering a sustainability plan
tailored to their needs.

 To meet the challenge set by the Prime Minister,
that all new schools and City Academies should be
models for sustainable developmentthe
requirement is for all schools procured through the
Building Schools for the Future (BSF) and other
major capital programmes to achieve rating of
‘very good’15 or better. Funding levels provide for
this. A number of quality indicators16 must be used
in all BSF school projects and in post-occupancy
evaluations, such as transport (including cyclists),
reducing energy and waste in the building process
and using natural day-light and ventilation
wherever possible. To support this work, this
year the Government will collect energy and
consumption data from 2003-04 to 2005-06 to
benchmark school energy consumption and
set targets for the sector and will publish new
guidance on the design of sustainable
schools, emphasising the role of energy
performance in sustainable design.

 The Government is committed to promoting
renewable energy technologies in all schools in
England from a range of options including
biomass boilers, wind turbines, solar PV, solar
thermal and ground source heat pumps.
Government programmes to support the
development of micro-generation have played an
important part in providing funding for the
development of technologies within the schools
estate. To date the Government has committed
nearly £3m for projects in 186 schools. The
Budget 2006 announcement to provide a further
£50m for the installation of mircogeneration
technology will benefit schools further. There are
approximately 25,000 schools in England,
uniquely distributed within its communities and
connecting tangibly with millions of children,
young people and families. Renewable energy
technologies have a key role to play in reducing
carbon emissions and engaging future
generations with climate change issues. The use
of renewable technologies can also provide a rich
learning resource for teaching of science,
geography, design and technology, citizenship
and mathematics.

113
Public sector
14 Though in secondary schools this has been partially offset by improved energy efficiency.
15 This is based on the Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method (BREEAM13).
16 www.dqi.org.uk/Schools/default.htm



 To aid this process, the Government is
developing a strategy on renewable energy
generation and carbon reduction for schools.
This will include a whole life costs toolkit to help
decision makers prioritise expenditure on energy
efficiency measures and low and zero carbon
energy systems. The Government will work
with the private sector and NDPBs to
develop an approach to support schools in
developing, as part of the primary capital
programme, renewable energy generation to
make the process easy, low (or zero) cost,
and genuinely attractive to schools. This
approach will promote excellent sustainable
design, offer high efficiency potential, develop
best practice partnering with the private sector
and set out how to develop the skill necessary in
schools, local authorities and the private sector.
Higher and further education

 Higher education institutions have a significant
impact on the environment. Each year they are
responsible for consuming 
2 billion kWh of
energy at a cost of over £200m and spend £3bn
on goods and services. They educate two million
students and employ almost 300,000 staff, and
have an opportunity to support a sustainable
society by equipping students with the values,
skills and knowledge to contribute to sustainable
development. They also have the opportunity to
generate and transfer knowledge through
research and leadership of, and influence on,
local, national and international networks.

 The Higher Education Funding Council for
England17 (HEFCE) provides grants to institutions
through their Leadership, Governance and
Management Fund to support the development
and promotion of good practice. In July 2005
HEFCE published a strategy and action plan18,
setting out how, within the next ten years, the
Higher education sector in England will achieve
sustainability and tackle climate change. This will be
a key cross-cutting theme of HEFCE’s strategic plan
for 2006-11, which will be published in April 


 The Carbon Trust has developed a version of
Carbon Management tailored to the needs of
the Higher education sector. This provides technical
and change management support to help the
sector realise carbon emissions savings from areas
such as academic, accommodation and leisure
buildings and vehicle fleets. This is supported by
a Higher Education Carbon Management Toolkit
which provides process guidance, technical
advice, case studies and a suite of specifically
tailored tools. The pilot programme was launched
in April 2005 to 20 universities and runs until
March 
 The second phase is due to
commence in May 2006 and will extend support
to a further 25 universities.
The Learning and Skills Council (LSC) estate
is approximately 
13 million square metres
(excluding agricultural buildings and
residences) and is responsible for consuming
approximately 
7 billion kWh of energy at a
cost of over £43m per year. 
The Government expects providers, working
with the Learning Skills Council, to
demonstrate good governance in sustainable
buildings and estate management which will
see them undertake a review of the social,
economic and environmental aspects of their
organisations and identify areas for action.
relating to energy, building and design,
procurement and travel through for example,
encouraging the use of video and telephone
conferencing across the LSC to reduce business
travel and ‘recycling’ redundant IT equipment
for schools and charities.

114
Public sector
17 www.hefce.ac.uk/
18 This is available at: www.hefce.ac.uk/pubs/hefce/2005/05_28/.


The NHS Estate

 The NHS has the largest property portfolio in
Europe and the biggest capital spend programme
with an annual budget over £76bn. The NHS
employs over one million people and spends
£11bn per year on goods and services. Tasked
with building new hospitals, and GP premises,
it expects to spend £12bn on new facilities by

 Energy use costs the NHS over £312m per
year and is responsible for emissions of nearly
1 MtC each year.
The NHS has two targets in England:

 to reduce the level of primary energy
consumption by 15 per cent or 
15 MtC
from a base year of March 2000 by March
2010; and

 to achieve a target of 35-55 Gj/100m3 energy
efficiency performance for the healthcare
estate for all new capital developments and
major redevelopments or refurbishments; and
that all existing facilities should achieve a
target of 55-65 Gj/100m


 Data up to 2004-05 demonstrates that the energy
efficiency of the NHS estate in England continues
to improve. If this trend continues, predictions
show that total energy consumption is likely to
reduce by 15 per cent from 2000 figures by 

Predictions indicate that this performance is likely
to continue with higher building standards and
greater elements of the future estate comprising
more local low-tech facilities and fewer, but more
efficient, high-tech acute facilities. Carbon
dioxide emissions are not reducing to the same
extent but it is anticipated this will improve with
the impact of the forthcoming revised Building
Regulations and the Energy Performance of
Buildings Directive and the further development
of renewable energy sources.

 The Hartlepool Hospital energy centre is a clear
example of a partnership between the NHS and
the private sector and is an exemplar of Best
Value Procurement for the NHS. Not only does it
deliver lower energy costs and reduce carbon
emissions, but it also provides the Trust with a
secure energy source and the ability to generate
revenue when it exports electricity.

115
Public sector
CHP and the Hartlepool Energy Centre
Dalkia Utilities Services developed a new energy
centre at the Hartlepool Hospital as part of a PFI
contract with North Tees and Hartlepool NHS Trust.
This development includes the installation,
operation and the management of a 
4 MWe
reciprocating engine based CHP scheme with waste
heat recovery boiler. The boiler extracts heat from
the engine’s exhaust gases to generate steam which
will then be fed into the hospital’s steam system.
The low-grade heat from the engine water jacket
will also be utilised to provide hot water.
The scheme is designed to provide most of the
Hospital’s steam and electricity requirements. Any
surplus electricity is to be exported to other Trust
properties so they can benefit from the climate
change levy exemption. The scheme is to generate
about 11,000 MWh of electricity per year for on site
use and export to the Trust’s other properties.


Cross-cutting measures to improve
energy efficiency

 The majority of emissions from the public sector
come from buildings. In 2004 the sector
accounted for 34 per cent of new non-domestic
building construction and 37 per cent of non-
domestic refurbishment and maintenance work
(totalling almost 
5 per cent of UK GDP)


 The 2006 revision to Part L of Building
Regulations in England and Wales is set to
reduce emissions by up to 27 per cent for non-
domestic buildings. Continued tightening of the
standard with successive revisions to Part L will
enable the sector to make progress towards the
2050 target of reducing UK emissions by 60 per
cent. This will be necessary as the public sector is
increasing the intensity of its activities, with the
total floor area of public sector buildings growing
at nearly 2 per cent per year (mostly in the health
and education sectors). However, most of the
emissions between now and 2050 will come from
buildings that are already part of the public estate
therefore the elements of the Building
Regulations which apply to refurbishment and
should generate a 5 per cent improvement in
energy performance in the existing stock.

 Another key measure which targets existing
building stock is the Energy Performance of
Buildings Directive (EPBD). A key requirement
of the Directive is that when a building is
constructed, sold or rented out an energy
performance certificate must be made available
to the prospective buyer or tenant. In buildings
over 1000m2 that are used to provide a public
service there is a requirement to display the
certificate in a public place. Displaying an energy
performance certificate is intended to encourage
public pressure on building occupiers to modify
their behaviour in order to make energy
performance transparent. Through this measure
the Government will deliver the commitment
announced in the 2004 Energy Efficiency Action
Plan to only procure buildings in the Central
Government estate which are in the top-
quartile in terms of energy performance. This
has the potential to open up price differentials
which could help to transform the property market
in the similar way to white goods labelling.

 The conclusion of negotiations of the Energy
End-Use Efficiency and Energy Services
Directive was a key achievement as part of the
Government’s efforts to give energy efficiency a
high priority during UK’s Presidency of the EU.
The Directive was agreed in December 2005 and
will be formally adopted in Spring 
 Its
objective is to enhance the cost-effective
improvement of energy end-use efficiency in the
Member States. This is to be achieved among
other ways through the public sector
communicating its efforts to the public and
ensuring the exchange of best practice. As part
of implementing the Directive, the Government
must apply at least two measures from the
following list: the use of financial instruments;
guidance; requirements to purchase energy
efficient equipment and vehicles; requirements
to replace or retrofit existing equipment and
vehicles; requirements to use energy audits; and
the requirement to purchase or rent energy-
efficient buildings. Through implementation of
the Directive, the public sector will play a key part
in contributing to the overall savings target of
9 per cent of the average amount of energy
consumed during the previous five years, over
9 years.
THE ENCODE
The Department of Health in partnership with
the Carbon Trust and collaboration with the
devolved administrations is working to produce
a Health Technical Memorandum entitled
“EnCO2de – making energy work in healthcare”.
The document is to be published in 2006 and is
intended as a comprehensive guide to all issues
relating to the procurement and management
of energy in the NHS in the UK. The aim of
Encode is to ensure that everyone involved in
managing, procuring and using buildings and
equipment thinks about the implications of
energy use; today and in the future.

116
Public sector
19 BSRIA Statistics Bulletin, June 



CHAPTER NINE
Stimulating action by individuals

117

Understanding the barriers

 Encouraging changes in the way we live, often
habits engrained over many years, is not simple.
What Government has done in the past has led
to some significant changes but failed to make
the fundamental shift needed to move to a low
carbon economy. This chapter summarises the
aspects of the Climate Change Programme
through which the Government aims to
encourage a change in individual and collective
behaviour, and sets out further plans.

 The Government’s Sustainable Development
Strategy, Securing the Future – delivering UK
sustainable development strategy1, introduced a
new approach to delivering long-term behaviour
change based on the latest available research and
evidence, and gave greater recognition to some
of the social and practical factors that influence
and limit how we choose to behave.

 Further work has been undertaken by the Round
Table on Sustainable Consumption, jointly led by
the Sustainable Development Commission and
the National Consumer Council, which has
examined the potential for a significant shift
towards more sustainable lifestyles and is about
to come forward with recommendations aimed
at those areas of our lives which have greatest
environmental impact, including food, homes
and travel.

 One important issue that the Round Table has
raised is the need to understand the respective
1 HM Government (2005) Securing the future – delivering UK sustainable development strategy: www.sustainable-development.gov.uk
Individuals, households and communities have a crucial role in tackling climate change. The UK's emissions
are the cumulative result of the choices made by government, businesses, organisations in other sectors
and individuals. But government can play a critical role, by establishing a framework that encourages and
enables changes in behaviour that reduce the footprint of individuals. Many of the policies set out
elsewhere in this programme will contribute to this. But we will do more, and enable individuals to make
choices that reduce the impact of our individual and collective actions on the environment and help to
meet our emissions reduction goals.

 The Government will review and find more innovative ways to encourage individuals to make
sustainable choices and help them to understand their own role and responsibility in tackling climate
change. Earlier chapters set out a number of commitments which will contribute to this.

 The Government will continue to build relationships with organisations such as the Energy Saving Trust
to ensure that partnerships between key players are developed and links are made between raising
awareness and taking action at all levels – individual, business and the public sector.

 The Government will set out a plan for further action on sustainable consumption by the end of 2006,
responding to the report of the Round Table on Sustainable Consumption due in Spring 


 The Government is planning a new online information service (working title: Environment Direct) to
provide information on the environmental impact of a range of everyday products and services, and
practical advice on how people can make the most sustainable lifestyle choices.

 In December 2005 Defra launched the first elements of a new Climate Change Communications
Initiative. The Initiative aims to change public attitudes toward climate change, with a central focus on
local, grass roots and regional engagement.

 Defra is providing up to £4m over three years to roll out a new package of measures to help thousands
of community groups across England to take action on sustainable development, including climate
change. This initiative will be launched later in 



roles of Government, business and consumers in
promoting behaviour change and reducing the
negative environmental impacts of products. In
certain circumstances Government and business
will need to play a leadership role in “choice
editing”, taking responsibility for ensuring
appropriate minimum standards as well as
advising consumers about better lifestyle choices.
Consumers should expect that environmental
responsibility will be as fundamental to the
products they buy as health and safety is now.
Making the Change

 The new model in Securing our Future set out an
integrated approach to catalysing behaviour
change through the four “Es”. The Climate
Change Programme includes measures that seek
to exemplify, enable, engage, and encourage
the right attitude.
Exemplify – Government taking
the lead

 Government can play a critical role by
establishing a framework that encourages and
enables changes in behaviour that reduces the
footprint of individuals. Many of the policies set
out in this programme already will contribute to
this. But we will do more, and enable individuals
to make choices that reduce the impact of our
individual and collective actions on the
environment and help to meet our emissions
reduction goals.

 By increasing the purchase and use of energy
efficient goods and services we create a powerful
demand that markets will seek to meet,
stimulating innovation and new business
opportunities. The Government is committed to
leading by example by making sustainable
choices in the management of its own estates.

118
Stimulating action by individuals

 Remove barriers

 Give information

 Provide facilities

 Provide viable alternatives

 Educate/train/provide skills

 Provide capacity

 Leading by example

 Achieving consistency
in policies

 Community action

 Co-production

 Deliberative fora

 Personal contacts/
enthusiasts

 Media campaigns/
opinion formers

 Use Networks

 Tax system

 Expenditure – grants

 Reward schemes

 Recognition/
social pressure –
league tables

 Penalties, fines and
enforcement action
Approach evolves
as attitudes and
behaviours change
over time
Enable
Exemplify
EngageCatalyse
Is the package enough to
break a habit and kick
start change?
Encourage


As set out in the Public Sector chapter:

 The Government will use its own
purchasing power to lead by example and
has set itself a challenge of being an EU
leader in sustainable public procurement
by 


 In Summer 2006, the Government will
introduce new strategic targets for the
central government estate.
Enable – make it easy to behave
differently

 This is the starting point. We know that providing
individuals and communities with information is
not sufficient to enable behaviour change. We
need to help people make responsible choices by
providing them with accessible alternatives and
suitable infrastructure, and supporting them with
the necessary skills and information.

 As part of its Market Transformation
Programme, the Government will identify
potential eco-design standards for
important products in households and
non-households sectors.

 The Government will explore the role of
industry voluntary agreements such as
the Code of Conduct on Digital TV
services, procurement policy and UK-Led
International Task Force on Sustainable
Products which will encourage
international benchmarking.

 Budget 2006 announced a new initiative,
in partnership with major retailers and
the Energy Saving Trust, to introduce
voluntary schemes in the retail sector
which encourage the purchase of more
energy efficient alternatives in consumer
electronics.

 The Government will continue to support
colour-coded efficiency labels for products
to help consumers make sustainable
choices.

 Providing better information and
feedback on energy consumption through
better billing and metering will also help
individuals become more responsible in
the way they use energy. The
Government will work with Ofgem to
explore these benefits and the potential
for introducing smart metering in the UK.

 Making sustainable choices when
travelling is equally important. The
Government will therefore explore the
role of “smarter choices” to help curb
emissions.

 Defra is providing up to £4m over three
years to roll out a new package of
measures to help thousands of
community groups across England to take
action on sustainable development,
including climate change. ‘Every action
counts’ will provide new tools,
information and support to community
groups in taking small simple actions on
energy, waste and water which add up to
make a big difference nationwide. This
initiative will also support over 20
national voluntary and community sector
organisations to develop and implement
their own sustainable development
action plan, which will include the
contribution these bodies can make to
tackling climate change and energy
efficiency. This initiative will be launched
later in 


119
Stimulating action by individuals


Engage – get people involved

 Research2 shows that information in isolation is
rarely enough to change people’s behaviour, but
it has a very important role in underpinning and
increasing the effectiveness of other Government
actions. Information provision usually works best
if some of the people the Government is seeking
to influence are involved at a local level in
developing the communication materials and
selecting the media used. Such an approach
also helps identify and encourage community
champions and leaders and their networks to
be involved.

 As set out in the Public Sector chapter the
Government will:

 provide local authorities with additional
guidance on how to stimulate action on
climate change at local level; and

 introduce a revolving fund of £20m over
the next two years to support public
sector organisations in implementing
energy efficiency measures.

 Businesses in the agriculture and land
management sector face particular challenges
from a changing climate, and awareness of the
impacts of climate change in this sector needs
improving. The Rural Climate Change Forum has
made a strong contribution to getting key
messages to farmers, but further effort is
required.

 The Government will put in place an
agriculture sector communications
strategy as part of the wider Climate
Change Communications Initiative.
Encourage – give the right signals

 The Government must use the most efficient and
effective techniques to reward, encourage and
where necessary, enforce, the desired behaviour
change. The Government already supports
consumers through the work of the Energy
Saving Trust (EST)3 and other organisations such
as the Low Carbon Vehicle Partnership.

 As set out in the Domestic chapter, the
Government has announced £20m over
the next two years for a programme to
strengthen consumer demand for energy
efficiency, working closely with energy
suppliers, local authorities and others.

 EST’s activities are designed to underpin and
complement the work of other actors in energy
efficiency markets. In particular it seeks to work
with key Government policy drivers for household
energy efficiency – EEC, Warm Front, Decent
Homes and Building Regulations. Its principal
activities are aimed at increasing demand for
energy efficiency by raising awareness, providing
advice and support for action to consumers, local
authorities, schools, communities, vehicle
manufacturers and technology developers. It also
supports the supply of energy efficiency products
and services to meet this demand by developing
partnerships, stimulating innovation, supporting
training and providing accreditation. The Energy
Saving Trust also runs the Energy Efficiency Advice
Centres in England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland.

 More generally, the Government is supporting
behaviour change, and our understanding of what
drives change, through the Environmental Action
Fund. This Fund, worth £
75m in its current three
year round, is supporting 35 projects in England
that are designed to promote more sustainable
consumption and production, covering lifestyle
areas such as homes, food and transport.

120
Stimulating action by individuals
2 Motivating Sustainable Consumption - a review of evidence on consumer behaviour and behavioural change: 
www.sd-research.org.uk/documents/MotivatingSCfinal.pdf, Tim Jackson, 2005 .
The impact of sustainable development on public behaviour Andrew Darnton, for Defra, March 2004: 
www.sustainable-development.gov.uk/taking-it-on/pdf/desk-research
pdf
Driving public behaviours for sustainable lifestyles, Andrew Darnton, for Defra, May 2004: 
www.sustainable-development.gov.uk/taking-it-on/pdf/desk-research
pdf
Personal Responsibility and Changing Behaviour: the state of knowledge and its implications for public policy, Prime Minister Strategy Unit, February 2004:
www.number
gov.uk/files/pdf/pr.pdf
Carrots, sticks and sermons: influencing public behaviour for environmental goals Demos and the Green Alliance, for Defra, December 2004: 
www.green-alliance.org.uk/publications/PubCarrotsSticksSermons
3 Further information can be found on the Trust’s website.


Experience from these projects will be fed back into
the Government’s climate change and sustainable
consumption and production programmes.
Catalyse – breaking habits

 The ultimate test for the Climate Change
Programme is how all of our individual policy
initiatives on climate change come together as a
package to collectively deliver the changes in
behaviour needed – across business, voluntary
organisations, Government at all levels,
communities, families and individual consumers.

 As part of the monitoring process of the
Programme, we will set up a Stakeholder
group to oversee the practical delivery of
the new measures.

 The Government will set out a plan for
further action on sustainable consumption
by the end of 2006, responding to the
report of the Round Table on Sustainable
Consumption due in Spring 

Educating the public

 The public need clear and reliable advice about
the environmental impact of different products
and services and how they can make the most
sustainable consumption choices. The
Government believes the best way of making this
available is through the internet, and is planning
a new online information service (working title:
Environment Direct). This will aim to enhance
consumers’ image of sustainable living so that
it is perceived as attractive and desirable rather
than about compromising quality of life. The
Government aims to launch the new service by
the end of 

Climate Change Communications
Initiative

 Engaging with the public on climate change is a
vital part of the UK climate change programme,
both to encourage specific behaviours to reduce
carbon dioxide emissions directly and to gain
acceptance for more ambitious Government
policy. In December 2005 Defra launched the
first elements of a new Climate Change
Communications Initiative, with funding of
£12m announced earlier in the year.

 The Climate Change Communications Initiative4
aims to change attitudes toward climate change
within the general public, with a central focus on
local and regional level engagement. The initiative
will address different themes as it unfolds. Its
initial focus is on making climate change a ‘here
and now’ and ‘front of mind’ issue, with the
emphasis moving over time towards collective
action and the social status of the attitudes and
behaviours associated with climate change.

 The research supporting the communications
strategy shows that changing attitudes is an
essential first step to voluntary behaviour change,
so the communications strategy is intended to
shift attitudes such that individual behaviour
change as well as further government-led action
to tackle climate change can be achieved at a
later stage.

 The Climate Change Communication Initiative
includes:

 a linking device or slogan “Tomorrow’s
climate, today’s challenge” to give a visual
identity to the whole initiative and, where
used on other climate change-related
material, to show central government, its
partners and others working together;

 a medium-long term aspirational goal
“Together this generation will tackle
climate change” to provide a clear, publicly
accessible focus for all of our climate-related
communications;

 a £6m fund for local communication
initiatives in England, which was opened in
January 2006;

 an interactive and user-friendly climate change
website: www.climatechallenge.gov.uk;

121
Stimulating action by individuals
4 Further details on the initiative and all of the resources are available from the website: www.climatechallenge.gov.uk/



 guidance for communicators with ideas on
how to communicate about climate change,
together with free-to-use resources such as a
short film and radio advertisements; and

 in January 2006, the Government launched
an England-wide “climate change
champions” competition to find young
ambassadors for climate change in the 10-18
year age range. The aim of the competition is
to raise the profile of climate change among
a critical and hard-to-reach audience.
How individuals can help

 The UK’s overall carbon emissions could be
reduced substantially by everyone making a
few small changes. An action which seems
insignificant on its own can combine with other
actions to create a significant overall impact.
These small changes can also save money.
Some simple ideas are set out below.

122
Stimulating action by individuals
At home
Households are responsible for around 30 per cent of total UK energy use, equivalent to around 40MtC.
A combination of individual actions in the home can make a real contribution to reducing the UK’s
emissions. They can make substantial cuts to utility bills, too.
Some ideas (main source – Energy Saving Trust):
Turn your thermostat down by 1°C. This could cut heating bills by up to 10 per cent. If every household did
this, the savings would be equivalent to the energy consumed by all the schools, colleges and universities in
the UK.
Close your curtains at dusk to stop heat escaping through the windows and reduce draughts.
Don’t leave appliances on standby. Every year, video recorders and televisions in the UK consume around
£150m worth of electricity while on standby.
Only boil as much water as you need (but remember to cover the elements if you’re using an electric
kettle). If everyone did this, we could save enough electricity to run more than three quarters of the street
lighting in the country.
Eliminate draughts and wasted heat. Install a cheap, easy-to-fix brush or PVC seal on your exterior doors,
and cover letterboxes and keyholes. Fill gaps in floorboards and skirting boards with newspaper, beading or
sealant.
Install energy saving light bulbs. They last up to 15 times longer than conventional bulbs and for each bulb
you fit, you could save up to £7 on your annual electricity bill.
Look for the logo. When replacing appliances, look for ones displaying the energy saving recommended
logo. Energy saving appliances use less energy and could save you up to £35 a year.

123
Stimulating action by individuals
5 Average emission factors are calculated using 2002 National Atmospheric Emissions Inventory CO2 emissions estimates by mode/vehicle type and data on
passenger kilometres and load factors from DfT Transport Statistics
Transport
A lot of individual journeys could be eliminated or made in a different way to reduce carbon emissions.
Changing travel habits can also have health and financial benefits.
For instance:
Go by train. The average person travelling by rail produces around half the carbon dioxide emissions of the
average person travelling by car.5
Teleconference. DfT research on smarter choices shows that the use of tele- and audio-conferencing and
teleworking can be a powerful tool to help cut staff travel and therefore carbon emissions.
Think sustainably. Where travel is necessary, the impact on carbon emissions can be reduced by taking
certain choices, for example car sharing. Government is encouraging businesses and schools to work with
employees and pupils to develop travel plans which enable individuals to make sustainable travel choices.
Improve your technique. It is estimated that eco-driving techniques can help deliver significant reductions
in carbon emissions from cars – and bring down fuel bills. Such techniques include maintaining appropriate
tyre pressure, minimising weight, removing roof racks when not in use (minimising weight and drag),
avoiding sharp braking and accelerating, using the correct gear and only using air conditioning when really
necessary. Some of these measures, such as looking ahead to avoid sudden braking, can also have positive
road safety benefits.
Look for the logo. When purchasing a new car, look for the new fuel efficiency label that shows how much
money you could save a year by choosing lower carbon models.


CHAPTER TEN
Bringing it all together

124

Summary of proposed action

 Chapter 1 of this Section summarises the
Government’s latest projections for emissions of
carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in
2010, 2015 and 
 These projections reflect
the ongoing impact of policies introduced since
the Climate Change Programme 


 The baseline with measures emissions projections
show that in 2010:

 emissions of the six greenhouse gas basket
would be reduced to around 
4 per cent
below base year levels. This means that the
UK is on track to exceed its Kyoto Protocol
target; and

 emissions of carbon dioxide would be reduced
to around 
6 per cent below 1990 levels
with existing measures.

 Section 2 of this programme sets out the action
Government is taking to reduce emissions from
all sectors. This includes policies the Government
is introducing which will be additional to those
reflected in the emission projections. The table
below sets out the carbon savings that we are
expecting existing measures to deliver by 

The table overleaf sets out the carbon savings
that we are expecting from the new measures
contained in this programme, which the
Government estimates could lead to additional
carbon savings of some 
0 – 
0 MtC in 

Existing measures Carbon savings in 2010 (MtC)
Energy supply
Renewables Obligation 
5
Business
Climate change levy1 
7
UK emissions trading scheme 
3
Carbon Trust 
1
Building Regulations 2002 
4
Building Regulations 2005 
2
Climate change agreements 
9
Transport
Voluntary Agreements package, including reform of company car taxation
and graduated VED 
3
Wider transport measures2 
8
Sustainable distribution in Scotland and Wales 
1
Fuel duty escalator 
9
Domestic
Energy Efficiency Commitment (EEC) (2002-05) 
4
Energy Efficiency Commitment (EEC) (2005-08) 
6
Energy Efficiency Commitment (EEC) (2008-11) 
6
Building Regulations 2002 
7
Building Regulations 2006 including 2005 condensing boilers update 
8
Warm Front and fuel poverty programmes 
4
Market Transformation including appliance standards and labelling 
2
Agriculture
Woodlands Grants Scheme (England) 
2
Woodland planting since 1990 (Scotland) 
5
Public Sector
Central Government, NHS, UK universities and English schools including 
Carbon Trust activities 
2
TOTAL 
13
1 An independent evaluation by Cambridge Econometrics (CE) concluded that CCL would deliver annual carbon savings of 
7MtC by 2010, from an
announcement effect and price effect of the levy. This figure assumes CCL rates are increased in line with inflation from 2005 to 
 The impact of CCL in
the projections is incorporated through the price elasticity of demand for different fuels (‘the price effect’), and there is no separately identified announcement
effect within the UEP baseline.
2 As set out in ‘Transport 2010: The 10 Year Plan for Transport’ and built upon in ‘The Future of Transport: A network for 2030’.
3 Total does not include cabon savings from climate change levy, and may differ slightly from figures for total carbon savings shown in Chapters 3 to 8 due to
rounding.



 This Programme of action will take the UK well
beyond its international target and move us close
to the 2010 domestic carbon dioxide goal.
The Government estimates that by 2010 the
Programme could:

 reduce the UK’s emissions of the basket of
greenhouse gases on which the Kyoto target
is based to 23 – 25 per cent below base year
levels; and

 reduce the UK’s carbon dioxide emissions to
15 – 18 per cent below 1990 levels.

 The graph below shows the predicted effect in
2010 of the Programme on the UK’s greenhouse
gas emissions. The effects have been estimated
for 2010, 2015 and 2020 only and emissions are
assume to fall linearly between 2005 and 2010
between 2010 and 2015, and between 2015
and 

Projections of greenhouse gas emissions and estimated effect of
quantified additional measures, MtC
1990 1995 2000 20102005 2015 2020

Mt C150160170180190200210220
Historical trend
Baseline with measures projections
Additional quantified measures
(including low range for EU ETS)
Additional quantified measures
(including high range for EU ETS)

125
Bringing it all together
Additional measures Carbon savings in 2010 (MtC)
Energy supply
Subsidy for biomass heat 
1
Second phase of EU emissions trading scheme 
0-
0
Business
Carbon Trust support for investment in energy efficiency in SMEs 
1
Measures to encourage or assist SMEs to take up energy saving opportunities 
1
Transport
Renewable Transport Fuel Obligation (RTFO) 
6
Future voluntary agreement with car manufacturers to reduce CO2 emissions
from new cars 
1
Domestic
Increased activity in Energy Efficiency Commitment (EEC) (2008-11) 
5
Provision of advice to stimulate early replacement of inefficient boilers and
implementation of the Energy Performance of Buildings Directive 
2
Package of measures to improve energy efficiency in buildings 
1
Better billing and metering 
2
Products Policy: consumer information and standards for lights and other
energy-using products (EUPs) 
2
Agriculture
Strategy for non-food crops 
1
Public Sector
Additional effort by local authorities 
2
Revolving loan fund for the public sector 
1
Actions by devolved administrations 
3
Other measures1 
1
TOTAL 
0 – 
0
1 These include the Green Landlord Scheme, increased funding for Warm Front, an Energy Report in the Home Condition Report, improved enforcement of
Building Regulations, enhanced capital allowances for cleanest biofuels processing plants, reduced VAT for wood fuelled plants, funding for demonstration
of Carbon Abatement Technologies and for the Low Carbon Building Programme. These policies together could deliver carbon savings of about 
1MtC in 



CHAPTER ELEVEN
Monitoring and review

126

Tracking progress

 The UK reports on its greenhouse gas and
specifically carbon dioxide emissions through a
number of mechanisms at international, EU and
domestic level.
International

 Progress towards achieving UK and international
climate change objectives is monitored through
the UK’s greenhouse gas inventory. The
Government submits the inventory annually to
the UNFCCC and to the EU Monitoring
Mechanism. In addition, the UK is required to
submit to the UNFCCC at regular intervals
national communications that report on action
being taken to tackle climate change. The UK will
submit its 4th National Communication (4NC)
in April 


EU

 Information on Member States’ projections must
be reported to the European Commission on a
biannual basis, by 15 June, with the next report
due in 
 The previous year’s results on the
EU emissions trading scheme will be published
in the first half of each year, and will set out
what this means for progress towards our Kyoto
target and domestic carbon dioxide goal.
Domestic

 Updates on PSA delivery plans (including
departmental PSAs relating to climate change) are
submitted biannually to HM Treasury, and
monitoring notes to departmental management
boards quarterly.

 There are a number of different sets of
indicators which already record progress on
greenhouse gas emissions and in other relevant
areas. These include sustainable development
indicators, reported on annually by Defra, and
energy sector indicators, reported on by DTI. DTI
also publishes provisional estimates of carbon
dioxide emissions every March.

 Progress on emission reductions is monitored
through the Sustainable Energy Policy
Network (SEPN), which operates through a
Ministerial Committee, an Advisory Board,
Strategy Group, working-level group and
Interdepartmental Analysts’ Group (IAG). The IAG
provides cross-cutting analytical support to SEPN
including: reviewing analytical requirements
feeding into the workstreams; advising on
potential gaps; identifying cross-cutting
requirements and drawing links between
analytical work conducted in support of
workstreams; and providing a measure of
peer review.

 Two Cabinet Committees have climate change
as part of their business:

 the Cabinet Committee on Energy and the
Environment (EE) has a remit to “develop
the Government's energy and environmental
policies, to monitor the impact on sustainable
development of the Government's policies,
and to consider issues of climate change,
security of supply and affordability of energy”;

and


 the Cabinet Committee on Sustainable
Development in Government (EE(SD))
has a remit to “improve the Government's
contribution to sustainable development
through the conduct of its business, including
through consideration of departmental
sustainable development action plans; and to
report as necessary to the Committee on
Energy and the Environment.”

 In addition to these existing processes, the
Government will introduce a new annual report
to Parliament on the level of greenhouse gas
emissions in the UK and the steps the
Government has been taking to reduce these.
The report will include data from the existing
sets described above, as well as any additional
information needed for it to provide
comprehensive coverage. It will also set out an
indicative work plan for the following year, the
basis for which will be announced in due course.


Carbon budget

 One of the proposals made in response to the
2004 consultation was for the introduction of an
annual carbon budget to manage progress
towards our domestic goal. This would mean that
within a national carbon account, carbon would
be given a market value and our position relative
to our targets calculated in monetary terms. The
Government will consider this proposal. However,
at present the primary mechanism for monitoring
progress towards our targets will be through the
annual report and the other reporting
requirements as listed above. The carbon budget
proposal merits serious study and will therefore
be considered by the Stern Review, with analysis
informing the Energy Review.

127
Monitoring and review


SECTION

3
Adapting to the impacts of climate change


CHAPTER ONE
Adaptation
Introduction

 Some degree of climate change resulting from
past and present emissions of greenhouse gases
is already inevitable. In order to cope with the
impacts of climate change we need to adapt –
this action is complementary to our efforts to
reduce emissions to avoid dangerous levels of
climate change.

 Adaptation can mean any action, either
intentional or accidental, taken to minimise the
adverse effects of climate change or to take
advantage of any beneficial effects. Adaptation
strategies vary considerably between different
types of organisation, and will be undertaken at a
range of scales, from central government policy
to modest individual projects. There are two main
approaches to adaptation:

 building adaptive capacity. This involves
creating the information and conditions
(regulatory, institutional, managerial) that
enable adaptation actions to be undertaken;

and


 delivering adaptation actions. This involves
taking actions that will help to reduce
vulnerability to climate risks, or exploit
opportunities.

 Anticipatory adaptation (as opposed to reactive
adaptation) is important for the protection or
maintenance of existing and future capital assets
with long life spans.

 A great deal has happened in the field of climate
impacts and adaptation since 2000, both
internationally with the publication in 2001 of
the IPCC’s Third Assessment Report and work by
the UNFCCC to support adaptation in both
developed and developing countries, and
domestically, with the publication of climate
change scenarios for the UK in 2002 and the
development of widely adopted tools,
methodologies and research by the UK Climate
Impacts Programme and other centres. The
Government has played a key role in each of
these arenas and will continue to do so.
Impacts of climate change in the UK

 Chapter 1 set out the way in which the UK’s
climate has changed in the past, and is predicted
to change further in the future. These changes in
climate are likely to have far-reaching effects on
our environment, economy and society in all
regions and in some cases these are already being
felt. Without effective action to tackle the causes
of climate change, climate-related risks and
damages will increase. Adaptation needs to be
planned accordingly, and this section sets out the
framework through which this will occur.

 In the UK, although climate change may bring
opportunities and benefits as well as threats,
we note that the larger the changes and rate of
change in climate, the more the adverse effects
will predominate.

 Some of the most widely-expected adverse
impacts in the UK include:

 an increased risk of flooding and coastal
erosion;

 increased pressure on drainage systems;

 possible increased winter storm damage;

 habitat and species loss;

 summer water shortages and low stream
flows;
The Government will take action to:

 develop a comprehensive and robust
approach to adaptation in the UK through
the Adaptation Policy Framework (APF);

 publish revised and expanded climate
change scenarios for the UK in 2008; and

 monitor and develop the knowledge base
on climate change impacts and adaptation
through the UKCIP.

130

 increased subsidence risk in subsidence-prone
areas;

 increasing thermal discomfort in buildings;

and

 health issues in summer.

 The greater the change in climate the more
serious the effects will be. However some
opportunities and benefits have also been
identified, for example:

 longer growing seasons;

 less winter transport disruption;

 reduced demand for winter heating; and

 less cold-related illness.
Some opportunities are anticipated, including:

 agricultural diversification;

 an increase in tourism and leisure pursuits;

and

 a shift to more outdoor-oriented lifestyles.

 The balance between these impacts will, to a
large extent, depend on what approach is taken
to adaptation. These impacts will also vary from
region to region in the UK. However overall we
expect that the adverse effects will outweigh the
benefits particularly as climate change increases.

 The economic consequences of some of these
climate changes may also be beginning to be felt.
For example, damage related to the heat-wave in
2003 left insurers with almost £400 million in
subsidence claims in the UK. Claims for storm
and flood damages in the UK totalled more than
£6 billion over 1998-2003, which was twice the
amount for the previous six-year period

International commitments and
programmes

 Under the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change (UNFCCC), the UK not only
has a commitment to mitigate emissions, but also
to make progress in adaptation.

 Article 4 (1(b)) states that all Parties to the
Convention shall: “Formulate, implement,
publish and regularly update national and where
appropriate, regional programmes containing
measures to mitigate climate change by
addressing anthropogenic emissions by sources
and removals by sinks of all greenhouse gases
not controlled by the Montreal Protocol, and
measures to facilitate adequate adaptation to
climate change.”

 Article 4 (1(f)) goes on to state that Parties shall:
“Take climate change considerations into
account, to the extent feasible, in their relevant
social, economic and environmental policies and
actions, and employ appropriate methods, for
example, impacts assessments, formulated and
determined nationally, with a view to minimising
adverse effects on the economy, on public health
and on the quality of the environment, of
projects undertaken by them to mitigate or adapt
to climate change.”

 In December 2004, Parties to the UNFCCC
agreed to develop a structured five-year
programme of work on the scientific, technical
and socio-economic aspects of impacts,
vulnerability and adaptation to climate change.
At Montreal in December 2005, agreement was
reached on the framework and initial actions for
this programme of work, and activities will begin
during 


 The IPCC is currently working towards its Fourth
Assessment Report and the Working Group 2
report on Impacts and Adaptation will give
particular emphasis to regional impacts and
adaptation. 

 In November 2005, the European Commission
launched a consultation on the development

131
Adaptation
1 A changing climate for insurance, June 2004, Association of British Insurers.


of the second European Climate Change
Programme, which includes a work stream on
adaptation. The Commission are working towards
the production of a green paper on adaptation at
the end of 2006, and the UK will contribute to
this process.
Domestic commitments and
programmes
Adapting to Climate Change in the United
Kingdom – the Adaptation Policy
Framework (APF)

 Although the more excessive regional
temperature increases and precipitation changes
may only be felt in a few decades time, they
need to be factored into decisions on investment
and infrastructure taken now. There are already a
range of adaptation activities taking place within
different sectors, including planning guidance,
health advice and water resource management,
and across different agencies and regions. In
order to develop a full picture of adaptation in
the UK we need to review such activities and
assess how far current efforts are contributing to
successful adaptation to climate change and to
identify what more needs to be done.

 For this reason, the Government is developing a
climate change Adaptation Policy Framework,
which will set out the appropriate responsibilities
and activities across a range of organisations in a
sector by sector approach. A consultation exercise
was completed in January 
 This work
contributes to the strategic outcome in Defra’s
Five Year Strategy, published in 20043 under its
climate change and energy strategic priority on
the “UK successfully adapting to unavoidable
climate change.

 The 5-year strategy included development of an
Adaptation Policy Framework which is described
below. For Defra, an emphasis was placed on
promoting research into climate change impacts
on agriculture, maintaining its substantial flood
and coastal erosion risk management programme,
with greater targeting of spending to reduce the
risks associated with climate change.

 The Framework aims to provide a consistent
approach to building adaptation into policies, and
a coherent way to identify cross-cutting risks and
opportunities and to assist in prioritisation of
action across Government. Co-ordination of work
within and across Government Departments and
the devolved administrations will provide
leadership to stakeholders.

 The development of objectives, targets and
measures of progress in each area of the
framework is the responsibility of the relevant
Government Departments and the devolved
administrations, along with other key players.
However, work on adaptation is the responsibility
of a wider range of stakeholders. While the
evidence base and the framework for a response
can be provided by Government, adaptation is
the responsibility of all and brings benefits to
those organisations and individuals who adapt
appropriately.

 The Adaptation Policy Framework will provide the
structure in which adaptation strategies can be
integrated into policies developed by
organisations at every level of decision making.
Not only will the APF set out a rational structure
for different roles and activities in adaptation
(including at regional and local level), it will also
be a primary information source for those
involved in policy development and provide an
indication of priorities for the private sector.

 This first stage aims to capture the national
picture of climate change adaptation as it
currently stands across the UK. It will focus on
priority sectors where climate change will have a
significant impact, or where considerable
co-ordination between Departments or with
other bodies will be needed to make progress on
adaptation. During stage 2, commencing in
2006, there will be an analysis of activities taking
place and an assessment made of the reasons
why some sectors are adapting more successfully
than others. Stage 3 (2008) will identify those
areas where adaptation is not occurring and what
incentives and assistance may be required to
ensure that it is considered appropriately in future
planning and development.

132
Adaptation
2 www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climatechange/uk/adapt/policyframe.htm
3 Delivering the Essentials of Life: Defra’s Five Year Strategy, Defra, 
 Available from www.defra.gov.uk


We will analyse stakeholder responses to the
public consultation and will publish the first
phase of the adaptation policy framework
during 

We will launch the second phase of
consultation during 2007 and a third phase
in 2008 to complete the APF work.
We will develop a process for reviewing and
assessing existing and new policies for their
vulnerability to climate change impacts and
their contribution to adaptation.
We will initiate a study of the potential role
of regulation and standards in accelerating
action to adapt to inform future
development of the APF.
UK Climate Impacts Programme 

 The UK Government set up the UK Climate
Impacts Programme (UKCIP) in 1997 to provide
essential information to help decision-makers
plan their response to the impacts of climate
change. Defra funds UKCIP on behalf of the UK
government and the devolved administrations.
From an initial focus on impacts research studies,
there has been a progression towards developing
stakeholder partnerships that share information,
identify research needs and pursue work on
climate impacts and adaptation in their regions
and sectors.
UKCIP is modular in structure, with individual
studies funded by stakeholder partnerships in two
main categories:

 regional studies that consider multiple sectors
within a given region and deliver information
that is relevant to local decision-making; and

 sectoral studies that are typically undertaken
at the national level, tend to be quantitative
in nature, and inform decision-making on
climate impacts and adaptation at the local,
regional and national scale for given sectors.
More recently, UKCIP has played an increasing
role in helping stakeholders to build adaptive
capacity.

 An integrated summary of findings from studies
carried out for the UK Climate Impacts
Programme was published in 


 The UKCIP Office team helps others to
commission and fund research and actively
supports all studies and partnerships. The UKCIP
has provided numerous tools to equip
stakeholders to develop their own adaptation
responses. All the tools and reports are available
from the UKCIP website.
Risk, uncertainty and decision-making
framework

 The UKCIP report Climate adaptation: Risk,
uncertainty and decision-making (Willows and
Connell, 2003) was developed in co-operation
with the Environment Agency. It provides an
eight-stage decision-making framework with
accompanying guidance to help assess climate
risks and uncertainties and incorporate suitable
adaptation measures into a decision. For each
stage of the framework, there are questions to
answer, and recommended tools to help.
The framework:

 directs decision-makers to undertake rapid risk
characterisation and screening exercises, before
moving on to more detailed assessments;

 helps refine the problem and objectives and
modify adaptation options, before making a
decision; and

 guides the decision-maker to review the
decision, for instance to see if it delivered the
expected benefits.

133
Adaptation
4 A comprehensive synthesis of the work achieved under the UK Climate Impacts Programme is provided in Measuring Progress: Preparing for climate change
through the UK Climate Impacts Programme, UKCIP, 2005, available from www.ukcip.org.uk



 The UKCIP has put stakeholders at the heart of
the research process, in a pioneering approach
for producing relevant information on climate
change. The use of common tools and resources
in climate impacts studies has achieved a degree
of coherence within and between studies.

 In 2004, an independent review5 of UKCIP indicated
that the Programme had performed very effectively,
establishing a valuable body of work on UK climate
impacts and increasingly adaptation, through its
stakeholder network. The review also noted that
there is still much for the UKCIP to achieve, and that
its work should be continued in a similar form.
In 2005, Defra established a new five-year
contract for the UKCIP. The new programme
of work retains two main aims:

 to improve knowledge and understanding
of the impacts of climate change among
stakeholders; and

 to help stakeholders to be better equipped
to undertake adaptation to climate change.
And five objectives:

 to improve knowledge and understanding of
the impacts of climate change at a regional
and national level among stakeholders,
through the co-ordination, integration and
communication of research;

 to provide stakeholders with tools and methods,
and supporting training and guidance;

 to promote a consistent programme of work
on impacts and adaptation across the UK,
working through partnerships with
stakeholders and other researchers;

 to provide a focal point for information on
climate change impacts in the UK, through
the UKCIP Programme Office and strategic
communications activities; and

 to learn from the research and experience of
other countries, through appropriate links.
We will work with UKCIP to continue to raise
awareness of climate change impacts and
adaptation at strategic levels within private
sector organisations and the business
community.
We will publish revised and expanded
climate change scenario datasets and
information for the UK in 

We will commission a programme of research
to investigate cross-sectoral issues in adapting
to the impacts of climate change in the UK.
We will review and update UK indicators of
climate change, and provide guidance for the
development of regional indicators of
climate change.
We will commission a study of the business
costs and benefits of adapting to climate
change impacts.
We will assess the role and status of regional
stakeholder climate change partnerships
including future funding options.
Adaptation in the UK today

 Most examples of adaptation today relate to
adaptation to current hazards, stemming from
natural climate variability or climate change. 

 The changing climate adds to the external risks
that business already has to face. Alongside the
physical risks from direct impacts in exposed
sectors (like agriculture, property, life insurance,
water, tourism), climate change may bring

134
Adaptation
5 Review of UKCIP, ESYS, 
 Available from www.defra.gov.uk/


additional market risks (as demands change
and competitors take advantage of new
opportunities), operational risks (as logistics and
premises are affected by climate events) and
reputational risks (as customers, suppliers and
shareholders gain awareness of the climate
change issue). Businesses may be more vulnerable
if they are currently affected by the weather;
make long-term investment decisions; or have
global markets and suppliers. In many cases,
the climate change experienced in other parts of
the world may have a more significant indirect
impact on UK businesses than the direct impacts
domestically, as global markets or supply chains
are affected. The changing climate may also
present opportunities and potential benefits such
as new markets, products or services, reduced
operational costs (say for building maintenance
or transport), and enhanced corporate reputation
through proactively addressing climate change.

 The most secure way to manage increasing
cross-cutting risks from climate change is likely to be
through integrating climate change into corporate
risk management strategies, particularly in order to
attract forward-looking investors. The costs of
adapting to climate change need not be large.
Many adaptations may only require small changes
to existing practices. “Win-win” solutions may also
be identified, through other objectives, such as in
corporate social responsibility or sustainable
development plans. By contrast, the costs of impacts
from damaging climate events can be very
significant. In addition it may not be possible to
adapt to all aspects or levels of climate change.
We will work with the UK Biodiversity
Partnership to publish practical guidance for
nature conservation managers and planners.
We will publish a revised guidance
statement on the role of spatial planning
in adapting to climate change.
We will produce revised guidance, with the
Environment Agency, on implementing flood
and coastal erosion risk management measures,
to ensure that adaptability to climate change
becomes an integral part of all flood and
coastal erosion management decisions.
We will assess the role and status of regional
stakeholder climate change partnerships
including future funding options.

135
Adaptation
Case studies of how organisations
have started to adapt 
The New Construction Research and Innovation
Strategy Panel (nCRISP)
The mission of nCRISP is to 'prioritise and
promote research and innovation that will
sustain a first class construction industry and
enhance the value of its contribution to the
quality of the built environment and the wealth
and well being of society’. nCRISP has links with
government, industry and the research
community, and considers the impact of climate
change on the built environment and vice versa.
The organisation has a Climate Change Task
Group, formed to prioritise future research on
the significance and effects of climate change
on the built environment (various publications
available). The remit of the task group is to
focus on the impacts of climate change rather
than mitigation measures: “Research is needed
for the UK construction industry to plan for
future construction and to provide solutions of
adaptation to current infrastructure features
amidst future climatic extremes” (Wilson and
Burtwell, 2002). Reports produced advocate
responsiveness and adaptation to climate
change in the construction sector (in an
‘effective and sustainable manner’).
South East Climate Change Adaptation and
Mitigation Implementation Plan
The Implementation Plan is designed to support
the South East Plan, and is part-funded by the
ESPACE EU INTERREG project. The Plan seeks to
provide both an overview of the existing actions
and activities to mitigate and adapt to climate
change in the South East as well as to propose
new actions and activities to address gaps. The
focus of the Implementation Plan is on actions
that are relevant to spatial planning, but it also
includes those that go beyond activity controlled
by the town and country planning system.

136
Adaptation
The UKCIP Business Areas Climate Impacts Assessment Tool (BACLIAT) provides a simple checklist for
organisations to assess the potential impacts of climate change on their business that can be used initially
for any type of business organisation because it encourages consideration of the threats and opportunities
across generic business areas. These include:

 logistics: vulnerability of supply chain, utilities and transport infrastructure;

 finance: implications for investment, insurance and stakeholder reputation;

 markets: changing demands for goods and services;

 process: impacts on production processes and service delivery;

 people: implications for workforce, customers and changing lifestyles;

 premises: impacts on building design, construction, maintenance and facilities management; and

 management implications: what are the strategic responses to the issues identified?
Costs of climate change on health in Hampshire
The summer 2003 heat wave event had particular significance in Hampshire because it was one of the two
counties in the UK where a daily maximum of 100°F was reached. The heat wave is estimated to have
caused 21 excess or premature deaths in the county, and 2142 additional hospital days.
Events such as the extreme temperatures experienced in summer 2003 are likely to become commonplace
by 

An initial assessment for mortality and hospital admissions in Hampshire under scenarios of future climate
change shows that in net present value terms, the additional impact costs over the period 2010 to 2100 are
estimated to be between £95-150m, depending on emissions scenario.
Adaptations to reduce some of this risk could include information provision and awareness-raising, and
changes in spatial planning policy or building design. These kinds of measures might carry maximum annual
costs of between £3-5m. These estimates were calculated using Costing the impacts of climate change in
the UK costing method, available from the UK Climate Change Impacts Programme (UKCIP).
An increase in the frequency of heat waves is likely to entail an increase in mortality and morbidity
principally in older people, due to cardiovascular and respiratory diseases. Specific individual impacts that
can be costed in this respect are premature mortality and hospital admissions.


Research on climate change impacts
across Government

 Research on climate change impacts and
adaptation is carried out across a number of
Government departments and agencies. Defra
leads on climate change policy, supports basic
tools and frameworks for impacts research
through UKCIP and other funded research of a
more general exemplary nature. Remaining
research falls to those responsible for different
sectors as outlined below.

 Defra and the Environment Agency fund a
collaborative research programme on flood and
coastal erosion risk management. Climate change
has featured in the work of a number of the
themes and recently this has been based on
analysis of the UKCIP026 scenarios to provide
guidance for design and appraisal. Effort is
currently focussed on better understanding fluvial
flows and in a recent project modelling was
undertaken using three different methods of
representing UKCIP02 scenarios:

 a “combined” scenario of percentage
changes in average rainfall and the change in
frequency of daily rainfall required for each
month;

 statistical downscaling methods for rainfall; and

137
Adaptation
6 The UKCIP02 scenarios, which replace those produced for UKCIP in 1998, are based on four different IPCC greenhouse gas emissions scenarios, themselves
based on four different descriptions of how the world may develop in the decades to come.

137
Adaptation
The London Climate Change Partnership: Adaptation decision-making in London
The London scoping study was published in 2002 by the London Climate Change Partnership (LCCP).
Information from the study was incorporated into London’s key land use planning document, ‘The London
Plan’ (Greater London Authority, 2004), which also refers to the role of the partnership in developing
adaptation policies:
“The Mayor will and boroughs should assess and develop policies for the likely impacts of climate change
on London identified in the work of the London Climate Change Partnership. Policies will be developed in
conjunction with the Partnership and addressed in the first review of the London Plan.”
“London is already feeling the effects of climate change. Sea-level rise relative to the land is now widely
accepted as occurring at 6mm/year at high tide in the London area. A significant proportion of future
development will be in east London, which could be increasingly at risk from tidal flooding. Preventative
and adaptive measures will therefore be needed, including the construction of appropriate flood defences
in new developments.”
Following on from the scoping study, the LCCP’s work has focused on transport and ‘growth areas’ such as
developments in the Thames Gateway. LCCP has commissioned research to evaluate climatic risks and costs
to London’s transport systems, including the underground and overground railways systems and road
network. This information will be used by London’s transport decision-makers. In 2005, together with the
South East and East of England climate change partnerships, the LCCP launched a consultation draft of
‘Adapting to Climate Change: A Checklist for Development’ (TRCCG, 2005). This provides developers and
their design teams with information and a checklist so that a new development can be designed to be
comfortable and secure in the face of climate change throughout its lifetime.
In early 2005, the GLA announced that it was developing the first climate adaptation strategy for a world
city. This strategy will include policy directions on flooding, overheating, water resources management,
emergency planning and other issues which will affected by London’s changing climate. Public consultation
on the draft strategy is due to take place in summer 

Climate change partnerships



 data from the 25km Hadley Centre regional
climate model.

 This provided valuable information, but was
limited to a small proportion of catchments under
a limited range of scenarios and showed a very
wide range of potential variation. A further study
is now underway to:

 consider the evidence for refining current
guidance to provide greater sensitivity to likely
changes in both peak flood flows and total
flood volumes between different regions and
catchments with different characteristics and
for different time periods;

 provide the scientific basis for analysing and
communicating uncertainties associated with
climate change in comparison with other
uncertainties generally encountered in
hydrological estimation of flood flows and
volumes; and

 improve the scientific basis for regionalised
policy guidance to the flood risk management
community on changes in flood flows due to
climate change or make recommendations for
other developments necessary before such
regionalisation can be achieved.

 Future work is likely to consider the impacts of
climate change on sea levels, surges and waves
and how the next generation of UKCIP climate
change scenarios can best be used in flood and
coastal erosion risk management design and
analysis activities.
We will produce revised guidance, with the
Environment Agency, on implementing flood
and coastal erosion risk management
measures, to ensure that adaptability to
climate change becomes an integral part of
all flood and coastal erosion management
decisions.

 The changing climate brings particular challenges
for the management of biodiversity and protected
sites. Defra’s research programme on biodiversity
and climate change is undertaken in partnership
with the devolved administrations, the statutory
nature conservation agencies and other interested
non-governmental organisations. The programme
has three main objectives:

 to improve the understanding of climate
change impacts on biodiversity in the
terrestrial and marine environments, including
through application of modelling techniques
to assess vulnerability of priority species and
habitats;

 to review and develop options for adaptation
of policy and management, including
improved knowledge transfer between
researchers and practitioners; and

 to ensure that long-term monitoring systems
are in place to detect changes in biodiversity
and discriminate the effects of climate change
from other factors.

 Defra recently published a review of climate
change impacts on migratory species
 As part of

138
Adaptation
EPSRC programme “Building Knowledge for a Changing Climate” (BKCC)
The Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) is working with UKCIP on a £3m portfolio
of research projects addressing climate impacts and adaptation for the built environment.
The projects are exploring climate impacts and adaptation for urban planning and design, urban drainage,
historic buildings, transport operations and infrastructure, and the electricity supply industry. All of the
projects involve partnerships of researchers with decision-makers who plan to use the research outputs to
inform their own organisations’ adaptation strategies.
A bi-annually convening Stakeholder Forum was set up to oversee the whole programme and ensure that
the research outputs are geared to meet decision-makers’ information needs. The majority of the BKCC
projects are due for completion in spring 



the UK Presidency of the EU, the UK Government
hosted a meeting of the European Platform for
Biodiversity Research Strategy to review the status
of knowledge on impacts of climate change and
to identify knowledge gaps which are hindering
implementation of adaptation strategies

We will publish the results of collaborative
research on the effects of climate change
on UK priority species and habitats
(MONARCH3) and on the establishment of
a long term monitoring network.
We will review the implications of climate
change for biodiversity in England and
integrate adaptation within the England
Biodiversity Strategy.
Adaptation to climate change as an impact
will be built into the development of
integrated policy for the Natural
Environment.

 Agriculture is inherently sensitive to climate.
We have a long-standing programme of research
of some £
3m per year on climate change on
agriculture and identifying adaptation options to
help industry and policymakers plan for the
uncertainties ahead. The programme has recently
been reviewed and we will ensure climate change
is factored into other key research on agriculture,

139
Adaptation
7 www.defra.gov.uk/wildlife-countryside/resprog/findings/climatechange-migratory/index.htm
8 The recommendations of this meeting are available from www.epbrs.org/
Foresight Project on Future Flooding
Rationale:
The Foresight Future Flooding study was commissioned by the Office of Science and Technology to provide
an independent vision of flood and coastal erosion risk management in the UK between 2030 and 2100 so
as to inform long-term policy. In undertaking the study there was a recognition that decisions taken today
will have a profound impact on the flood and coastal erosion risks which future generations will need to
manage. It was also recognised that the options available for managing risks in the long-term will be
strongly influenced by short term actions.
Approach:
The study used four Foresight socio-economic futures paired with UKCIP climate change scenarios (for
example the high-growth ‘world markets’ future was combined with high greenhouse gas emissions) to allow
responses to be tested against different outcomes. In this way it was possible to identify policies and responses
capable of coping with a range of possible futures, allowing flexible adaptation as the situation evolves.
Results:
Under the baseline assumption of current levels of expenditure and approaches to flood and coastal
management remaining unchanged, it was found that all scenarios would result in a substantial increase
in risk. The team demonstrated that an integrated approach combining a portfolio of responses would
provide significant cost savings over conventional defences and also enable a much more sustainable
approach to be realised.
Conclusions:
The Foresight Future Flooding study does not provide a definitive vision of the future or specify what our
aims should be. It does, however, give a clear indication of how we should approach the management of
flood risk and what issues are likely to be important. It has provided a vital input to the developing cross
government strategy Making Space for Water and demonstrated that reducing climate change could make
the task we face substantially easier.
Full details of the study are available from http://www.foresight.gov.uk/


and that climate change is linked more broadly to
work on socio-economic change in the
agriculture sector.

 The impacts of climate change are less well-
studied for the marine environment. Climate
change could significantly affect the physical,
biological and biogeochemical characteristics of
the oceans and coasts, modifying their ecological
structure and functions.

 Changes in sea water temperature is changing
the species composition of phytoplankton, the
microscopic plants which respond to temperature,
light and nutrients and form the lowest level in
the food web. Such changes could also affect the
life forms higher up the food web. More directly,
sea temperature changes could affect the
reproductive success of species at a given latitude
and, thus, affect the abundance of animals and
plants of any size. Since around 1987, changes in
plankton have been considered so large-scale that
they have been described as a regime shift. There
has been increased primary productivity, merging
of the spring and autumn blooms and a switch
in the dominant species. This has been
accompanied by the northward movement of
plankton species by about 10 degrees of latitude.

 More specific action is now being taken to
investigate the possible impacts of climate
change in the marine environment:

 The Government and the UK Climate Impacts
Programme (UKCIP) are establishing a Marine
Climate Change Impact Partnership in order
to develop a long-term, multidisciplinary
approach to understanding the implications
for the marine ecosystem.

 Within the UK Marine Monitoring Strategy,
relevant indicators will be identified to
monitor and evaluate the effects of climate
change on marine ecosystems.
We will conduct a review of current activities
to assess the impacts of climate change in
the marine environment.
We will commission an assessment of the
changes in the distribution and abundance
of marine species in relation to changes in
hydrodynamics and sea temperature.
We will combine knowledge and expertise
on the impacts of climate change in the
marine environment through the Marine
Climate Change Impacts Partnership.

 Much of the research to date has been carried
out to inform specific individual sectors about the
implications of climate change. However, there
may be more surprises in store as climate-related
impacts on one sector bring with them indirect
effects for another. Many of these cross-sectoral
issues are much less studied, yet robust
adaptation decisions in sectoral policy areas will
need to take into account the implications of
those decisions for facilitating or preventing
effective adaptation in related sectors.
We will commission a programme of
research to investigate cross-sectoral issues
in adapting to the impacts of climate change
in the UK.

 Knowledge and understanding of the impacts of
climate change is growing not only in the UK, but
internationally too. The field of adaptation is still
relatively young, and there is scope to learn much
from initial efforts both in the UK and elsewhere
to take effective adaptation. In order to be
robust, policy-making needs to be flexible, build
on the latest research, and allow the latest results
to inform policy and planning.
We will commission an academic “Climate
Change Impacts Review Group” to produce a
review of the impacts of climate change and
adaptation in the UK. 

140
Adaptation


Conclusions

 It is clear that there are many areas of policy
where adaptation to the unavoidable impacts of
climate change is beginning to occur. The UK has
developed considerable expertise in this field, and
in the period covered by this revised Programme
will have the opportunity to share this
internationally.

 There is also much supporting research work that
Government is taking forward to improve
understanding of climate impacts and to enable
the integration of this understanding into
adaptation policy.

 Action is required more widely than just Central
Government. We are working to set in place the
knowledge and frameworks to allow us to more
successfully adapt to unavoidable climate change.

141
Adaptation


SECTION

4
Action by the Devolved Administrations


CHAPTER ONE
Scotland
Introduction

 This chapter outlines some of the action being
taken by the Scottish Executive to tackle climate
change in Scotland. It is largely retrospective,
providing an update on action the Executive has
taken since the UK and Scottish programmes
were published in November 
 Detailed
information about the outcome of the review
process in Scotland and the new policies to be
introduced will be provided in the revised Scottish
Climate Change Programme, to be published
soon after the UK Programme.

 The original Scottish Programme contains a range
of regulatory, voluntary and educational measures
aimed at delivering emissions reductions in areas
devolved to the Executive. It committed the
Executive to make an equitable contribution to
the UK Kyoto target and to work in partnership
with the UK Government in moving towards its
ambitious domestic carbon dioxide goal for 


 To complement historic data, the Executive is
developing updated greenhouse gas and carbon
dioxide emissions projections for Scotland.
The Executive is committed to developing
its strategic response to climate change as
scientific understanding of the problem, and
Scotland’s contribution to it, develops. During
the review of the Scottish Programme, described
in greater detail below, the Executive developed
a new approach to define what an equitable
contribution to UK climate change commitments
is in specific emissions saving terms (the “Scottish
Share” – see below). 
Greenhouse gas emissions inventory
and projections

 Greenhouse gas emissions data, disaggregated for
the four countries of the UK, is available for 1990,
1995 and annually from 
 Scotland’s
greenhouse gas emissions reductions demonstrate
that Scotland is making a substantial contribution
to the UK’s Kyoto target. Greenhouse gas
emissions fell by 2 MtC between 1990 and 2003
(10 per cent below 1990 levels and 14 per cent
below if land use change removals are taken into
account). Carbon dioxide emissions fell by almost

3 MtC over the same period (8 per cent below
1990 levels and 13 per cent if land use change
removals are taken into account). These reductions
were achieved at the same time as a 29 per cent
growth in the Scottish economy over the period.

 Scotland’s carbon dioxide and total greenhouse gas
emissions have fallen by more than the UK average
in the period since the UK and Scottish Climate
Change Programmes were published (2000-2003),
by 5 and 6 per cent respectively. Scotland’s
greenhouse gas emissions reduction between 1990
and 2003, including land use change and forestry
emissions and removals, was greater than that of
13 of the 15 EU Member States that make up the
EU Kyoto burden-sharing agreement.
The Scottish Executive is committed to:

 Strengthening its climate change response
through its own revised Scottish Climate
Change Programme.

 Quantifying Scotland’s equitable
contribution to the UK’s targets by
developing the Scottish Share concept.

 Creating a framework to assist Scotland in
repsponding to the unavoidable impacts of
climate change .

144
The impacts of climate change in
Scotland

 The UK Climate Impact Programme’s climate
change scenarios1, published in 2002, predict
that:

 by the 2080s Scotland will have warmer and
wetter winters;

 there will be less snowfall and increased
flooding;

 summer temperatures could rise by up to

5˚C and winter ones by 
5˚C;

 rainfall in 24 hours from storms, which are
expected to occur biennially, could rise by up
to 25 per cent, especially in the east;

 the growing season could be extended by
30 to 80 days;

 sea levels could rise by up to 600 mm;

 summers could be up to 40 per cent drier;

and

 snowfall could decrease by up to 90 per cent
depending on location.

 The Executive has worked closely with the UK
Government on a £400,000 cross-regional
research programme, which is funding six projects
on impacts and adaptation. It is also working
with: (1) the Scotland and Northern Ireland
Forum for Environmental Research on the
development of a regional partnership to assist
organisations in Scotland to respond to the
impacts of climate change; and (2) the UK
Climate Impacts Programme to assist businesses
and local authorities plan their adaptation
response. In addition, the Executive is working
closely with the UK Government and the other
devolved administrations on the development
of the UK climate change Adaptation Policy
Framework. Further information on the
Executive’s adaptation response to flood risk
and other climate change-related threats will
be set out in the revised Scottish Climate
Change Programme.

145
Scotland
1 www.ukcip.org.uk/scenarios/
Scottish and UK greenhouse gas emissions by sector in 2003
Sector Greenhouse Gas Emissions (MtC)1 % Change Scotland as %
1990 2003 1990-2003 of UK2 (2003)
Business 
2 
0 -36 7
Waste Management 
4 
2 -51 6
Industrial Process 
5 
1 -72 3
Transport 
8 
0 6 9
Residential 
9 
0 2 8
Energy Supply 
3 
5 3 11
Agriculture 
4 
1 -15 16
Land Use Change Emission 
5 
4 -3 35
Public 
5 
3 -48 9
Total Emissions 
6 
6 -10 10
Land Use Change3: Removals** -
3 -
7 20 62
Total Net Emissions 
3 
9 -14 9
Notes:
1 Base year and 2003 emission figures taken from the Greenhouse Gas Inventories for England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland 1990-2003 (Baggott et
al., 2005). The emissions estimates for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland inventories are subject to greater uncertainty than the consolidated UK estimates.
2 UK figures exclude unallocated emissions. This affects energy supply and transport (where emissions due to military transport, fishing and domestic aviation
are unallocated).
3 Land use change removals is a sink and, therefore, removes carbon. Thus, the percentage change between 1990 and 2003 (in column 3) has therefore been
shown as a positive to reflect the fact that the capacity of the sink has increased.


The review of the Scottish Climate
Change Programme

 A formal review of the Scottish Programme
was launched at the same time as the UK
Government’s review of the UK Programme in
September 
 The aim of the review was to
consider the scope for strengthening existing
measures and introducing new policies to reduce
Scottish greenhouse gas emissions and adapt to
the unavoidable impacts of climate change. The
Executive received almost 400 responses, which
are summarised in Scottish Climate Change
Programme Review: Analysis of Consultation
Responses
 A Scottish stakeholder group was
also established and met periodically during the
review.
Scottish Share

 One of the key aims of the review of the Scottish
Programme was to assess to what extent
Scotland makes an equitable contribution to UK
commitments on climate change, in those areas
of policy in which the Executive has direct
responsibility.

 The ‘Scottish Share’ concept was announced
by the Minister for Environment and Rural
Development at a Climate Leaders’ Summit held
in Montreal in parallel with the 11th Conference
of the Parties on 5-6 December 
 The
Scottish Share quantifies the amount of carbon
savings that Scotland has to deliver through its
devolved policies to match savings from all
devolved policies in the UK Climate Change
Programme on a per capita basis. Details of the
Scottish Share and further development of the
overall approach will be included in the revised
Scottish Climate Change Programme.
Scottish Sustainable Development
Strategy

 The Scottish Sustainable Development Strategy
Choosing Our Future3 was published at the end of

 The Strategy is built around action to
address the well-being of people in Scotland,
supporting thriving communities, protecting
Scotland’s natural heritage and resources and
making a global contribution. The Strategy
provides a framework for a range of existing and
planned policies, strategies and programmes,
including the Scottish Climate Change
Programme. It sets out cross-cutting proposals
on education and learning, communication and
governance and identifies actions that can be
taken by public bodies, businesses, individuals
and the community and voluntary sectors to
address sustainable development concerns,
including climate change.
Renewables

 Promotion of renewable energy is devolved to the
Executive. Scottish Ministers are committed
to promoting energy from a wide range of
renewable sources, and have a target that
40 per cent of electricity generated in Scotland
as a proportion of demand should come from
renewable sources by 
 This equates to
around 6GW of installed capacity, although
Ministers have made clear that this is not
regarded as a cap.

 Much of the developer activity at present (driven
by the Renewables Obligation Scotland/ROS) is
focused on onshore wind. However, the Forum
for Renewable Energy Development in Scotland
has produced reports aimed at expanding the
biomass and marine energy sectors. Scottish
Ministers recently announced their intention to
provide more support to wave and tidal power
by amending the ROS, and further work and
consultation on this option is currently under
preparation. Plans to provide additional support
to biomass heat and power projects are also
being advanced, whilst the Executive continues
to provide support to small and micro scale
renewables through its Scottish Community and
Household Renewables Initiative


146
Scotland
2 www.scotland.gov.uk/Topics/Environment/Climate-Change/16327/SCCPReview 
3 www.scotland.gov.uk/Publications/2005/12/1493902/39032
4 www.est.org.uk/schri/


Energy efficiency

 Overall energy policy is reserved to the UK
Government while the Executive is responsible
under the Scotland Act 1998 for “the
encouragement of energy efficiency other than by
prohibition or regulation”. The Executive plans
to publish an energy efficiency strategy for
Scotland during 
 This will create a more
joined-up approach for energy efficiency
interventions. The strategy will cover the
domestic, business, transport, and public sectors.

CHP


 Policy on Combined Heat and Power is reserved
to the UK Government. CHP electrical capacity in
Scotland in 2004 was 773 megawatts of energy,

8 per cent of the UK total.

IPPC


 Implementation of the Integrated Pollution
Prevention and Control Directive (96/61/EC) is
devolved and has been implemented in Scotland
through the Pollution Prevention and Control
(Scotland) Regulations 2000 (PPC). IPPC includes
energy efficiency requirements that are designed to
minimise pollution arising from the consumption
of energy in industrial processes. Each installation
requires a PPC permit issued by the Scottish
Environment Protection Agency (SEPA). These
include conditions also encouraging energy to be
used efficiently in the industrial process.
EU emissions trading scheme

 The EU ETS is a devolved matter. The Executive
worked closely with the UK Government to have
the Scheme up and running uniformly across the
UK by 1 January 
 Over 1000 UK installations
– accounting for over 46 per cent of UK carbon
dioxide emissions – are involved in the first phase
of the scheme (2005-2007). Over 100 of these are
based in Scotland. The Executive continues to
work closely with the UK Government on
arrangements for the second phase.
Support for businesses

 The Carbon Trust works with businesses and the
public sector in the UK to support them in
strategies to cut emissions of carbon dioxide, and
to reduce climate change. In 2004-5, the Trust
European Marine Energy Centre
Among the first of its kind in Europe, the
European Marine Energy Centre in Orkney
provides testing facilities for commercial-scale
wave devices and in the near future it will also
provide tidal testing facilities. The £5m Centre,
which has been operational since October 2003
and was opened officially in August 2004, hosts
a four berth wave testing facility (2 kilometres
offshore) and a data centre in Stromness. Work
is underway on the creation of a five berth
tidal testing facility.
It is hoped that the facility will become a world
leader in the development, testing,
accreditation and environmental monitoring of
devices for the marine energy industry and will
help to stimulate the creation of green jobs in
Scotland. A Marine Energy Group report,
published in 2004, suggested that up to 7000
jobs could be supported in both direct and
indirectly related industries.

147
Scotland


carried out around 600 on-site energy audits in
Scotland, identifying potential carbon savings of

07 MtC, representing financial savings of
around £16m. Up to March 2005, it had also
reached 34 partnership agreements with
organisations in both the public and private sector
producing an estimated 
02 MtC of carbon
savings and financial savings of around £8m.

 Loan Action Scotland provides interest free loans
from £5,000 to £50,000 to Scottish Small and
Medium Sized enterprises (SMEs) for investments
that reduce energy consumption. These loans are
repayable over a maximum of five years. As well
as reducing energy consumption and carbon
emissions, the scheme directly increases the
profitability of Scottish SMEs by reducing their
energy bills.
Green jobs strategy

 Resource efficiency is devolved and the Executive
published Going for green growth: a green
jobs strategy for Scotland5 in June 
 The
Strategy highlights the wealth of business and
employment opportunities arising from the global
shift towards a sustainable future, especially
in sectors specialising in renewable energy
and cleaner technologies, including carbon
sequestration, waste management and recycling. 
Waste management

 Waste policy in Scotland is generally a devolved
matter although taxation, including the landfill tax,
is reserved. The National Waste Plan (NWP) and 11
constituent Area Waste Plans were published in
February 2003 and established the direction of the
Executive’s policies for sustainable waste
management to 
 The aim of the plans is to
minimise the impact of waste on the environment,
both locally and globally, and improve resource
efficiency in Scotland. Targets include recycling and
composting 25 per cent of municipal waste by
2006, 30 per cent by 2008 and 55 per cent by

 A Strategic Waste Fund was established in
2001 to assist local authorities in meeting these
targets. Implementation of the NWP will lead to a
significant reduction in landfill of municipal waste,
from around 90 per cent to 30 per cent and
subsequent reduction in methane gas emissions.
Transport

 The National Transport Strategy (NTS) will be
launched in 
 Over the coming year the
Strategy will provide the opportunity for the
Executive to consider its transport policies and
their alignment with its climate change and
sustainable development goals. The NTS will be
based on the Executive’s aim for transport as set
out in the 2004 White Paper, Scotland’s Transport
Future, for example to promote economic
growth, social inclusion, health and protection of
the environment through a safe, integrated and
effective transport system. The Executive’s
environmental objective for transport is to
“protect our environment and improve health by
building and investing in public transport and
other types of efficient and sustainable transport
which minimise emissions and consumption of
resources and energy”.

 The NTS will offer the opportunity to start a
wider debate on environmental issues and
provide an ideal forum to seek the views of
stakeholders on targets and indicators. In the
meantime the Executive is addressing the issue
of transport impacts on the environment and
transport emissions in a number of ways ranging
from initiatives aimed at promoting modal shift
such as the funding of StepChange6 location
specific pilot projects, School Travel Co-ordinators
and CyclingScotland7, to its Partnership
Agreement8 commitment to introducing Green
Travel Plans and directing 70 per cent of
investment to public transport over the period
of the Executive’s long-term investment plan.

148
Scotland
5 Going for green growth: A green jobs strategy for Scotland: http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Publications/2005/06/1693437/34386
6 www.stepchangescotland.org/
7 www.cyclingscotland.org/
8 www.scotland.gov.uk/library5/government/pfbs-
asp


Biofuels

 The Executive recognises the environmental
benefits of biofuels and has encouraged and
supported the construction of Scotland’s first
large-scale biodiesel plant by the Argent Group
near Motherwell through a Regional Selective
Assistance grant of £
2m. The plant became
operational in early 2005 and reached full
production levels at the end of the 
 It also
supports development work at UK level on the
promotion and uptake of alternative and cleaner
vehicle technology and fuels such as the
Powering Future Vehicles Strategy9 and is involved
in developments at the UK level related to the
recently announced introduction of a Renewable
Transport Fuel Obligation (RTFO).
Food transportation

 The Executive understands the need to reduce
unnecessary food miles and better understand
issues around food transportation. The Processing
and Marketing Grant schemes support the use of
Scottish produce and therefore local employment.
This cuts down on imports that can have an
impact on food miles and transportation.
Aviation

 The impact of transport on the environment is
not only a Scottish issue but also a UK and an
international one. The Executive, therefore,
strongly supports – subject to specific concerns
being addressed regarding the unique nature of air
services in the Highlands and Islands – the UK
Government in seeking the inclusion of the
aviation sector in the EU emissions trading scheme.
Energy efficiency in households

 There has been significant growth in energy
consumption in the residential sector. This issue
will therefore be the focus for the energy
efficiency strategy to be published in 
 The
Energy Saving Trust (EST) is one of the leading
organisations working with the Executive to
identify climate change interventions within the
household sector. The Executive is providing direct
funding of around £8m in the year 2005-6 for
the EST’s work in Scotland. In 2004-5 EST advised
90,000 clients in Scotland on energy efficiency
matters. It is estimated that in 2005-6 EST
programmes should produce lifetime savings of
194,000 tonnes of carbon equivalent.
Edinburgh CityCarClub
Edinburgh CityCarClub is the largest in Britain,
operated by Smart Moves with the support of
the City of Edinburgh Council. It offers an
alternative to traditional car ownership through
pay-as-you-drive car hire. Members have local
access to a car when they need one and only
pay for the time it is in use and the miles
driven. Cars are parked in reserved parking
spaces, close to homes or workplaces and can
be booked on-line or by telephone. All vehicles
are serviced and maintained by the club, which
means members do not have the expense or
bother of dealing with servicing, repairs,
insurance, MOTs, road tax and cleaning.
City Car Club cites research showing that each
car in a car club typically replaces five privately
owned vehicles. Fewer cars = less carbon
dioxide emissions, less congestion and also
quieter, cleaner, safer streets.

149
Scotland
9 www.dft.gov.uk/stellent/groups/dft_roads/documents/page/ dft_roads_
hcsp


Fuel poverty

 Policy to combat fuel poverty is devolved to the
Executive. Fuel poverty in Scotland has more than
halved between 1996 and 2002, from 738,000
to 286,000 households. Since 2001, over £140m
has been made available to the Central Heating
programme which has provided central heating
systems to over 56,000 homes. Research on the
first year of the programme showed that of the
people who were fuel poor, nearly nine out of
ten were lifted out of fuel poverty after receiving
measures. The Executive has also so far devoted
£64m to the Warm Deal, insulating over 218,000
homes – nearly one-tenth of all of Scotland’s
housing stock.
Agriculture

 Agriculture policy is devolved to the Executive.
The Common Agriculture Policy Reform
introduced cross compliance10 and the
requirement for farmers to maintain their land in
Good Agricultural and Environmental Condition
(GAEC). These became requirements for receipt
of the new Single Farm Payment in 
 Much
of GAEC relates to soil protection issues and
measures to preserve and enhance levels of
organic matter in soils. About 70 per cent of
Scottish land is managed according to GAEC.

 Agri-environment schemes such as the Rural
Stewardship Scheme (RSS) include a number of
measures which will contribute to a reduction in
emissions by encouraging more extensive land
use practices. Advice is provided to farmers
through various means, including the Prevention
of Environmental Pollution from Agricultural
Activity (PEPFAA) Code and the Farm Soils Plan
which include recommendations for techniques
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and
encourage energy efficiency.

 The Executive has funded a range of research
projects to understand the role of agriculture and
other rural land uses on greenhouse gas
emissions, for example how fertiliser use in
Scotland11 contributes to climate change.
A model to simulate carbon and nitrogen
dynamics in organic soils and help predict the
response to land use change will be published
in 

Scottish soils

 Policy in this area is devolved to the Executive.
A commitment has already been made by the
Executive in the Rural Implementation Plan of the
Scottish Biodiversity Strategy12 to ‘develop soil
management strategies/policies which will
promote conservation and enhancement of
biodiversity interests’ by 


 Recognising the importance of evidence when
considering a more strategic approach towards
soil protection, the Executive is currently involved
in a number of research projects that will provide

150
Scotland
10Cross compliance is a series of standards that farmers need to meet in order to receive their subsidy payment in full.
11www.scotland.gov.uk/Resource/Doc/30701/
pdf
12www.scotland.gov.uk/Publications/2004/05/19366/37239


evidence on the state of and threats to Scottish
soils. At the same time, the Executive is an active
member of the UK Soil Indicators Consortium
which aims to develop soil indicators and a soil
monitoring scheme in order to broaden the
knowledge base on the overall state of soils.
Scottish soil policies are currently informing the
UK’s input to the negotiation of the EU Soil
Thematic Strategy. The EU Strategy will in turn be
an important factor in the development of the
Scottish soil policy framework.
Forestry

 Forestry policy is entirely devolved to the
Executive. Forestry makes a net contribution to
reducing atmospheric carbon dioxide by carbon
uptake in growing biomass, and through forest
vegetation and soils. A further contribution is
made when wood fuel substitutes fossil fuels,
and where timber and wood products substitute
for energy-intensive materials such as concrete
and steel.

 Through Forestry Commission Scotland (FCS),
the Executive promotes woodland creation in
appropriate situations through the Scottish
Forestry Increase Grants Scheme. This work aims
to increase the accessibility of woodland creation
grants via their incorporation into Land
Management Contracts, which from 2007 will
become the primary vehicle in Scotland for
supporting land management. A review of the
Scottish Forestry Strategy is underway; climate
change mitigation will be recognised as a key
issue for Scotland’s 
35m hectare forest estate.
Public sector

 Scottish local authorities, the Health Boards, and
Scottish Water spend over £100m a year on
energy. The Central Energy Efficiency Fund (CEEF)
is a revolving loan fund started in June 2004 to
promote improved energy efficiency throughout
the public sector by providing interest free loans
to fund the installation of energy saving
measures. The Executive has allocated £20m,
with £15m available to local authorities, £4m to
the health sector, and £1m to Scottish Water. This
scheme is directly financing projects that deliver
energy, cost and carbon savings.

 The Executive recognises that it must lead by
example in tackling its own corporate
contribution to climate change. The Greening
Government policy sets out objectives and targets
for improving the environmental performance of
the Executive’s own operations. These include, for
example, the energy consumption of its estate,
vehicle use, waste arising and recycling, and
factoring in environmental considerations to the
procurement of goods and services. The
Executive’s electricity contract enables the
procurement of 100 per cent carbon-free energy
attributed to hydro-electric and wind power
generation, and an 80 per cent climate change
levy exemption.

 The Executive reports annually on progress
against its environmental objectives and targets.
This work also includes the development of
environmental management systems across its
estate and the continuing ISO14001 accreditation
of its largest building.
Performance of the NHS Scotland
estate

 In line with Executive climate change
commitments, NHSScotland had, between
1989-90 and 2004, reduced its carbon dioxide
emissions by 
6 per cent. Its target to reduce
energy consumption by 
5-30 per cent between
1985-86 and 2000-01 was surpassed, with a total
reduction of 34 per cent achieved. In 2000, NHS
Scotland committed to a national target to further
reduce energy consumption by 2 per cent each
year by 
 If achieved, this target will be
equivalent to a total saving of almost 50 per cent
in energy consumption by 2010 against the 1990
Kyoto base year. An update on other key public
bodies will be provided in the new Scottish
Climate Change Programme.

151
Scotland


Planning

 The town and country planning system is a
devolved matter. In Scotland, the integration of
climate change considerations into land use
planning is dealt with in a wide range of
Executive planning publications. Firstly, it is
recognised as a key issue and driver of change
in the National Planning Framework. Secondly,
Scottish Planning Policy (SPP)1 – The Planning
System13 recognises the Executive’s wider
commitment to tackling climate change and
acknowledges that burning fossil fuel is the
biggest single contributor to global warming.
Thirdly, more specific references are included in
the policy and advice on individual planning
issues, notably SPP3 Housing, National Planning
Policy Guideline (NPPG)6 Renewable Energy
(under review), SPP7 Flooding, NPPG 10 Waste
Management and NPPG 13 Coastal Planning
 

 Regarding emissions reductions, the Scottish
Planning Policy 17 Planning for Transport15 and
the associated planning advice note published in
August 2005, incorporate a wide number of
broader Executive policy objectives in the
planning policy, including those related to climate
change. In turn, planning authorities take the
Executive’s policy and advice into account in the
preparation of their structure and local plans, and
in the determination of planning applications.
This is reinforced by requirements for Strategic
Environmental Assessments (see below) for plans
and Environmental Impact Assessments for
projects, to consider any significant effects on
climatic factors.
Building Regulations

 The current energy standards for buildings were
introduced in March 
 These standards apply
when new buildings are constructed and existing
buildings are altered and/or extended. The
improvements made represent a 25 per cent
saving in energy terms over the previous set of
standards. The revised Scottish Building
Regulations, which came into force in May 2005,
currently have the most demanding levels of
thermal insulation for buildings (including
conservatories) in the UK.
Strategic Environmental Assessment

 Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) is a
devolved matter. In Scotland and also UK wide,
regulations implementing SEA came into force
in July 
 The Environmental Assessment
(Scotland) Bill (SEA Bill) was passed in the Scottish
Parliament on 9 November 2005 and extends the
scope of Strategic Environmental Assessment
beyond the requirements of the EU Directive, to
cover all public sector strategies, plans and
programmes.
Monitoring and reporting 

 Details of monitoring and reporting arrangements
will be included in the revised Scottish Climate
Change Programme.

152
Scotland
13www.scotland.gov.uk/library5/planning/spp1-
asp
14www.scotland.gov.uk/library5/planning/spp3-
asp 
15www.scotland.gov.uk/Publications/2005/08/16154406/44078


CHAPTER TWO
Northern Ireland

153
16www.ukcip.org.uk/resources/publications/documents/ Northern_Ireland.pdf
Introduction

 Northern Ireland is fully committed to
implementing policies and programmes to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions, to help contribute to
the UK’s Kyoto target and domestic goal. Climate
Change and energy is a priority area for Northern
Ireland. Work is also progressing on assessing the
implications of climate change for Northern
Ireland as the basis for developing adaptation
policies. Northern Ireland’s Sustainable
Development Strategy, due to be published this
year, will provide a cross-cutting strategic
direction and framework for the Northern Ireland
Administration to direct policy and decision-
making and encourage a co-ordinated and
co-operative approach to sustainable
development.
Greenhouse gas emissions inventory
and projections

 Because of its small size and limited industrial
base, Northern Ireland accounts for a relatively
small proportion of the UK’s greenhouse gas
emissions. In 2003, the latest year for which
disaggregated data is available, greenhouse gas
emissions accounted for three per cent of the
UK total.

 Total greenhouse gas emissions in 2003 were

5 per cent below the 1990 base year. While
there has been improvement, the reduction is not
as marked as in the UK as a whole. This partly
reflects the different sector mix, the smaller
industrial base in Northern Ireland, a larger
agriculture sector, and historically low availability
of natural gas. The largest reductions have taken
place in the residential, and energy supply
sectors, whereas emissions in the business and
transport sectors continue to grow. The
breakdown by sector for 2003 is shown below.
While there are no disaggregated emission
reduction targets for the devolved
administrations, specific energy efficiency targets
apply in a number of sectors in Northern Ireland
and progress on achieving these is monitored.
The impacts of climate change in
Northern Ireland

 The Department of the Environment (DOE) in
Northern Ireland has taken forward a number of
initiatives to promote understanding and
awareness of climate change impacts. Much of
this work has been developed in co-ordination
with the UK Climate Impacts Programme (UKCIP).
A comprehensive report on Implications of
Climate Change for Northern Ireland: Informing
Strategy Development16, published in 2002 by the
Scotland and Northern Ireland Forum for
Environmental Research (SNIFFER), examined the
likely impacts of climate change across a wide
range of sectors. The key impacts identified
include potentially adverse effects on public
health, the likelihood of more accidents and
damage from extreme weather events and
threats to vulnerable eco-systems.

 The DOE has recently commissioned SNIFFER to
provide an updated report on the implications of
climate change for Northern Ireland. This study
Northern Ireland is committed to:

 Implement a package of policies and
programmes to mitigate climate change
and contribute to the UK emission
reduction targets.

 Focus effort on further reducing the
emissions intensity of electricity generation
and improving energy efficiency in homes,
businesses and the public sector.

 Invest in research and development on
renewable technologies, support and
incentivise market uptake to reduce reliance
on fossil fuels.

 Undertake research and engage with
stakeholders to raise awareness and
understanding of the potential impacts of
predicted changes in climate and assist
organisations in preparing for these changes.


will incorporate a risk assessment and will
recommend adaptation strategies for the key
impacts. This work is due to be completed by the
end of 2006 and its results will help to inform
Northern Ireland’s input to the UK Adaptation
Policy Framework.

 The DOE’s Environment and Heritage Service
maintains a database on 13 indicators of climate
change including rainfall, temperature, and the
responsive behaviour of birds and insects.
A report on Climate Change Indicators for
Northern Ireland17 published in 2004, indicated
that since 1840, nine of the fifteen warmest
years recorded have occurred since 
 It also
pointed to evidence of:

 average temperatures increasing;

 an increase in the growing season;

 number of snow days decreasing; and

 swallows and butterflies being sighted
progressively earlier.

 The database will be updated annually and will
form the basis of ongoing monitoring of climate
change impacts in Northern Ireland.

 To promote awareness of climate change, the
Environment and Heritage Service issued a
guidance booklet18 for public bodies on climate
change impacts in Northern Ireland, with
information on how climate change will impact
across sectors and on the delivery of key public
services. It includes checklists for public
authorities in assessing their vulnerability to
climate change.

 DOE’s Planning Service recently completed a
public consultation on a draft Planning Policy
Statement (PPS15) on Planning & Flood Risk.
PPS15 seeks to reduce flood risks to people,
property and the environment and adopts a
precautionary approach to decision-making,
taking account of climate change and
acknowledging the wider sustainability objectives
of the Northern Ireland Administration.
Publication of the final PPS is anticipated by
April 


154
Northern Ireland
17www.ehsni.gov.uk/pubs/publications/ccicover
pdf
18A summary of the possible impacts can be found at: http://www.ehsni.gov.uk/pubs/publications/guidanceweb.pdf
Northern Ireland and UK greenhouse gas emissions by sector in 2003
Sector Greenhouse Gas Emissions (MtC)1 % Change Northern Ireland as 
1990 2003 1990-2003 % of UK2 (2003)
Business 
46 
60 +30 2
Waste Management 
10 
06 -44 2
Industrial Process 
20 
05 -75 1
Transport 
94 
28 +36 4
Residential 
14 
90 -20 4
Energy Supply 
51 
39 -8 2
Agriculture 
38 
35 -3 11
Land Use Change Emission 
32 
27 -16 7
Public 
08 
04 -55 1
Total Emissions 
14 
94 -
4 3
Land Use Change3: Removal** -
22 -
22 2 5
Total Net Emissions 
92 
71 -
5 3
Notes:
1 Base year and 2003 emission figures taken from the Greenhouse Gas Inventories for England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland 1990-2003 (Baggott et
al., 2005). The emissions estimates for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland inventories are subject to greater uncertainty than the consolidated UK estimates.
2 UK figures exclude unallocated emissions. This affects energy supply and transport (where emissions due to military transport, fishing and domestic aviation
are unallocated).
3 Land use change removals is a sink and, therefore, removes carbon. Thus, the percentage change between 1990 and 2003 (in column 3) has therefore been
shown as a positive to reflect the fact that the capacity of the sink has increased.


Northern Ireland Energy Study 2002

 In order to establish a robust baseline for its
work in Northern Ireland, the Carbon Trust, in
partnership with Invest Northern Ireland,
undertook a major scoping study into the use
of energy in Northern Ireland during 

The purpose was to reconcile a variety of data
sources across the main energy supply and
energy demand sub-sectors. Published in October
2003, the Northern Ireland Energy Study 200219
remains a valuable and authoritative cross sector
view of the Northern Ireland energy landscape.

 Building on the baseline established by the study,
the Northern Ireland Vision Study20 set out to
determine how Northern Ireland could best
achieve the deep carbon cuts required to deliver
on the UK Government’s national emission
reduction targets. The Vision Study recognises
that the Northern Ireland of 2050 is likely to be
very different to today, and that high growth
rates may be less realisable as climate change
impacts become more evident. The study
produced an Initial Action Plan21 to help initiate
change, while still striving to develop a vibrant
and prosperous economy. The ten-point Vision
Study Action Plan sets out immediate actions,
building options for the future, and cross cutting
actions.
Energy supply

 There have been a number of developments in
the power generation sector in Northern Ireland
in recent years that have contributed to a
significant decline in emissions from electricity
generation. The Belfast West coal fired power
station closed in 2002 and a new combined cycle
gas turbine (CCGT) was opened at Ballylumford
in 
 Another CCGT plant was commissioned
in July 2005 at Coolkeeragh near Londonderry.
This switch from coal and oil stations to more
efficient gas-fired stations has had a positive
impact on carbon dioxide emissions. In 2003, the
Energy Supply sector contributed 31 per cent of
carbon dioxide emissions in Northern Ireland.
This is expected to decline further due to
structural changes in the generation industry and
due to a number of sectors participating in the
EU emissions trading scheme.

 Northern Ireland’s electricity and gas markets are
no longer isolated but are inter-connected into
national and EU networks. In the next decade
there will be an expansion of the gas network
beyond the greater Belfast area. A multi-million
pound project is currently underway involving the
construction of a gas pipeline from Dublin to
Antrim, the South-North pipeline, which will link
with another new pipeline from near
Carrickfergus to Londonderry, the North-West
pipeline. This will result in the roll-out of gas to
towns along the path of the new transmission
network.

 The introduction of natural gas into the Greater
Belfast area since 1996 has brought significant
environmental benefits as customers have
switched from oil and coal to the more efficient
fuel. By 2004, emissions of carbon dioxide had
fallen by 
30 MtC as a result of this change.
The South-North and North-West pipelines are
expected to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by
some 
11 MtC per annum. 

 The vision and challenges of the 2003 Energy
White Paper are reflected in the Strategic Energy
Framework for Northern Ireland published in June
2004 by the Department of Enterprise Trade and
Investment (DETI). Key targets are:

155
Northern Ireland
19www.thecarbontrust.co.uk/carbontrust/about/publications/ NI_2003_Energy_Study.pdf
20www.thecarbontrust.co.uk/carbontrust/about/publications/CTC
pdf
21www.thecarbontrust.co.uk/carbontrust/about/publications/CTC
pdf



 by 2012 at least 12 per cent of electricity
consumed in Northern Ireland must be from
indigenous renewable energy sources, at least
15 per cent of which must be generated by a
renewable source other than wind power; and

 to achieve a 1 per cent reduction in electricity
consumption in Northern Ireland in each year
from 2007 to 


 The latter target is challenging in the context of
a 2 per cent per annum growth rate in
consumption in recent years. DETI is leading a
working group to co-ordinate actions to deliver
this target and to develop an effective framework
with agreed strategic objectives for energy
efficiency.
Renewable energy

 The main driver for increasing the use of
renewable energy is the Northern Ireland
Renewables Obligation (NIRO) which was
introduced on 1 April 
 The NIRO operates
alongside the Renewables Obligation in the UK.
Renewable generating capacity is now around
120 megawatts, a threefold increase over that
delivered under the Non-Fossil Fuel Obligation
schemes of the late 1990s.

 On the demand side, the percentage of electricity
consumed in Northern Ireland from renewable
energy sources is currently around 6 per cent
with indigenous renewables generation having
doubled over the past 2 years, representing over
50 per cent of renewables consumption. There
are currently 15,000 consumers using renewable
energy electricity and every school, library and
the majority of hospitals are supplied with
renewable energy.

 The main non-fossil resource available in Northern
Ireland for electricity production is wind energy,
mainly onshore but also with a significant
offshore potential. This produces electricity at the
lowest cost of all the renewable options. There
are currently ten wind farms supplying the grid as
well as commercial scale wind turbines installed
to serve specific businesses. Large-scale wind
powered projects are expected to make the
largest contribution to electricity generation from
renewables over the next decade. The
deployment of small-scale wind powered systems
is also being promoted in disadvantaged rural
areas through the Wind Energy for Rural
Businesses Project. This is a EU funded
programme which provides financial support to
rural businesses to meet their energy costs
through the installation of small scale (20kw)
wind turbines.

 There is already considerable interest in the
growing and utilisation of Short Rotation Coppice
willow biomass. Over the longer term, it is
anticipated that biomass, solar power, wave and
tidal power will provide an increasing
contribution to renewable energy as technologies
are developed and their potential is realised.
Changes in the Common Agriculture Policy and
implementation of the EC Nitrates Directive
should provide an incentive for farm
diversification into energy crops, and the
development of renewable energy solutions for
the disposal of livestock manure and residues.
Research work in these areas is ongoing.

 The Department of Agriculture and Rural
Development in Northern Ireland has been
leading an inter-departmental group to examine
the potential for renewable energy production
from the agri-food and forestry sectors to
contribute to Northern Ireland’s wider renewables
obligations and to provide economic
opportunities for rural communities in Northern
Ireland. To inform this work, a wide ranging study
was undertaken to investigate the potential
market for, and economic and environmental
sustainability of, small-scale imbedded heat and
power and heat only systems in the rural
economy. The potential of bio-fuel crops to
provide energy for transportation was also
addressed. Draft policy recommendations were
issued for public consultation in September 2005;
a policy position and action plan will follow.

156
Northern Ireland



 In February 2006 a £59m Environment and
Renewable Energy funding package was
launched to enhance and accelerate the
development and deployment of renewables over
the next two years. It will support actions in four
broad programmes:

 research and demonstration – including
flagship projects in energy from waste and
biomass;

 accelerated deployment of renewables and
energy efficiency – mainly capital projects
including a focus on public buildings and
households;

 building market capacity through providing
infrastructure and supply chain development –
with a focus on bio-energy and energy crops;

and


 underpinning knowledge and raising
awareness.

 Awareness of the benefits of renewable energy
for both domestic and industrial users is being
championed throughout Northern Ireland by
Action Renewables22 – a joint initiative
established in 2003 between the DETI and the
Viridian Group. The key objectives are to increase
awareness of renewable energy amongst the
general public and to create a renewable energy
installer academy, in partnership with Sustainable
Energy Ireland, which will improve the quality of
small-scale renewable energy installations and
increase market competitiveness throughout
Northern Ireland and the six border counties of
the Republic of Ireland.

CHP


 Policy for Combined Heat and Power is devolved
to the Northern Ireland Administration. Northern
Ireland has a CHP capacity of approximately 2 per
cent of the installed electricity generating
capacity compared with the UK figure of 
6 per
cent. There are two main factors contributing to
this gap. Firstly, Northern Ireland has a relatively
low industrial/manufacturing base and secondly,
the limited availability of natural gas in Northern
Ireland. Despite these drawbacks Northern Ireland
has performed well in other ways with twice as
many CHP plants, on a per capita basis, in the
non-industrial sectors as the rest of the UK.
In 2005 Northern Ireland had 68 CHP schemes
with a total electricity generating capacity of

1 MW.

 A small group of stakeholders is currently
considering a revised CHP strategy for Northern
Ireland in parallel with the transposition of the EU
Cogeneration Directive. Consultations are also
underway with the Republic of Ireland with a
Tidal power generation
In December 2005, Marine Current Turbines
Ltd, one of the world’s leading developers of
tidal stream energy, announced that it had
chosen Strangford Lough as a test bed for the
development of clean, renewable electricity
using tidal power generation. Strangford
Lough has one of the strongest currents in the
UK and provides an ideal location for the
company to test a pre-commercial device.
If successful, this could have considerable
potential for harnessing the tidal resource off
the North East Antrim Coast. The pilot project
which is planned to commence in the autumn
2006 will be closely monitored, also in relation
to assessing any potential environmental
impacts of the technology on the Lough itself.

157
Northern Ireland
22www.actionrenewables.org/


view to ensuring that any CHP policy might,
where possible, also align on an all island basis.

IPPC


 Implementation of the Integrated Pollution
Prevention and Control Directive (96/61/EC) is
devolved and has been implemented in Northern
Ireland through the Pollution Prevention and
Control Regulations (Northern Ireland) 2003
(PPC). Each installation requires a PPC permit
issued by the DOE’s Environment and Heritage
Service. Some 60 industrial installations have
been permitted under PPC in Northern Ireland so
far and around 250 installations in total will be
subject to IPPC controls by the end of 

EU emissions trading scheme

 There are currently 28 industrial plants in
Northern Ireland participating in the EU Emissions
Trading Scheme, from a wide range of sectors
including power generation, food and drink,
and cement manufacturing.
Support for businesses

 Over the past three years the Carbon Trust has
been working successfully in partnership with
Northern Ireland businesses and the public sector
through energy surveys, interest free loans to
fund energy saving projects, Enhanced Capital
Allowances/Energy Technology List23, design
advice and training events. It has developed a
comprehensive suite of design guidance
documentation and has put in place an
unparalleled range of skills transfer mechanisms
to support local construction professionals. A key
Northern Ireland-specific concept is the Low
Carbon Design Initiative. This was launched in
2003 and seeks to ensure that the new
generation of buildings are of a world class
standard with respect to low energy/carbon
design.
Waste management

 The Northern Ireland Landfill Allowances Scheme,
introduced in April 2005, provides the mechanism
for reducing biodegradable municipal waste
(BMW) sent to landfill. The targets are to reduce
landfilling of BMW to 75 per cent of 1995 levels
by 2010, to 50 per cent of 1995 levels by 2013
and to 35 per cent of 1995 levels by 

Northern Ireland has a deficit of waste
management infrastructure due to historical
reliance on landfill as the cheapest option for
waste disposal. Northern Ireland’s revised Waste
Management strategy, due for publication in
Spring 2006, will focus on the provision and
funding of the physical infrastructure necessary
to deliver the EU Landfill Directive targets.
Transport

 Road transport emissions in Northern Ireland
continue to increase. This is now the second
largest source of carbon dioxide emissions,
comprising around 27 per cent of the Northern
Ireland carbon dioxide emissions in 
 This
Compressed air systems
Over the past two years the Carbon Trust
commissioned seventy specialist energy surveys
looking solely at compressed air systems in
Northern Ireland businesses. Between them the
local businesses surveyed were spending
around £
6m annually on electricity to
generate, treat, and distribute compressed air.
As a result of the Carbon Trust intervention,
annual savings of £
3m (31 per cent) and
26,400 tCO2 were identified for a one-off
investment cost of £3m, and an overall simple
payback of 16 months. Within 12 months of
receipt of the survey reports, these businesses
had implemented recommendations with
annual savings of £
5m and 17,000 tCO2, and
plans for further investment to realise
additional savings.

158
Northern Ireland
23www.eca.gov.uk/etl/


contribution is likely to increase as road traffic
continues to grow.

 An integral feature of Northern Ireland’s Regional
Development Strategy is the Regional
Transportation Strategy 2002-2012 (RTS) which
provides a framework for the future planning,
funding and delivery of land-based transportation
throughout Northern Ireland. A major aim of the
RTS is to start a strategic move away from a
transport system that is dominated by car use
towards a more balanced and integrated system
in which walking, cycling and public transport will
be more viable and attractive options.

 Walking and cycling are being encouraged by the
provision of specifically designed physical
measures, including the construction of additional
footways, cycle lanes and cycle parking stands.
Rail infrastructure and services have improved
with the introduction of new trains. The first
phase of the Belfast “Metro” high frequency
network bus service, introduced in February
2005, has improved passenger access, comfort
and convenience.

 Land use planning is key to determining travel
behaviour. Planning Policy Statement 13 on
Transportation and Land Use was published in
March 2005 to provide strategic policy guidance
and advice on the integration of transportation
and land use. Planning Policy Statement 3 on
Access, Movement and Parking translates the
strategic guidance on these issues into detailed
operational policies. Both planning policy
statements introduce an assessment of the
potential transport impacts of the proposed
development and seek for the first time to
integrate transport policy and planning.

 The Department for Regional Development’s
Travelwise scheme is being promoted within the
Northern Ireland Civil Service to encourage staff
to rely less on private cars and to make greater
use of car sharing, cycling and public transport.
Conversion of fleet vehicles to more
environmentally friendly alternatives and or fuels
is another goal.

 In rural areas, where passenger numbers are low,
alternatives to conventional bus services include
community-based initiatives and the use of
smaller vehicles. The Rural Transport Fund
provides grant aid to support these initiatives.
Households

 The inventory of greenhouse gas emissions
indicates that the household sector in Northern
Ireland contributes around 20 per cent of
Northern Ireland’s carbon dioxide emissions.
This amounts to 4 per cent of UK domestic
emissions, which is slightly higher than what
would be expected from the population size
(3 per cent of the UK population). A contributory
factor is the limited availability of natural gas for
home heating resulting in higher consumption of
oil and coal, although the latter is on the decline
due to central heating conversions.

 In partnership with public, private and voluntary
sector organisations to improve energy efficiency
in the housing stock and to tackle fuel poverty, a
wide range of programmes and initiatives are
being promoted by the Northern Ireland
Administration. The Northern Ireland Housing
Executive invests around £40m per annum on
heating conversions, double-glazing and
insulation works. The Housing Executive’s policy is
that natural gas should be the fuel of choice for
domestic heating where supply is available. As a
result of these measures and fuel switching in the
private sector there have been significant changes
in the domestic fuel mix in the eight years
between 1996 and 2004, with solid fuel declining
from 40 per cent to 8 per cent. Oil has risen from
36 per cent to 65 per cent and natural gas has
risen from zero to 8 per cent. The 2004 interim
House Condition Survey indicated a 
2 per cent
improvement in energy efficiency from 1996 to

 The associated carbon dioxide savings are
of the order of 
55 MtC per annum.

 In partnership with other agencies, the Housing
Executive is also piloting a range of renewable
technologies on “hard to heat” homes which are
defined as properties with solid walls, off the gas

159
Northern Ireland


network. The installations include solar PV panels
(photovoltaic), solar water heating, solar air
heating, wind turbine, ground source heat pumps
and a prototype high efficiency oil-condensing
boiler. A partnership-funded micro CHP trial
involving around 50 homes, across all tenures, is
also underway with 17 installations to date. The
trial will be used to assess the effectiveness of the
technologies and will also be used to help
stimulate the market. 
Energy efficiency

 During 2004-05, support for the domestic and
non-commercial elements of the Energy Efficiency
Programme came from DETI as part of a package
of measures to reduce electricity costs. The much
smaller commercial element of the programme
continues to be funded through a levy on all
electricity customers.

 The Northern Ireland Authority for Energy
Regulation set the framework for the programme
with the Energy Saving Trust fulfilling the role of
evaluating, assessing and auditing schemes.
Seventeen individual energy efficiency schemes
were implemented by Northern Ireland Electricity
with an investment of £
72m, providing whole
house energy efficiency solutions for over 1,700
homes throughout Northern Ireland and
delivering 340 GWh of energy. The schemes are
estimated to deliver carbon savings of 100,332
tonnes.

 Prior to April 2005, there were three Energy
Efficiency Advice Centres (EEACs) funded by the
Energy Saving Trust in Northern Ireland with
offices in Belfast, Londonderry and Enniskillen.
The Energy Saving Trust is currently piloting the
concept of a Sustainable Energy Network with
the creation of separate Sustainable Energy
Centres (SECs) in three areas of the UK, one of
which is in Northern Ireland.
Fuel poverty

 Northern Ireland has the highest level of fuel
poverty in the United Kingdom. In November
2004, the Department for Social Development
launched the Ending Fuel Poverty, A Strategy for
Northern Ireland24 which aims to eliminate fuel
poverty in vulnerable households and the social
rented sector by 2010 and in non-vulnerable
households by 
 A Fuel Poverty Advisory
Group was established in April 2005 to monitor
and review the strategy and to promote a
partnership approach to tackling fuel poverty.
Since 2001 over 4,600 owner-occupiers have
received central heating and over 16,000 have
received cavity wall and/or loft insulation under
the Warm Homes Scheme.
Agriculture

 Northern Ireland’s important agricultural sector
currently contributes around 22 per cent of
Northern Ireland’s total greenhouse gas
emissions. In 2003 agriculture contributed 91 per
cent of Northern Ireland’s methane emissions and
88 per cent of nitrous oxide emissions. Methane
emissions have declined by 4 per cent from 1990,
while nitrous oxide emissions have fallen by 10
per cent.

 The current Northern Ireland Rural Development
Programme comprises a range of agri-
environment schemes including the Countryside
Management Scheme (CMS), the Environmentally
Sensitive Area (ESA) Scheme and the Organic
Farming Scheme. Some 30 per cent of Northern
Ireland’s 28,000 farm businesses currently
participate in this agri-environment programme.
This is expected to rise to 50 per cent by mid-

 CMS and ESA participants are required to
adopt environmentally friendly farming practices
such as ungrazed grass margins or the
introduction of tree-planted margins.

160
Northern Ireland
24www.dsdni.gov.uk/ending_fuel_poverty_-_a_strategy_for_ni.pdf


Forestry

 Forest policy is currently under review in Northern
Ireland with an emphasis on forest expansion and
a commitment to encourage afforestation. Grant
aid incentives are provided to complement the
reform of the Common Agricultural Policy and to
maximise the potential for the forestry sector to
contribute to sustainable development. The
Department of Agriculture and Rural
Development’s consultation paper, Options for
Forestry (DARD, 200427), recognised the value of
trees in removing carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere and indicated that the Forest Service
would work with others to pursue opportunities
for carbon sequestration.

 The Forest Service has operated a Challenge Fund
for Short Rotation Coppice Energy Crops since
August 2004 to encourage the establishment of
short rotation willow coppice for renewable
energy generation. To date, 200 hectares have
been planted with an additional 350 hectares
already agreed or in the planning stage. The Fund
operates under the umbrella of the current Rural
Development Regulation running from 2000 to

 Support is expected to be extended into
the successor programme from 2007 to 

Public sector

 The Department of Finance and Personnel (DFP)
in Northern Ireland has overall responsibility for
the promotion of energy efficiency in public
sector bodies. While this is a devolved matter,
Ministers have agreed to work towards the
national targets in the Sustainable Development
Framework for the Government Estate. The DFP
has developed a customised software programme
for recording and analysing the energy
performance of all buildings occupied by
Northern Ireland public bodies. The system
enables energy performance to be compared with
nationally accepted benchmarks.

 The DFP manages a Central Energy Efficiency
Fund to finance energy efficiency improvements
in the public sector. Since natural gas became
available in 1996, some 125 government
buildings in Northern Ireland have been
converted to natural gas as the fuel of choice.
This conversion programme has secured a 20,000
tonne reduction of carbon dioxide emissions over
the eight years to 
 Similar action has been
taken by many other public bodies including
District Councils, Health Trusts, Education and
Library Boards, and the Police Service of Northern
Ireland. Since 2001, there has been a steady

161
Northern Ireland
25www.forestserviceni.gov.uk/home.htm
Balcas combined heat and power plant and wood pellet production
Balcas Timber, one of the largest saw mills in the British Isles, based near Enniskillen in County Fermanagh,
obtained grant aid from the UK Government’s Department of Trade and Industry’s Bio energy Capital Grant
Scheme to support a £10m investment in the development of a wood fired combined heat and power (CHP)
generator in tandem with a wood pellet production facility.
The plant uses 180,000 tonnes of surplus wood chip and sawdust, produced as a co-product of Balcas sawn
timber production, to provide its own power requirements (saving the company up to £1,000,000 per year
in electricity costs) as well as producing heat for timber drying kilns and the production of pellets. The
company has succeeded in securing deals with
two major power stations in England which will
purchase the pellets for co-firing. The fuel also
has great potential as a renewable energy
alternative to wind for small-scale commercial
and domestic use. With a target pellet
production of 50,000 tonnes per year, this is one
of the largest plants of this nature in Europe.


increase in the amount of green electricity
purchased. Central Government departments
currently purchase around 11,000,000 kWh of
green electricity annually, representing some
30 per cent of their electricity requirements.

 The DFP and the Northern Ireland Strategic
Investment Board are jointly undertaking a
strategic review of accommodation needs for the
Northern Ireland Government estate (Workplace
2010). This will ensure that only buildings in the
top quartile of energy performance are procured.
The review also seeks to reduce the number of
buildings occupied by departments and to make
better and more efficient use of space. This will
achieve efficiencies in energy use and further
reduce emissions. As a result of the
improvements in energy efficiency, the normalised
carbon dioxide performance of the Northern
Ireland public sector has shown an improvement
from 141 kgCO2/m
2 in 1989-90 to 80 kgCO2/m

2
in 1999-2000 to 72 kgCO2/m
2 in 2003-

Public procurement

 The Northern Ireland Government is committed
to taking action towards sustainable procurement
and using the power of procurement spend to
transform markets and influence the supply
chain, for example by increasing the amount of
energy bought from renewable sources, by
buying from suppliers who have established
environmental credentials, and through “green”
specifications. In addition, the DOE is currently
piloting an Environmental Management Scheme
for potential roll-out to the Northern Ireland Civil
Service (NICS) as a whole.
Building Regulations

 Part F of the Northern Ireland Building
Regulations on minimum standards for
conservation of fuel and power is being
amended. The revision will have the effect of
reducing carbon dioxide emissions from those
buildings to which these regulations apply by up
to 40 per cent. The amendment will also
incorporate a number of the requirements under
the EU Energy Performance of Buildings Directive.
Monitoring and reporting

 Progress with these policies will be monitored as
part of the roll-out of the Sustainable
Development Implementation Plan. In an attempt
to mainstream sustainable development across
the Northern Ireland administration, the DOE is
considering the development of a revised
integrated impact assessment process. Efforts to
change consumer behaviour and raise public
awareness of climate change issues will be taken
forward through the Sustainable Development
Communication Strategy.
Energy efficiency in the public sector
The proposed new library at Queen’s University
will recover and use waste heat generated by
its computer centre to heat the rest of the
building using ground water heating/cooling
and heat pump technology.
Omagh College of Further and Higher
Education has installed a biomass boiler which
feeds into an under-floor heating system to
heat the industrial wing of it new campus.
The Environment and Renewable Energy Fund
will provide means for a biomass heat network
to supply the heating needs for several of the
buildings in the Stormont Estate. If this is based
on a CHP system, it is estimated that this
network will be capable of meeting around
40 per cent of the electrical demand for those
buildings.

162
Northern Ireland


CHAPTER THREE
Wales
Introduction

 The Welsh Assembly Government recognises that
climate change is one of the most important
issues facing the world at the beginning of the
21st Century. The Environment Strategy for
Wales and its accompanying action plan
which are due to be published in early 2006
will provide details of further actions to be
taken to address climate change. Scoping work
has been carried out in each ministerial portfolio
on how climate change mitigation and adaptation
relates to current policies and programmes and
will inform future policy choices.
Greenhouse gas emissions inventory
and projections

 In 2003, the latest year for which disaggregated
data is available, Wales accounted for just over 2
per cent of the UK total (disaggregated figures
for 2004 will be available later in the year). This is

2 per cent below the level in Wales for the
1990 base year. Emissions of greenhouse gases in
Wales in 2003 were 
54 million tonnes lower
than in 
 A breakdown by sector follows:

 Industrial greenhouse gas emissions still account
for a third of Wales’ total emissions. This is not
unexpected as Wales has a much larger
manufacturing sector than the UK average, with
a strong heavy industry component. Nevertheless
Wales has tremendous natural potential for
renewable and alternative energy and has already
set a target that by 2010; 4 TWh of its electricity
demand will be generated from renewable
energy sources. This is expected to make a
contribution to the UK’s long-term aspiration to
reduce carbon dioxide emissions by some 60 per
cent emissions by around 

The Welsh Assembly Government is committed
to working with the UK Government, the
other devolved administrations, the statutory,
voluntary sector and business partners in
Wales, and the community at large to tackle
the threat of climate change.

163

Wales and UK Greenhouse gas emissions by sector in 2003
Sector Greenhouse Gas Emissions (MtC)1 % Change Wales as % of
1990 2003 1990-2003 UK2 (2003)
Business 
21 
85 -
2 
7
Waste Management 
38 
15 -
9 
3
Industrial Process 
79 
69 -
2 
5
Transport 
70 
81 
4 
4
Residential 
12 
30 16 
5
Energy Supply 
40 
95 
6 
3
Agriculture 
75 
55 -
4 
3
Land Use Change Emission 
37 
33 -
8 
2
Public 
23 
13 -
8 
2
Total Emissions 
80 
00 -
6 
1
Land Use Change3: Removal** -
46 -
00 -
7 
3
Total Net Emissions 
82 
38 -
2 
1
Notes:
1 Base year and 2003 emission figures taken from the Greenhouse Gas Inventories for England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland 1990-2003 (Baggott et
al., 2005). The emissions estimates for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland inventories are subject to greater uncertainty than the consolidated UK estimates.
2 UK figures exclude unallocated emissions. This affects energy supply and transport (where emissions due to military transport, fishing and domestic aviation
are unallocated).
3 Land use change removals is a sink and, therefore, removes carbon. Thus, the percentage change between 1990 and 2003 (in column 3) has therefore been
shown as a positive to reflect the fact that the capacity of the sink has increased.


The impacts of climate change in
Wales

 150,000 residential properties, many commercial
and industrial developments and other key
infrastructure like power generation, transport
links and schools as well as important
environmental sites are situated on land at risk
from flooding. Around half a million people live
and work on flood plains and over £8bn worth of
assets are at risk. The Environment Strategy for
Wales will set out the Welsh Assembly
Government’s strategic response to climate
change, building on actions already underway in
key sectors.

 The UK Climate Change Impact Programme has
produced scenarios for changes in Wales over the
period up to 
 The potential negative
impacts in Wales of the changes suggested by
these scenarios include increased risk of:

 river and coastal flooding and erosion;

 pressure on sewer systems;

 winter storm damage and coastal erosion;

 habitat and species loss, for example in
uplands and wetlands;

 changes to the landscape;

 summer water shortages and low stream
flows (coupled with higher demand);

 subsidence in prone areas; and

 thermal discomfort in buildings and health
problems in summer, including heat-related
deaths linked to high air pollution.
Climate change is predicted to have some local
advantages, but these depend on the scale and
rate of change of climate:

 a longer growing season, and potential
opportunities for agricultural diversification;

 less cold-weather transport disruption
balanced by greater disruption from storms;

 reduced demand for winter heating; and

 less cold weather related illness.
The Environment Strategy for Wales

 The Environment Strategy for Wales will set the
vision for the Environment in Wales through to

 The consultation on the Strategy, Our
Environment – Our Future – Your Views26,
contained climate change as a central theme and
recognised that it has major implications for the
Welsh Assembly Government’s policy agenda. The
consultation ended on 3 October 
 Around
200 written responses were received, many of
which commented on action to tackle climate
change. The Environment Strategy will be
supported by an action plan to deliver the
vision set out in the Strategy.
Sustainable Development Action Plan

 Wales has a legal obligation to have a Sustainable
Development (SD) Scheme and build sustainable
development into all policies and practices. The
present SD Action Plan runs from 2004 to 

Addressing climate change is one of the key
themes and is supported by commitments to
mitigating the effects of climate change. As a
result, various initiatives have been put in place
since 2004, which are supported by national and
area-specific commitments in the Welsh Assembly
Government’s Wales Spatial Plan, People, Places,
Futures. These are:

164
Wales
26www.wlga.gov.uk/uploads/publications/
pdf



 the Energy Route Map to be published in
2006 will set out the objective for a clean
energy agenda, including the development of
renewable energy. Clear targets for producing
4 TWh (approximately 10 per cent) of energy
from renewable sources by 2010 and 7 TWh
by 2020 are already in place. A project has
been commissioned to investigate the benefits
and barriers to promoting the uptake of
alternative fuels in Wales, such as biofuels,
biogas, natural gas and hydrogen;

 community renewables and innovative energy
projects have been developed through a
number of community projects and funded
through the Objective 1 programme

Additional funds have been secured to ensure
that the work of the Carbon Trust in Wales
can continue to support the uptake of energy
efficiency practices;

 research is in progress to develop guidelines
on land-use for conservation of carbon stocks
in soils. The guidelines will then be considered
for implementation under the CAP reform and
agri-environment policy;

 a two-year contract from 2005 to 2007 is in
place to supply all Assembly street lighting
with 100 per cent green energy, as part of the
Wales Street-lighting Energy Purchase
consortium; and

 a study has been commissioned to explore the
feasibility of offsetting the carbon generated
by road scheme.
Energy supply

 The Welsh energy policy faces the challenge of
fuelling an internationally competitive economy
while maintaining the highest environmental
standards and mitigating climate change.
Although Wales is a net exporter of electricity,
there is a significant north-south divide in energy
generation. Electricity is exported from the
concentration of generating stations in north
Wales while in south Wales a significant
proportion of electricity is imported.
Consequently, because of transmission costs,
consumers in south Wales pay some of the
highest electricity prices in Great Britain. There is
a relatively poor electricity transmission
infrastructure in mid Wales. 

 The Welsh Assembly Government is keen to
encourage the development of small-scale
renewable energy generation in Wales. This
includes:

 small hydro projects – these are already
substantially developed in Wales. In addition
smaller schemes have become viable as a
result of the Renewables Obligation;

 photovoltaic (PV) and micro wind – it is
expected that the uptake of these
technologies will increase in the future as they
continue to advance and economy of scale
will be making them more economical;

 biomass and biofuels – will continue to be
important as the results of studies and
demonstration projects are being evaluated;

and


 On large scale renewables, as well as looking
to generate 800MW from new large windfarms
being built in accordance with the TAN 8
planning guidance, the Welsh Assembly
Government believes the time is now right to
further investigate building proposals, including
the major environmental impacts, for a major
low-carbon energy-generating Severn Barrage.

165
Wales

165
Wales
27www.defra.gov.uk/rural/structure/obj
htm

CHP

 Health estates in Wales have increased self-
generation of CHP electricity by 
7 per cent
over the 2004-05 period. This accounts for 8 per
cent of their total electricity requirement.
Opportunities for micro CHP will feature in
the Wales micro-generation strategy which
is expected to be issued for consultation in
Spring 


 The Welsh Assembly Government and Forestry
Commission Wales administer the £7m Wood
Energy Business Scheme which provides: (1)
appropriate projects with capital grants to
facilitate the installation and operation of
woodfuel powered heating and power
generation plants; and (2) equipment for initial
processing of roundwood into chip and pellet
form. In addition, clean energy technology
development will be encouraged by collaboration
between the Welsh Energy Research Centre
(WERC) and the higher education sector in Wales.
Households

 The Welsh Housing Quality Standard sets a
minimum energy rating (SAP)28 for social housing,
requiring that the heating in the whole dwelling
should be at comfortable level and reasonably
economical in normal weather conditions. Social
landlords must also take all cost-effective
opportunities to upgrade the thermal and
ventilation performance of dwellings.
Development Quality Requirements (DQR) are the
published design standards for all new housing
built by Registered Social Landlords in Wales
when using a Social Housing Grant. DQR requires
that all housing must be built to an EcoHomes
rating standard of ‘good’.

 Companies supplying gas or electricity have been
actively promoting their Energy Efficiency
Commitment (EEC) programmes to customers in
Wales. The Welsh Assembly Government also
works with the Energy Saving Trust and the
Welsh Local Government Association to assist
local authorities to meet their targets under the
Home Energy Conservation Act and Policy
Agreements. The Energy Saving Trust leads
activity on domestic sector energy efficiency in
Wales. Advice is offered to individual households
and social landlords through the Energy Efficiency
Advice Centres in Wales and the Welsh Local
Government Association. The Welsh Assembly
Government’s Energy Saving Wales portal
website29, which was launched as a portal
website in December 2005 will provide links to
organisations with information, advice and
support on energy efficiency and small scale
renewable energy projects.
Support to businesses

 The Welsh Assembly Government encourages
businesses to take up the opportunities that low
carbon technology offers. The Welsh
Development Agency’s Environmental Goods and
Services (EGS) scheme supports businesses
engaged in environmental legislation market
activities such as clean energy. The Welsh
Assembly Government also sponsors the Carbon
Trust in Wales. Their direct support services have
helped Welsh organisations identify potential cost
savings of around £
5m, equating to 144,500
tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions.
EU emissions trading scheme

 The Welsh Assembly Government supports the
EU ETS scheme and will be working closely with
the UK Government to ensure that the second
phase of the scheme recognises and addresses
the specific needs of businesses based in Wales
while delivering emissions savings.

IPPC


 From 1 January 2006, the Welsh Assembly
Government became responsible for
implementing the Integrated Pollution Prevention
and Control Directive (96/61/EC) in Wales.

166
Wales
28Standard Assessment Procedure
29www.energysavingwales.org.uk/index.cfm?alias=about


Fuel poverty

 The 2004 Living in Wales survey indicated that in
2004, the overall number of households living in
fuel poverty in Wales was 130,000 or 11 per cent
of all Welsh households. The Home Energy
Efficiency Scheme (HEES) , the main programme
to tackle fuel poverty in Wales has assisted over
50,000 households since 

Waste management

 In June 2002, the Welsh Assembly Government
published Wise about Waste: the National Waste
Strategy for Wales, which sets down policies and
targets for waste management across all waste
streams. The Strategy seeks to ensure that Wales
will meet its obligations under both UK and
European legislation and its duty to promote
sustainable development set in the Government
of Wales Act 
 Recycling and composting
have increased from an historic base of 3 per
cent to 5 per cent in 2004-05 to 
4 per cent
with targets of 25 per cent in 2006-07 and
40 per cent in 2009-
 

 The Welsh Assembly Government has made
substantial financial resources available to local
authorities to support delivery of the waste
strategy, £93m over the three years to 2007-

The Welsh Assembly Government has also
allocated £
5m support for businesses over three
years to 2007-08 under the Materials Action
Programme. This will assist them to become more
resource efficient thus using fewer materials and
less energy. Businesses are also being encouraged
to use recycled materials through an industrial
symbiosis programme to identify partners whose
waste they can use as a raw material and are also
being encouraged to reduce the amount of
hazardous waste they produce and the
hazardousness of that waste.
Transport

 The Transport (Wales) Act 2006 sets the context
for the development of a Wales Transport
Strategy (WTS) and places a statutory
requirement on the Welsh Assembly Government
to develop a Transport Strategy. The WTS will
replace the existing Transport Framework for
Wales. The new Strategy will cover the
period up to 2030 and a draft for
consultation will be published in early
summer 
 One of the over-arching
objectives will be to reduce the impact of
transport on climatic change, air and noise
quality, water pollution, biodiversity, landscape
and townscape. The WTS will include
a Sustainable Distribution Strategy, which is
being developed in consultation with the Wales
Freight Group.

 A new Welsh Transport Appraisal Guidance
(WELTAG) is also being developed and will be
published later this year. WELTAG will be used to
appraise the strategies developed by the WTS,
including examination of the Strategic
Environmental Assessment (SEA) requirements.
On completion of the WTS, schemes and
measures to support the strategies will be
explored.
Farming

 Making farming more sustainable is at the heart
of “Farming for the Future”, the Welsh strategy
for the agricultural industry. One of the concerns
of the Welsh Assembly Government is to ensure
that the carbon contents of soils in Wales are

167
Wales

167
Wales


conserved and enhanced. Current estimates of
the carbon store are 350-480MtC, however there
is recent evidence that this has decreased
significantly over the past 25 years. Research is
ongoing to understand better the land
management methods to conserve soil carbon.

 The Rural Development Plan for Wales,
covering the 2007-2013 programming period,
will be published at the end of the year and
will be a key tool to support the agri-environment
agenda within the farming community.
Forestry

 Forestry policy is entirely devolved to the Welsh
Assembly Government. The Forestry Commission
Wales acts as the Assembly’s department of
forestry. Woodlands for Wales sets the Welsh
Assembly Government policy for trees and
woodlands. Much work has been undertaken by
Coed Cymru30 to develop products from Welsh
hardwoods and softwoods, which both enhance
the life of the forest carbon store and are a useful
substitute for more energy intensive materials.
Public sector

 The Sustainable Development Action Plan
committed the Welsh Assembly Government to
putting in place an Environmental Management
System to be accredited to Green Dragon
Environmental Standard31 Level 5 by 
 Good
progress has been made towards this goal. Level
4 was achieved in 2005 and actions have been
taken to achieve Level 5 in early 
 The
Welsh Assembly Government is also
committed to purchasing green electricity
and currently procures approximately 90 per cent
of its supplies from renewable sources. It will be
looking to procure 100 per cent of its electricity
supplies from renewable sources by 
 Under
the current round of Policy Agreements, local
authorities have committed to reducing carbon
dioxide emissions from Council buildings. The
Carbon Trust’s Carbon Management service helps
large organisations to assess how to combat the
risks and take advantage of the opportunities
associated with climate change.
Education

 The Eco-schools project in Wales, supported by The
Welsh Assembly Government, the Countryside
Council for Wales and Awareness Wales, currently
involves 1,100 schools in Wales though the target
is to increase this to 1,700 by 
 The Eco-
schools programme encourages pupils to engage
with environmental and sustainable development
issues and so reduce the environmental impact
of the school. Schools can also work towards
obtaining the Eco-schools European Green Flag
award, which is the national standard for parks
and green spaces in England and Wales.
128 schools have achieved this to date.
NHS Estate

 The performance of health estates is improving,
for example, absolute carbon dioxide emissions
have been reduced by 
5 per cent compared
with the previous year’s figures and 3 per cent
compared with the base year figures. There is
increasing use of green electricity by Trusts, with
North West Wales, Pontypridd & Rhondda, North
East Wales and Gwent all supplementing their
electrical demand, in part, from green electricity.
The amount of self-generated CHP electricity has
increased by 
7 per cent over this period and
accounts for 8 per cent of the total electricity
requirement.
Planning

 Planning Policy Wales, published in March 2002,
sets out the Welsh Assembly Government’s
planning policies and is supplemented by a series
of technical advice notes (TANs), some of which
are of particular relevance to climate change.

168
Wales
30Coed Cymru is an all Wales initiative to promote the management of broadleaf woodlands and the use of locally grown hardwood timber.
31www.greendragonems.com/


SECTION

5
Annexes


ANNEX A
Emissions projections
Carbon dioxide

 Projections of the UK’s emissions of carbon
dioxide are largely derived from the DTI Energy
Model. This is a set of interlocking sub-models of
the UK energy market including final user energy
sectors and the electricity supply sector. It is a top
down demand model, based on econometrically
estimated relationships between energy demand,
energy supply, economic activity and energy
prices and a bottom–up supply side model. The
demand side comprises over 150 equations
linking historic fuel demand for residential,
transport, industry, service and agriculture sectors.
The supply side comprises data on every major
power producer and other energy producing
industries. The sector classification and the
principal source of energy statistics is the Digest
of UK Energy Statistics (DUKES)
 The DTI model
makes projections based on prospects for fossil
fuel prices, economic growth and demographics.

 Rather than producing a single forecast, the
projections provide a view of possible future
levels of emissions and composition of energy
demand based on agreed assumptions of world
energy prices. This results in different scenarios
within the umbrella of overall projected UK
economic growth. Even then, considerable
uncertainties remain. These are discussed further
in Annex B.

 Energy and emissions projections which informed
the Climate Change Programme 2000 were
published in November 2000 in Energy Paper 

The exercise to provide updated energy and
emissions projections began in April 2003 and
Updated Energy Projections (UEP) are now
published periodically. The UEP exercise includes
significant improvements to the DTI model in
several sectors. Key assumptions have been
updated and revised and have been incorporated
in the baseline. It also now includes all current
government environmental policy measures as
most recently evaluated, as described below.
Baseline with measures projections underpinning
the Climate Change Programme review were
published in UEP 21, in February 
 

 Government policies and measures introduced
since the Kyoto Protocol was negotiated, and
since the publication of the Climate Change
Programme in 2000, are now incorporated within
the baseline projections. Thus, for example, the
demand response to the climate change levy is
incorporated in the projections, as is the impact
of the Renewables Obligation, which is assumed
in the DTI energy projections to raise the share of
renewables in electricity supply to around 8 per
cent by 
 The level of carbon saving from the
policy measure incorporated in the baseline has
been determined during the re-evaluation process
undertaken during the Summer of 
 A table
setting out the carbon savings associated with
each policy included in the baseline projections is
included in Section 


 The UEP projections provide two central scenarios
based on HM Treasury projections of economic
growth combined with two variations on
assumptions of world fossil fuel price projections.
The two central price variations provide relative
price situations that would indicate either gas or

170

1 See www.dti.gov.uk/energy/inform/dukes/dukes2005/index.shtml
2 www.dti.gov.uk/energy/sepn/UEP_Feb
pdf
3 Historical CO2 emissions and CO2 energy projections in the table are based on the greenhouse gas inventory published in 2005 which agrees with the
inventory published in 2006 (used elsewhere in the programme) to about 
01 per cent for total CO2 emissions on average over the period 1990 to 2003,
with individual years differing by up to about 
4 per cent. The energy projections will be updated to be based on the inventory published in 
 The LULUCF
emissions are taken from the inventory published in 

UK carbon dioxide emission projections by scenario, 1990 to 2020, MtC3
1990 1995 2000 2004 2010 2015 2020
Central favouring coal 
6 
1 
7 
8 
6 
3 
3
Central favouring gas 
6 
1 
7 
8 
9 
4 
6
Average of central projections 
6 
1 
7 
8 
8 
8 
9
LULUCF emissions and removals 
8 
3 -
1 -
6 -
5 
1 
7
Total CO2 emissions and removals 
4 
4 
6 
3 
3 
0 
6
Change from 1990 emissions for row above -
8% -
9% -
2% -
6% -
8% -
2%
Note: the percentage changes and emission estimates may differ slightly due to rounding.


coal as more economic within the electricity
generating sector. Alternative scenarios providing
a longer-term view of either high or low fossil
fuel prices are also provided but not reported
here. The table below shows how the average of
the two central scenarios from the DTI model
combines with the central land use, land use
change and forestry (LULUCF) emission scenarios
developed by the Centre for Ecology and
Hydrology under contract to Defra. This provides
the total UK carbon dioxide projections used
within this Programme. The CEH projections
are described further under Annex F. 
Other greenhouse gases projections

 The emissions projections of the other
greenhouse gases covered by the Kyoto Protocol
– methane, nitrous oxide, hydrofluorocarbons,
perfluorocarbons and sulphur hexafluoride – were
produced by ENTEC4 under contract to Defra and
are broadly consistent with the assumptions
underlying the projections of carbon dioxide
emissions published by the DTI. The projections
have been developed for thirteen different sectors
and sub-sectors based on a range of different
sources, including consultation with experts and
stakeholders from Government departments,
industry and other organisations; technical
literature; and incorporating results of studies
undertaken for Defra.

 Projections are calculated using simple
spreadsheet models that calculate emissions
based on forecast activity statistics, emissions
factors and various other sector specific
assumptions for each of the main sources of
emissions. Greenhouse gas emission projections
are disaggregated by sector and are calculated for
each year from 2005 to 
 These are then
aggregated to provide an estimate of total
projected emissions. The spreadsheets have been
constructed so as to provide transparency in the
assumptions and approaches used and also for
ease of updating.

 Methodologies and assumptions used to
generate the projections are documented in the
spreadsheets and accompanying report.
Probabilistic modelling of the range of uncertainty
associated with the total emissions for each gas
has also been undertaken to calculate the
confidence range for the projections. 

 As with the projections for carbon dioxide, the
non-CO2 projections are based on a ‘with
measures’ scenario, which takes into account
currently adopted and implemented policies and
measures. Central estimates for sector projections
are aggregated to calculate the best estimate for
the total emissions. 

 The table below summarises the methodologies
used to estimate projections of non-carbon
dioxide gases, broken down by sector. Annexes D
to F provide more details of the emissions of each
gas and the methodologies used to derive them
including uncertainty ranges associated with the
central estimates reported in the Programme.

 Projections are checked by comparing trends in
actual historic emissions against future emission
estimates. If there is a significant deviation
between the trend in historic data and future
emission estimates, projection methodologies and
assumptions are revised accordingly.

 In certain sectors, projection methodologies are
verified by using a combination of bottom up
and top down information. For example, the
methodology that derives estimates of future
emissions of hydrofluorocarbons is based on
detailed disaggregated projections on a sector
by sector basis. This is a bottom up approach.
The outputs from this model have been
checked against historic sales information for
hydrofluorocarbons, where available – a top
down approach. Consequently, the model has
been verified by comparing projected emissions
to actual sales information for the fluids
concerned.

171
Emissions projections
4 This technical report will be available following publication of the Programme. The non-CO2 projections have been updated for consistency with the greenhouse
gas inventory published in 
 

172
Emissions projections
5 UK Greenhouse Gas Inventory, 1990 to 2004, to be published in April 2006, will be available at www.naei.co.uk/reports.php
6 Development of a Methodology for Estimating Methane Emissions from Abandoned Coal Mines in the UK, IMC White Young Green, 

7 www.dft.gov.uk/stellent/groups/dft_aviation/documents/page/dft_aviation_
pdf
8 UK Landfill Methane Emissions: Evaluation and Appraisal of Waste Policies and Projections to 2050, Golder Associates, November 

Methodologies for non-carbon dioxide projections
Sector Gas Methodology
Agriculture Methane Projections are consistent with the approach adopted in the UK
Greenhouse Gas Inventory, 1990 to 20045, incorporating forecasts of
livestock numbers (from Defra) and expectations for changes in body 
mass per cow and milk production per head (Defra).
Nitrous oxide Projections are consistent with the approach adopted in the UK 
Greenhouse Gas Inventory, 1990 to 2004, incorporating forecast changes 
in inorganic nitrogen-based fertiliser use (Agricultural Industries Federation). 
Fuel combustion Methane & The DTI updated energy projections (UEP 21) have been incorporated 
Nitrous oxide into a model consistent with that used to calculate CH4 and N2O emissions
for the UK Greenhouse Gas Inventory, 1990 to 
 DTI industrial growth
forecasts are used to estimate emissions from the manufacturing and
construction sectors and from metal production.
Gas distribution Methane Projections are based on reductions in leakage expected through an 
ongoing replacement programme for cast iron gas mains (low 
pressure pipes).
Coal mining Methane Projections are based on DTI estimates of future UK mined coal
production, using the approach currently adopted in the UK
Greenhouse Gas Inventory, 1990 to 

Abandoned coal mines Methane Projections are based on an emission of 
74 per cent of the 
estimated methane reserve of closed collieries per year
 Methane 
reserve estimates are based on detailed plans of abandoned mine 
workings and take into account the likely effects of rising water in the
workings due to flooding. Calculations allow for a higher expected 
rate of emissions a few years after closure of individual collieries. 
Some mitigation of emissions has also been assumed for collieries 
closing in future. Projections are consistent with DTI estimates of 
future colliery closure.
Oil & Gas Methane Projections are based on estimates provided by United Kingdom
Offshore Operators Association (UKOOA) and verified by comparison
with forecast offshore oil and gas production.
Transport Methane & Road – Emission projections are based on projections of vehicle km 
Nitrous oxide traveled, provided by the Department for Transport and AEA 
Technology, and emissions factors for each of the ‘Euro’ standards 
comprising the vehicle fleet.
Civil aviation – Emission projections are based on assumed growth in 
passenger demand (Aviation White Paper)

Navigation – Emission projections are based on information from 
Department for Transport on expected growth (assuming emissions 
proportional to activity).
Railways – Emission projections are based on the assumption that 
changes in rail activity influence emissions proportionately. The data 
was provided by the Department for Transport and the Strategic Rail 
Authority.
Landfill Methane Estimates developed by Golder Associates8 based on municipal solid
waste arisings generated from the Local Authority Waste Recycling
Recovery and Disposal Model.
Wastewater handling Methane Based on expected change in sewage sludge production and 
projected changes in population developed by Government 
Actuary’s Department.
Chemical industry Nitrous oxide Projected emissions from adipic and nitric acid manufacture are
calculated based on knowledge of abatement techniques applied at
relevant sites and projected future abatement achievable. 


Overall uncertainty

 Uncertainty ranges for each greenhouse gas,
including carbon dioxide, were combined
probabilistically to determine the overall
uncertainty range for total greenhouse gas
emissions and projections presented in the
Programme. For this exercise, the probabilistic
range of baseline emissions from energy use
was consistent with the Average of central
projections scenario.

 This analysis suggests that in 2010, UK emissions
of greenhouse gases will be between 16 per cent
and 22 per cent below 1990 levels, with the
central scenario about 19 per cent below. The
range takes into account macroeconomic,
sectoral and modeling uncertainties. Overall
therefore, the Kyoto target would be delivered
on the basis of the policies included in the
projections. The additional policies set out in this
Programme could further reduce UK emissions of
greenhouse gases to between 20 per cent and
26 per cent below 1990 levels by 2010, with the
central scenario about 23 per cent below.

173
Emissions projections
9 Emissions and projections of HFCs, PFCs and SF6 for the UK and Constituent Countries, AEA Technology plc, June 

Methodologies for non-carbon dioxide projections – continued
Sector Gas Methodology
Industrial, business, HFCs, PFCs, Based on projections developed by AEA Technology in 2003 and 
residential SF6 updated in 2004

 Mainly based on production trends and assumed 
trends in emission factors.
Mineral Products Methane Projections based on site-specific forecasts, developed in discussion with
operators.


ANNEX B
Carbon dioxide

 Section 2 of the Programme outlines the policies
and measures that are being put in place to
reduce carbon dioxide emissions. This Annex
provides a more detailed breakdown of inventory
trends and projections.
Emissions trends and projections

 In 1990, anthropogenic emissions of the six
greenhouse gases from the UK were about 209
MtC. Carbon dioxide made up around 77 per
cent of this total. Annual emissions of carbon
dioxide fell by about 
6 per cent between 1990
and 
 Emissions are projected to continue
falling to 
6 per cent below 1990 levels by
2010, on the basis of existing policies and
measures only. 

 The table below provides a more detailed sectoral
breakdown of carbon dioxide projections
compared to the information provided in Section
2, chapter 1 of the Programme.
Carbon dioxide emissions by source, 1990 to 2020, MtC
UK carbon dioxide emissions 1990 to 2020, MtC

 The uncertainty range indicated in the figure
above will be about ±6 per cent in 2010,
increasing to ±7 per cent by 
 The range
arises from an estimate of the uncertainty
introduced by the energy modelling process,
corresponding to the full range of emission
scenarios produced by DTI
 A description of
sensitivities in key assumptions can be found in
chapter 8 of the DTI paper.
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 20202015

Mt C120130140150160170
Central estimate
Low (95%, probabilistic)
High (95%, probabilistic)
1990 2000

Mt C
2010 2020

020406080100120140160180
Transport
Industry
Services
Residential
Refineries
Power stations
Key facts

 Carbon dioxide is the most important
greenhouse gas. It contributed 85 per cent
to the UK’s total greenhouse gas emissions
in 


 CO2 emissions are estimated to have fallen
by 
6 per cent between 1990 and 


 Emissions are projected to continue falling
to 
6 per cent below 1990 levels by 2010,
on the basis of existing measures only, with
an uncertainty range of about ±6 per cent.

174

10www.dti.gov.uk/energy/sepn/UEP_Feb 
pdf

175
Carbon dioxide
11Actual historical data for 2004 are used in this table in place of 2005 projections.
Carbon dioxide emissions by source 1990 to 2020, MtC11
Sector 1990 1995 2000 2004 2010 2015 2020
Power stations 
6 
6 
4 
5 
2 
8 
6
Refineries 
0 
6 
7 
8 
7 
7 
7
Residential 
3 
7 
3 
9 
7 
0 
1
Services 
1 
5 
2 
4 
4 
7 
7
Industry 
8 
5 
4 
2 
4 
1 
6
Road Transport 
9 
3 
7 
6 
6 
8 
2
Off-road 
5 
5 
5 
5 
4 
4 
4
Other transport 
4 
9 
8 
1 
3 
4 
5
LULUCF (net) 
8 
3 -
1 -
5 -
5 
1 
7
Total CO2 emissions by sources minus
total removals by sinks 
5 
9 
0 
5 
3 
0 
6
Change from 1990 levels for row above -
2% -
7% -
6% -
6% -
8% -
2%
Note: the percentage changes and emission estimates may differ slightly due to rounding.


ANNEX C
Methane

 Methane has a global warming potential (GWP)
21 times that of carbon dioxide over a 100-year
time horizon
 However, due to a relatively short
turnover rate in the atmosphere of 12 years,
reductions in total emissions result in rapid
reduction in atmospheric concentration.
Emissions trends and projections

 In 1990, emissions of methane from the UK were

1 MtC, contributing 12 per cent to total UK
greenhouse gas emissions in that year. The major
sources were landfill waste, agriculture, natural
gas distribution and coal mining. Annual
emissions fell by 50 per cent between 1990 and
2004 and are expected to continue to fall to
about 57 per cent of 1990 emissions by 

Methane emissions by source 1990 to 2020, MtC
Methane emissions, 1990 to 2020, MtC

 The table below shows UK methane emissions by
source. There are still large uncertainties in many
of the source estimates but these have been
reduced significantly in key sectors because of
research commissioned by the Government. For
each of the key sectors, high and low estimates of
the projected emissions were derived. These were
assumed to form the upper and lower bounds of
a triangular distribution of the projected
emissions. These high and low estimates were
generally derived from expert judgement about
the data inputs, the modelling approach and the
historical variability in the data. Monte Carlo
Analysis was used in order to derive a probability
1990 1995 2000 20102005 2015 2020

Mt C051015202530
Central estimate
Low (95%, probabilistic)
High (95%, probabilistic)

1990
(base year)

2000Mt C
2010 2020

051015202530
Wastewater treatment
Fuel combustion
Offshore oil and gas
Natural gas distribution
Coal mining
Agriculture
Waste
Key facts

 Methane contributed about 7 per cent to
total UK greenhouse gas emissions in 


 Methane emissions are estimated to have
fallen by about 50 per cent between 1990
and 2004 and are projected to continue
falling to about 57 per cent below 1990
levels by 


 Waste and coal mining contributed most to
the overall reduction in methane emission
levels.

176

12Please see Annex H for more information on GWP.


density function associated with the total
projected emissions for methane. The range of
projected emissions representing the 95th
percentile is presented here.

 Landfills are the dominant source of methane in
the waste sector, contributing 98 per cent of
national methane emissions from that sector in

 Methane emissions from landfill sites are
estimated to have been 
4 MtC in 1990 and are
projected to fall to 
4 MtC by 
 The national
methane assessment model estimate of methane
emissions has been revised to take account of
improvements to the gas collection efficiency and
oxidation factors


 Methane emissions from abandoned coal mines
were 
3 MtC in 1990 based on a new estimating
method developed for Defra
 Annual emissions
decreased to 
25 MtC in 2004 but are expected
to rise again by 2010 due to colliery closures. For
the first time in 2005 the UK greenhouse gas
inventory contained emissions estimates for
abandoned mine methane.

 Based on the latest assessment of likely future
emissions from each sector and the effect of
planned policies and measures, annual emissions
of methane are expected to decrease by 57 per
cent below 1990 levels to around 
8 MtC
in 


177
Methane
13UK Landfill Methane Emissions: Evaluation and Appraisal of Waste Policies and Projections to 2050, Golder Associates, November 2005
14Development of a Methodology for Estimating Methane Emissions from Abandoned Coal Mines in the UK, White Young Green 

15Actual historical data for 2004 are used in this table in place of 2005 projections.
Methane emissions by source 1990 to 2020, MtC15
Sector 1990 1995 2000 2004 2010 2015 2020
Waste 
4 
3 
1 
8 
4 
1 
8
Agriculture 
9 
7 
5 
1 
4 
4 
4
Coal mining 
0 
4 
9 
3 
0 
8 
7
Natural gas distribution 
2 
0 
8 
3 
1 
0 
9
Offshore oil and gas 
6 
6 
4 
3 
3 
1 
1
Fuel combustion 
7 
5 
4 
4 
3 
3 
3
Wastewater treatment 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2
Other 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0
Total 
1 
8 
3 
5 
8 
0 
5
Change from 1990 levels -
1% -
9% -
1% -
0% -
0% -
1%
Note: the percentage changes and emission estimates may differ slightly due to rounding.


ANNEX D
Nitrous oxide

 Nitrous oxide has a global warming potential 310
times that of carbon dioxide over a 100-year time
horizon. The main source of emissions in the UK
is now agricultural soils because emissions from
industrial processes, particularly fugitive nitrous
oxide emissions from adipic acid manufacture,
have been significantly reduced due to
introduction of abatement equipment.
Emissions trends and projections

 In 1990, anthropogenic emissions of nitrous oxide
from the UK were 
6 MtC. Annual emissions
fell 
4 per cent between 1990 and 

Projected nitrous oxide emissions in 2010 are

0 MtC, a decrease of 
2 per cent on
1990 levels.
Nitrous oxide emissions by source 1990 to 2020, MtC
Nitrous oxide emissions, 1990 to 2020, MtC

 The table below shows UK nitrous oxide
emissions by source. There are large uncertainties
in many of the source estimates but these have
been reduced significantly in key sectors because
of Government research. For each of the key
sectors, high and low estimates of the projected
emissions were derived. These were assumed to
form the upper and lower bounds of a triangular
distribution of the projected emissions. These
high and low estimates were generally derived
from expert judgement about data inputs, the
modelling approach and the historical variability
in the data. Monte Carlo Analysis was used in
order to derive a probability density function
associated with the total projected emissions for
nitrous oxide. The range of projected emissions
representing the 95th percentile is presented
here. The central and low projections are close in
this case because the uncertainty in the rates of
application of nitrogenous fertiliser is skewed.

 Estimates of nitrous oxide emissions from
agricultural soils are currently under review,
though this is unlikely to have a significant effect
on the overall trend of nitrous oxide emissions.
1990 1995 2000

Mt C
20102005 2015 2020

1011121314151617181920
Central estimate
Low (95%, probabilistic)
High (95%, probabilistic)

1990
(base year)

2000Mt C
2010 2020

02468101214161820
Transport
Waste
Fuel combustion
Industrial processes
Agriculture
Key facts

 Nitrous oxide contributed almost 6 per cent
to total UK greenhouse gas emissions in 


 N2O emissions are estimated to have fallen by
about 40 per cent between 1990 and 2004
and are projected to be about 41 per cent
below 1990 levels by 


 Large reductions in emissions from industrial
processes contributed most to this fall.

178179
Nitrous oxide
16Actual historical data for 2004 are used in this table in place of 2005 projections.
Nitrous oxide emissions by source 1990 to 2020, MtC16
Sector 1990 1995 2000 2004 2010 2015 2020
Agriculture 
7 
3 
9 
2 
0 
9 
9
Industrial processes 
0 
2 
7 
1 
1 
1 
1
Fuel combustion 
2 
0 
9 
9 
9 
9 
8
Waste 
3 
3 
3 
3 
4 
4 
4
Transport 
4 
7 
2 
5 
6 
7 
8
Other 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0
Total 
6 
5 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0
Change from 1990 levels -
6% -
3% -
4% -
2% -
9% -
0%
Note: the percentage changes and emission estimates may differ slightly due to rounding.


ANNEX E
HFCs, PFCs and SF6

 Though relatively small as a proportion of total
emissions, emissions of the fluorinated gases –
hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons
(PFCs) and sulphur hexafluoride (SF6) – are
significant for climate change as they have high
global warming potentials (see annex H) and
usage particularly of HFCs is expected to grow in
some sectors in the near future.
Emissions trends and projections

 The Kyoto Protocol allows for either 1990 or
1995 to be used as the base year for measuring
emissions of HFCs, PFCs and SF
 The UK has
chosen to use 1995 as the baseline.

 Historical and projected emissions are shown
graphically as low, central and high estimates.
Uncertainties in the combined total UK f-gas
emissions were derived from individual sector
uncertainty estimates using an iterative Monte
Carlo Analysis. Uncertainties were calculated
as two standard deviations from the mean,
corresponding to a 95 per cent confidence
interval. Manufacturers and their representatives
provided most of the data. Stakeholder
workshops involving industry, NGOs and
producers of alternative refrigerants and other
interested parties helped to refine the emissions
and projections, and reduce some of the
uncertainties.
Emissions of HFCs, PFCs and SF6, 1990 to 2020, MtC
UK emissions of HFCs, 1995 to 2020, MtC
Notes:*from HCFC-22 manufacture and fugitive losses from HFC
manufacture.

1995
(base year)

2000Mt C
2010 2020











5
Fire fighting
Solvents
HFC-23 from HCFC-22
manufacture and
fugitive losses from HFC
manufacture
Metered dose inhalers
General aerosols
Foam 
Refrigeration/
air conditioning
1990 1995 2000

Mt C
20102005 2015 2020











0
Central estimate
Low (95%, probabilistic)
High (95%, probabilistic)
Key facts

 The fluorinated gases (F-gases) together
contributed 
6 per cent to total UK
greenhouse gas emissions in 


 F-gas emissions fell by 40 per cent between
the 1995 base year and 2004 and are
projected to be 33 per cent below 1995 levels
by 


180
UK emissions of PFCs, 1995 to 2020, MtC
UK emissions of SF6, 1995 to 2020, MtC

 In 1995, emissions of fluorinated gases from the
UK were 
7 MtC, contributing 
4 per cent of
total UK greenhouse gas emissions in that year.
Annual emissions fell by about 40 per cent
between 1995 and 2004 and are expected to be

4 per cent below 1995 levels by 
 Details
of major sources for each fluorinated gas are
given below.

 The projections are to be updated to take
account of additional abatement action affecting
HFC-23 emissions and use of SF6 in the non-
ferrous metal industry, which may together
reduce emission by between 
3 and 
4 MtC/yr
in 2010 below the level shown in the figures.

HFCs


 In 1995, emissions of hydrochlorofluorocarbons
(HFCs) from the UK were 
2 MtC with the major
source, representing about 90 per cent of HFC
emissions, being fugitive emissions of HFC-23
from the manufacture of the refrigerant HCFC-

 Other sources of HFC emissions are
refrigeration/air conditioning; foam blowing;
general aerosols; metered dose inhalers; solvent
cleaning; and firefighting.

 HFCs were virtually unused in many of these
sectors before 1990 but since then, consumption
has risen in response to the phase out of
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and HCFCs under
the Montreal Protocol.

 HFC emissions are expected to fall by 36 per cent
from 1995 to 2010, mainly due to a substantial
fall in HFC-23 emissions from HCFC-22
manufacturing plants. Emissions from end use
markets such as aerosols, refrigeration and foam
blowing are projected to increase significantly
compared to 
 However, expected reduced
levels of leakage and increased use of alternative
fluids in these markets limit the magnitude of
increases in HFC emissions.

PFCs


 UK emissions of PFCs were 
1 MtC in 
 PFC
emissions are expected to decrease by around

6 per cent of 1995 level by 2010 mainly due
to improved control of aluminium smelters and
improved fluid recovery in the electronics industry.

SF6


 SF6 is used in four main markets: electrical
insulation; magnesium smelting; electronics; and
training shoes. SF6 emissions from these end use
markets are estimated to have been 
34 MtC in
1995 and are expected to remain approximately
the same in 


1995
(base year)

2000Mt C
2010 2020








6
Electronics
Other SF6 uses
Electrical insulation
Magnesium smelting

1995
(base year)

2000Mt C
2010 2020


00



02



04



06



08



10



12



14

Refrigeration/air conditioning
Other PFC emissions
Aluminium smelting
Electronics

181
HFCs, PFCs and SF6

182
HFCs, PFCs and SF6
17Actual historical data for 2004 are used in this table in place of 2005 projections.
18OCF – One Component Foams.
19OCF – One Component Foams.
HFC, PFC, SF6 emissions by market sector 1990 to 2020, MtC

17
Sector 1990 1995 2000 2004 2010 2015 2020
(Base year)

HFCs
Refrigeration/air conditioning 
000 
254 
101 
376 
233 
124 
912
Foam (excluding OCF)18 
000 
000 
017 
139 
237 
282 
324
General aerosols (including OCF)19 
000 
156 
368 
344 
448 
469 
491
Metered dose inhalers 
000 
000 
244 
390 
380 
335 
316
HFC-23 from HCFC-22 manufacture and 
fugitive losses from HFC manufacture 
102 
813 
730 
077 
274 
274 
274
Solvents 
000 
000 
001 
009 
029 
029 
029
Fire fighting 
000 
001 
017 
079 
102 
114 
128
Total HFC emissions 
102 
225 
478 
415 
703 
627 
474

PFCs
Electronics 
010 
022 
049 
026 
019 
023 
029
Aluminium smelting 
363 
078 
070 
042 
033 
033 
033
Other PFC emissions 
009 
026 
007 
029 
022 
024 
025
Refrigeration/air conditioning 
000 
002 
009 
000 
000 
000 
000
Total PFC emissions 
382 
128 
136 
096 
073 
080 
086

SF6
Magnesium smelting 
116 
116 
298 
106 
202 
202 
202
Electrical insulation 
163 
219 
170 
142 
138 
138 
135
Other SF6 uses 
000 
000 
016 
056 
010 
000 
000
Electronics 
002 
003 
006 
003 
004 
005 
007
Total SF6 emissions 
281 
338 
490 
307 
354 
345 
344
Total UK emissions of HFCs, PFCs and SF6 
765 
691 
104 
515 
130 
052 
904
Change from base year for row above -
8% -
4% -
3% -
9% -
1%
Note: the percentage changes and emission estimates may differ slightly due to rounding.


ANNEX F
Carbon sequestration

 Under the UNFCCC and the Kyoto Protocol, the
UK is committed to protecting and enhancing
sinks. The Kyoto Protocol also gives a limited
allowance for forestry activities to be used to help
meet emission reduction commitments. This
Annex explains how the UK is approaching
international negotiations on the use of sinks
and about the current trends in emissions from
land use change. 

 The latest information on land use in the United
Kingdom comes from a Countryside Survey
conducted in 
 The use of land was
estimated by classification of surveyed locations
into one of 21 Broad Habitats or dense urban
use. These classes can be combined into five of
those recommended in the IPCC Good practice
Guidance of Land Use, Land-Use Change and
Forestry, namely Forest Land, Cropland,
Grassland, Settlements and Other Land. The land
that would be within the IPCC Wetland type is
included in Grassland or Other Land. Using the
IPCC classes the chart below shows how land in
the United Kingdom is used. The main classes are
grassland (54 per cent) and Cropland (22 per
cent). About 12 per cent of Great Britain is
wooded. Settlements occupy 9 per cent of land,
including gardens and urban parks leaving 4 per
cent of the UK in the IPCC Other Land class for
example rock, open water and beaches.
Land use in the United Kingdom

 Soil is the largest carbon pool in the UK, which
stores about 6 billion tonnes of carbon
 About
3 billion tonnes of this total are stored in peats
and other organic soils which are found mainly
in Scotland and which cover about 30 per cent
of the UK’s total land area. The biomass in
woodlands contain some 90 million tonnes of
carbon, 30 million tonnes of which are stored in
conifers and some 60 million tonnes in broad
leaves and mixed woodland.
Inventory and projections

 The UK’s annual greenhouse gas inventory
includes categories covering LULUCF, in
accordance with the IPCC’s 2003 Good Practice
Guidance for LULUCF. The methods used to
estimate emissions from these categories have
been reported in the scientific literature22 and are
kept under review. The methodologies are
described in the UK’s National Inventory Reports
(e.g. Baggott et al 2005).
Ranges in future land use change
1990 1995 2000

Mt C
20102005 2015 2020

-
0


-
5


-
0


-







0

Low Mid High
Forestland
Grassland
Cropland
Settlements
Other Land

 The largest carbon pools in the UK are soils
which store about 6 billion tonnes of carbon

 The UK was a net source of emissions from
land use, land use change and forestry
(LULUCF) in 1990

 Projections indicate the UK will become a
small net sink of 
5 MtC from LULUCF
activities by 2010
20Countryside Survey 1990, 1993, Barr et al: Main Report, DOE, London; Northern Ireland Countryside Survey, 1997, Cooper et al, EHS, Belfast.
21The figure included carbon stored in litter, which is dead plant matter lying on top of the soil.
22Cannell et al, National Inventories of Terrestrial Carbon Sources and Sinks: The UK Experience, Climatic Change, vol 42, pp505-530, 


183

 The estimates for forest carbon sinks in the
greenhouse gas inventory are based largely on
data from the Forestry Commission, which has
undertaken inventories of woodlands in Great
Britain at 15-20 year intervals since 
 The
most recent inventory, was carried out between
1995 and 
 Further woodland inventories
will be carried out as part of a 10-year rolling
programme, planned to start in 
 Annual
planting and felling data is used to update
information on the size and age structure of the
national forest estate between the periodic
inventories. This information, together with data
derived from the growth characteristics of UK
forests (so-called ‘yield classes’) is used in a
dynamic carbon accounting model to estimate
annual uptake and storage of atmospheric
carbon by trees. Growth characteristics are kept
under review through a national system of
mensuration plots and associated yield models.

184
Carbon sequestration
23Actual historical data for 2004 are used in this table in place of 2005 projections.
24Actual historical data for 2004 are used in this table in place of 2005 projections.
Greenhouse gas emissions and removals from land use, land use change and forestry, on a) UNFCCC basis and b) Kyoto Protocol (KP) basis, MtC23
Convention Reporting bases
Gas 1990 1995 2000 2004 2010 2015 2020
Carbon dioxide 
795 
282 -
120 -
530 -
455 
124 
653
Methane 
004 
003 
005 
005 
004 
003 
003
Nitrous oxide 
0004 
0003 
0005 
0005 
0004 
0003 
0003
Total greenhouse gas emissions by sources 
minus removals by sinks 
799 
285 -
114 -
524 -
451 
128 
656
Kyoto Protocol Reporting bases
Gas 1990 1995 2000 2004 2010 2015 2020
Carbon dioxide
Afforestation & Reforestation 
008 -
076 -
388 -
586 -
843 -
978 -
179
Deforestation 
046 
061 
100 
102 
104 
106 
104
Methane 
004 
003 
005 
005 
004 
003 
003
Nitrous oxide 
0004 
0003 
0005 
0005 
0004 
0003 
0003
Total greenhouse gas removals by Afforestation 
and Reforestation less emissions by 
Deforestation mandatory under Article 
3 of the
Kyoto Protocol. (-ve is net removal). 
058 -
011 -
282 -
479 -
735 -
869 -
072
Removals associated with forest 
management under Article 
4 of the 
Kyoto Protocol 
37 
37 
37 
37
Under Kyoto Protocol Article 
7, 
Total Emissions in 1990 due to Deforestation 
(added to base year emissions for KP reporting) 
1
Carbon dioxide emissions and removals from LULUCF 1990 to 2020 MtC, on UNFCCC reporting basis24
1990 1995 2000 2004 2010 2015 2020
Removals (to forestland) (a) -
328 -
804 -
765 -
446 -
935 -
140 -
387
Including removals due to land 
afforested since 1990 (b) 
008 -
076 -
388 -
586 -
843 -
978 -
179
Net Emissions from other land use 
change and management (c) 
123 
086 
645 
916 
479 
264 
039
Total emissions minus total removals 
795 
282 -
120 -
530 -
455 
124 
653
Notes:
(a) Includes carbon accumulated in forests by woody biomass, soils, litter and changes in the quantity of forest products from timber grown in the UK;
(b) Entries for woodlands planted from 1990 exclude increasing pool of carbon in timber products;
(c) Sum of source and sink terms due to transitions between land use categories and emissions due to specific land management, includes measures.


This information will be used to keep the carbon
accounting model up to date.

 Estimates of land use change emissions rely on
separate land use change matrices for Scotland,
and for England and Wales. These matrices are
derived from surveys on land use conducted in
1947, 1980, 1984, 1990 and 
 The matrices
show the pattern of land use change between
different categories of land which have been
grouped into the broad land types of Grassland,
Cropland, Forest Land, Settlements and Other
Land. Changes in carbon density for the types of
land undergoing transition are estimated from
soil survey data and used in a dynamic model to
estimate annual gains and losses of carbon
associated with the transitions in the matrix.

 The tables above summarises the main trends in
UK sources and sinks from land use change and
forestry, with disaggregations by greenhouse gas.
The data is consistent with the UK Greenhouse
Gas emissions inventory published in 
 The
difference between UNFCCC and Kyoto Protocol
reporting bases in table 1 lies in which
components of the LULUCF sector are counted
within the total carbon dioxide estimates. The
Convention basis includes all human-induced
changes to land-based carbon stocks, ie total
emissions minus total removals from the LULUCF
sector. The Kyoto reporting basis includes LULUCF
emissions and removals associated with
mandatory activities under Art 
3 of the Kyoto
Protocol – afforestation plus reforestation minus
deforestation since 
 In addition, since the
UK has chosen to account for forest management
under Art 
4 of the Kyoto Protocol, the Kyoto
table also indicates removals up to the level of
the cap agreed for the UK as part of the
Marrakesh Accords, since the actual uptake by
forests is projected to exceed the cap in all years.
A small base year allowance of 
1 MtC related
to deforestation emissions is added to the UK
base year because land use change and forestry
was a net source of emissions in the base year.
This is in accordance with the provisions of the
second sentence of Art 
7 of the Kyoto Protocol,
and subsequent COP decisions.

 New forests and woodlands have been planted at
rates between 12,000 and 21,000 hectares per
year across the UK since 1990 as a result of
government policy implemented by the Forestry
Commission and the Northern Ireland Forest
Service. The Government and the devolved
administrations are committed to expanding the
UK’s woodland area. The projections for the
forest sink shown in the above table assume that
future policies will continue to produce new
planting at rates of between 12,000 and 30,000
hectares per year, and that existing planting will
be replaced after felling. Row (a) in the last table
includes the continuing uptake by trees planted
before 1990 and still growing, as well as more
recent planting. Row (b) shows only the effect of
expanding the forest area due to planting since
1990, to illustrate how taking account of forestry
activities under Article 
3 of the Kyoto Protocol
might help the UK meet its commitments. 

 Estimated emissions from land use change in row
(c) are mainly a result of agricultural
intensification and urbanisation under the pattern
of land use change before the mid-1980s. In the
more recent land use change matrix, these trends
are moderated or reversed, reflecting the effect
of agri-environmental policies to protect and
enhance the countryside and de-intensify
conventional farming practices. These policies
include Environmentally Sensitive Areas,
Countryside Stewardship, Nitrate Vulnerable
Zones, Woodland Grant and Farm Woodland
Premium Schemes, the Organic Farming Scheme
and the Tir Gofal agri-environment scheme for
Wales. The ranges in the figure above show the
uncertainty in knowledge of future land use
change, either where the changes cause more
change (higher emissions estimate) or less change
(lower emissions line) compared to the
continuation of recent land use changes.

 The ranges in the figure are determined by the
assumptions made about expansion of the forest
area and the other land use changes reflected in
the land use change matrix. They do not show
the full range of uncertainties, which would also
include methodological uncertainties linked to soil
carbon densities in addition to the uncertainty in

185
Carbon sequestration
25UK Greenhouse Gas Inventory, 1990 to 2004, April 2006, NETCEN.


future rates of change in land use included here.
Defra has supported recent work, reported in the
scientific literature, suggesting that losses of
carbon from the upper layers of UK soils may be
greater than previously estimated
 The causes of
the estimated losses and the fate of the carbon
are under investigation and these results are not
reflected in the inventory or the projections.

186
Carbon sequestration
26Bellamy et al: Carbon losses from all soils across England and Wales 1978-2003, Nature, vol 437, 245, 8 Sept 



ANNEX G
Carbon capture and geological storage

 The potential of carbon dioxide capture and
storage (CCS) as a mitigation option was
highlighted in 2005 including in the UK’s Carbon
Abatement Technology strategy27, the G8
Communiqué28 and in the IPCC Special report
on CCS


 Storage of carbon dioxide in deep geological
formations, onshore or offshore, uses many of
the same technologies that have been developed
by the oil and gas industry. Three industrial-scale
storage projects, which include direct injection of
carbon dioxide into geological formations, are in
operation in the world: the Sleipner project in the
Norwegian sector of the North Sea, the Weyburn
enhanced oil recovery project in Canada, and the
In Salah project in a gas field in Algeria; more
projects worldwide are at different stages of
development. The UK’s Carbon Abatement
Technology Strategy identified CCS along with
improved efficiency in existing power generation
as the two key technologies for reducing carbon
dioxide emissions from fossil fuel use.

 Current evidence suggests that the cost of
capture and storage of carbon dioxide from new
power plants is around $40-60 per tonne of
carbon dioxide, which can be expected to fall as
the technology matures. This is comparable with
other major abatement options, and suggests
that the technology could have a major role in
mitigating emissions. The rate of deployment is
constrained by uncertainties over economics (cost
of capture technologies, and emissions trading
eligibility) and legal status of subsea-bed storage
under the London and OSPAR Conventions,
which are designed to protect the marine
environment. These issues are being addressed
by the UK through active participation in the
negotiations under the marine treaties and the
UNFCCC, cooperation with the EU via the EU
Climate Change Programme, membership of the
Carbon Sequestration Leadership Forum and the
North Sea Basin Task Force, assistance with
development by IPCC of emissions inventory
methodologies relevant to CCS, and considering
possible requirements for domestic regulation.
The IPCC Special Report provides confidence in
the permanence of storage in appropriately
selected and managed geological reservoirs.

 Carbon dioxide capture and storage (CCS)
consists of separation of carbon dioxide
from industrial and energy-related sources,
transport to a storage location, and long-
term isolation from the atmosphere.

 Storage in properly selected geological
formations can store carbon dioxide with
high probability over very long periods of
time and is part of the portfolio of mitigation
options that can contribute to stabilising
concentrations of greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere.

 Direct injection into the deep ocean would
not isolate the CO2 from the atmosphere
indefinitely and would have unknown
impacts on marine ecosystems. It cannot
therefore be regarded as a mitigation option.
27www.dti.gov.uk/energy/coal/cfft/cct/pub/catreportlinked.pdf
28www.fco.gov.uk/Files/kfile/PostG8_Gleneagles_Communique,
pdf
29www.ipcc.ch/activity/ccsspm.pdf

187
ANNEX H
List of greenhouse gases

188


 To compare the relative climate effects of
greenhouse gases, it is necessary to assess their
contribution to changes in the net downward
infra-red radiation flux at the tropopause (the top
of the lower atmosphere) over a period of time.
Ultimately the best way to do this is by
comparing different emission scenarios in climate
models, but a simple working method has been
derived for use by Parties to the UNFCCC which
provides the relative contribution of a unit
emission of each gas, relative to the effect of a
unit emission of carbon dioxide integrated over a
fixed time period. A 100-year time horizon has
been chosen by the Convention in view of the
relatively long time scale for addressing climate
change.

 This factor is known as a global warming
potential (GWP). It means, for example, that
1 tonne of HFC-134 emitted to the atmosphere
has 1,000 times the warming impact over 100
years compared to 1 tonne of carbon dioxide

31The GWPs given in the table above were published in the IPCC’s Second Assessment Report and are referred to as “1995 IPCC GWP values”. Although some
have since been updated, it was agreed that for reporting under the UNFCCC and the Kyoto Protocol, Parties should use these values.
Greenhouse gas Lifetime (years) 100 years global
warming potential
Carbon dioxide 50-200 1
Methane 
23 21
Nitrous oxide 120 310
HFC-23 264 11,700
HFC-32 
6 650
HFC-41 
7 150
HFC-43-10mee 
1 1,300
HFC-125 
6 2,800
HFC-134 
6 1,000
HFC-134a 
6 1,300
HFC-152a 
5 140
HFC-143 
8 300
HFC-143a 
3 3,800
HFC-227ea 
5 2,900
HFC-236fa 209 6,300
HFC-245ca 
6 560
Chloroform 
51 4
Methylene chloride 
46 9
Sulphur hexafluoride 3,200 23,900
Perfluoromethane 50,000 6,500
Perfluorethane 10,000 9,200
Perfluoropropane 2,600 7,000
Perfluorobutane 2,600 7,000
Perfluoropentane 4,100 7,500
Perfluorohexane 3,200 7,400
Perfluorocyclobutane 3,200 8,700
Trifluoroiodomethane <
005 <1
Source: IPCC, 1996



 To compute the carbon equivalent of the
emission of any gas, multiply its emission by the
GWP and by 12/44, the ratio of the atomic
weights of carbon and carbon dioxide. Thus, for
example, an emission of 1 tonne of HFC-134 is
equivalent to 1 x 1000 x 12/44 = 273 tonnes
of carbon.

 The GWPs given in the table were published in
the IPCC’s Second Assessment Report and are
sometimes referred to as 1995 IPCC GWP values.
These are the values agreed for use in reporting
to the UNFCCC and the Kyto Protocol. IPCC’s
Third Assessment Report published updated
values that differ to some extent, these are
shown in Section 


189
List of greenhouse gases


ANNEX I
Review of the 2000 Climate Change Programme

190


 In the 2000 Climate Change Programme, the
Government made a commitment to review both
the Programme and its progress towards the
Kyoto target and national goal in 
 The
review was launched on 15 September 2004 with
the remit to look at how existing policies were
performing and the range of measures that could
be put in place in the future. In December 2004
the Government launched a public consultation
which ran from 8 December 2004 to March

 Some of the questions asked were whether
the existing measures were working, how they
might be improved and whether any of them
should be dropped. The Government also asked
for ideas for new policies and measures that
would ensure progress towards the 2010
national goal.

 Around 300 responses were received. The
majority of the responses were from business,
including the energy supply industry and NGOs.
A significant number of respondents stated that
the evidence on climate change was stronger
than ever and many also stated that the Climate
Change Programme needed to be more strategic,
more joined-up and or/higher priority. A
significant number of respondents felt that
existing measures were not effective in reducing
emissions of greenhouse gases and that the
Programme needed to be stronger on adaptation
to climate change. The consultation received over
200 suggestions for additional policies.

 The evaluation of existing policies in the 2000
Climate Change Programme was mainly carried
out by external consultants, following Green
Book guidance, while appraisals were a mixture
of in-house and external analysis. All the
evaluations and appraisals were presented to the
IAG for discussion. In addition to Government
departments, the IAG included representatives
from Ofgem, the Carbon Trust, the Energy Saving
Trust, the Environment Agency and the
Sustainable Development Commission.

 The evaluation of existing policies and appraisal
of possible new policies that could be
continued/adopted were carried out in
accordance with the Treasury Green Book
guidelines. Cost-benefit and cost-effectiveness
analysis was carried out for both the evaluation
of existing measures and the appraisal of possible
new policies
 In addition an assessment of each
policy’s impact on innovation, competitiveness,
security of supply, fuel poverty and air quality
was also carried out. The evaluation synthesis
report can be found at: www.defra.gov.uk/
environment/climatechange/pubs/ukccp/index.htm.
There will be an appraisal synthesis report to
accompany the evaluation synthesis report,
containing summary information about all of
the policies appraised as part of the Climate
Change Programme.
32The cost effectiveness analysis presents each policy in terms of the cost per tonne of carbon saved whilst the cost-benefit analysis shows each policy in terms
of its net present value (all the benefits minus all the costs).


Glossary of terms

191
ACEA European Automobile Manufacturers Association
BIC British Irish Council
BSF Building Schools for the Future
CO2 Carbon dioxide
CAP Common Agricultural Policy
CAT Carbon Abatement Technology
CCA Climate change agreements
CCP Climate Change Programme
CCS Carbon Capture and Sequestration 
CDM Clean Development Mechanism
CFC Chlorofluorocarbon
CHP Combined Heat and Power
CCL Climate change levy
CMM Coal mine methane
CPA Comprehensive Performance Assessment
CSF Catchment Sensitive Farming
CSS Countryside Stewardship
CT Carbon Trust
DEFRA Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs 
DfT Department for Transport
DPs Direct Participants
DTI Department of Trade and Industry
DVLA Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency
DWPA Diffuse Water Pollution from Agriculture
ECA Enhanced Capital Allowance
ECS Energy Crops Scheme
EEACs Energy Efficiency Advice Centres
EEC Energy Efficiency Commitment
EIA Environmental Impact Assessment
ELS Entry Level Stewardship
ESA Environmentally Sensitive Area
EST Energy Saving Trust
ESWG Energy Services Working Group
ETS Emissions Trading Scheme
EU European Union
EU ETS EU emissions trading scheme
FWPS Farm Woodland Premium Scheme
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GW Gigawatts
G8 Group of 8
HA Hectare


HCFC Hydrochlorofluorocarbon
HECA Home Energy Conservation Act
HFC Hydrofluorocarbon
HLS Higher Level Stewardship
HMT Her Majesty’s Treasury
ICAO International Civil Aviation Organisation
IEA International Energy Agency
IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IPPC Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control
JAMA Japanese Automobile Manufacturers Association
JI Joint Implementation
KAMA Korean Automobile Manufacturers Association
KP Kyoto Protocol
LA Local authority
LCPD Large Combustion Plant Directive
LNG Liquefied Natural Gas
MCHP Micro-CHP
MtC Million tonnes of carbon equivalent
MW Megawatt
N2O Nitrous oxide
NAO National Audit Office
NAP National Allocation Plan
NEAT NHS Environmental Assessment Tool
NHSIS NHS in Scotland
NOx Nitrogen oxides
NVZ Nitrate Vulnerable Zone
ODPM Office of the Deputy Prime Minister
Ofgem Office of Gas and Electricity Regulation
PFC Perfluorocarbon
PM Particulate Matter
PPC Pollution Prevention and Control
PPS22 Planning Policy Statement 22
RDA Regional Development Agency
RDR Rural Development Regulation
RO Renewables Obligation
SCCP Scottish Climate Change Programme
SD Sustainable development
SEPA Scottish Environment Protection Agency
SF6 Sulphur hexafluoride
SO2 Sulphur dioxide
STEP School Turnkey Energy Programme

192
Glossary of terms


TIWG Transmission Issues Working Group
UKETS UK Emissions Trading Scheme
UKCIP UK Climate Impacts Programme
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
VED Vehicle Excise Duty
WAG Welsh Assembly Government

193
Glossary of Terms
Printed in the UK for the Stationery Office Limited
on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty's Stationery Office
185031  03/06  19798
Printed on material containing 80% post-consumer waste and 20% Elemental Chlorine Free pulp


ISBN 0-10-167642-5
9 780101 676427
Published by TSO (The Stationery Office) and available from:
Online
www.tsoshop.co.uk
Mail,Telephone, Fax & E-mail

TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich, NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 0870 600 5522
Fax orders: 0870 600 5533
E-mail: book.orders@tso.co.uk
Textphone 0870 240 3701
TSO Shops
123 Kingsway, London,WC2B 6PQ
020 7242 6393 Fax 020 7242 6394
68-69 Bull Street, Birmingham B4 6AD
0121 236 9696 Fax 0121 236 9699
9-21 Princess Street, Manchester M60 8AS
0161 834 7201 Fax 0161 833 0634
16 Arthur Street, Belfast BT1 4GD
028 9023 8451 Fax 028 9023 5401
18-19 High Street, Cardiff CF10 1PT
029 2039 5548 Fax 029 2038 4347
71 Lothian Road, Edinburgh EH3 9AZ
0870 606 5566 Fax 0870 606 5588
TSO Accredited Agents 
(see Yellow Pages)
and through good booksellers


