



CLIMATE CHANGE: Taking Action




CLIMATE CHANGE:
TAKING ACTION 

Delivering the Low Carbon Transition Plan  
and preparing for a changing climate

© Crown Copyright 2010 
PB13359 March 2010

Copyright in the typographical arrangement  
and design rests with the Crown.

Printed on material that contains a minimum  
of 100% recycled fibre for uncoated paper.




Further information

Carbon Reduction Delivery Plans and Departmental 
Adaptation Plans are publicly available from individual 
departments’ websites. 

All Carbon Reduction Delivery Plans can also  
be accessed from the DECC website: 
http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/what_
we_do/lc_uk/carbon_budgets/departments/
departments.aspx

All Departmental Adaptation Plans are available on  
the Adapting to Climate Change Programme website: 
http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/
programme/across-government.htm 

Feedback

Government’s collective adaptation planning is at an 
early stage. Your feedback would be appreciated as 
your views will influence the way ACC delivers, and will 
feed into future adaptation planning. Feedback can be 
sent to Acc.Mailbox@defra.gsi.gov.uk, or to:

ACC Mailbox 
Adapting to Climate Change Programme 
Area 3A, Defra 
Nobel House 
17 Smith Square 
London SW1P 3JR

2 Climate Change: Taking Action | Contents




3Contents

Contents
Ministerial Foreword 
Rt Hon Hilary Benn MP and Rt Hon Ed Miliband MP ................................4

Executive Summary .............................................................................................6

Part 1 Delivering the Low Carbon Transition Plan ......................... 10

Introduction ...............................................................................................................11

Departmental Carbon Budgets ........................................................................ 14

Delivery of Departmental Budgets .................................................................. 20

Carbon Budget Sector Indicators .................................................................... 25

Performance Management ................................................................................38

Part 2 Preparing for a changing climate ...............................................40

Introduction .............................................................................................................. 41

Departmental Adaptation Plans ....................................................................... 42

Delivering Practical Action ..................................................................................46

Building the Government’s Capacity to Adapt .......................................... 62

Next Steps .................................................................................................................64

Annex 1 Departments’ Carbon Budgets ...............................................66

Annex 2 The Rationale for Departmental Allocations .................68

Annex 3 Glossary ................................................................................................70


4


Nobody knows for sure what the future will bring. But  
in terms of our climate, scientists are using increasingly 
sophisticated computer models to project plausible 
changes over the coming decades. These models have to 
cope with some uncertainties; for instance, how societies 
and economies around the world will alter over the next 
50 years and what this could mean for global emissions 
of greenhouse gases. But our knowledge is constantly 
improving and the latest models shed a stronger light  
on our climate system than ever before.

Science moves forward by challenge and debate and this 
will continue. Some people disagree with the published 
evidence about climate change, or how it is interpreted, 
but the vast majority of leading climate scientists  
agree on the fundamentals – that climate change  
is happening and that increased greenhouse gas 
emissions as a result of human activity are now the 
major cause. We know enough to understand the need 
for nations, including our own, to take urgent steps to 
cut the level of greenhouse gas emissions going into the 
atmosphere, as much and as fast as possible, to avoid 
the more severe aspects of climate change. We must also 
prepare for the impacts of climate change, some of which 
are already inevitable.

The UK is a well established leader of international 
efforts to tackle the challenges of climate change. We are 
working with our EU and international partners to build 
consensus on the scale of action needed to stabilise  
the climate, to avoid the worst global scenarios, and 
ultimately to get agreement on a legally binding treaty 
to deliver those goals. In doing so, and to have real 
influence, we recognise the importance of demonstrating 
leadership though real action in the UK, both to reduce 
our domestic emissions and to identify and plan for the 
risks our country faces from the changing climate.

The UK Climate Projections 2009 show that past emissions 
are likely to make summers over 2°C warmer in southern 
England by the 2040s – more than enough to affect the 
way we live and work. And unless global emissions are 
successfully reduced, we could be faced by much more 
damaging impacts by the 2040s. Climate change will 
make life in this country tougher – through flooding, 
droughts and heat-waves, the loss of land to sea level rise 
and a rise in health problems. But there will also be 
some opportunities, for example from longer growing 
seasons, if we are ready to take them.

Ministerial Foreword

The Earth’s climate is changing. Recognising the challenge  
this presents to all aspects of our economy and daily activities,  
all major government departments have published their plans for 
contributing to reducing greenhouse gas emissions and action 
required to adapt to the effects of climate change. 

Climate Change: Taking Action | Ministerial Foreword4




5Climate Change Plan

The Climate Change Act 2008 made Britain the first 
country in the world to introduce a long-term legally 
binding framework to tackle climate change with targets 
in legislation and five year carbon budgets. The Act 
requires the UK to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions 
by at least 34% below 1990 levels over the third 
budget period (2018 to 2022) and by at least 80% by 
2050. The UK Low Carbon Transition Plan, published 
last July, set out how we would reduce emissions to 
meet our carbon budgets and announced that we were 
sharing the UK carbon budget between government 
departments to ensure that every part of government is 
involved in playing its part in reducing emissions. 

The Act also introduced a framework for adaptation, 
including a UK-wide Change Risk Assessment every five 
years and a National Adaptation Programme from 2012 
to address the most pressing climate change impacts.

The Government has more than doubled spending on 
flood protection since 1997, developed a heat-wave plan 
in the NHS, and is helping communities affected by 
coastal erosion. We have changed the rules so that every 
major public investment needs to be resilient to the climate 
over its lifetime. But we are not complacent. The country 
has to continue to act to adapt to changes that are 
coming and take action to stop these getting worse.

Today all major government departments are publishing 
their plans to show how they are taking practical 
action on climate change. This has never been done 
before by any government in the world. 

The plans set out how each main government department 
will reduce emissions from their own estate and operations 
and, where applicable, in the sectors where they have 
an influence. They show how they will monitor progress 
to achieve reductions and illustrate how departments  
will cope with the effects of climate change that we  
can expect. And they set out the work being done to 
enhance the awareness, capacity and skills available 
within government to respond effectively to current and 
future risks.

By producing a series of individual departmental plans, 
linking each department’s primary objectives to the 

challenges posed by climate change, government will  
lead by example. Such actions will facilitate a cut in 
emissions by around 700 million tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalent over the period from 2008 to 2022; encourage 
collaboration to ensure these goals are met; create 
employment through the shift to a low carbon, well 
adapted economy; and protect our country for the future. 

These plans are by no means the last word, but they 
represent a sensible pathway towards a lower carbon 
society, whilst setting out actions that will help to 
reduce our vulnerability to current and future climate 
risks and exploit the opportunities that exist. The plans 
show how we will continue to work together across 
government and with the wider public sector to 
demonstrate how the challenges posed by climate 
change can become an everyday consideration in all  
our activities. There is no choice to be made between 
action to build a low carbon economy and planning for 
adaptation. We regard both as urgent and essential. 


 

The Rt Hon Hilary Benn MP 
Secretary of State for Environment,  
Food and Rural Affairs

The Rt Hon Ed Miliband MP 
Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change

Ministerial Foreword 5


6


In June 2009 the latest set of UK Climate Projections 
(UKCP09) were published, which revised and 
expanded the available climate change projections 
from now until the end of the century. They provide 
the most detailed picture to date of the changes 
currently considered likely in the UK and show us a 
future that we must plan to avoid. It is clear from the 
Projections that the UK is likely to face hotter, drier 
summers; warmer wetter winters; sea level rise; and an 
increase in extreme weather events such as heavy rain 
and heat-waves. The severity of the change will depend 
on our success in reducing carbon emissions globally.

Some climate change is now inevitable whatever we do, 
but from the second half of this century the extent of 
change will depend greatly on how successfully the 
world cuts its greenhouse gas emissions. The world 
will also undergo demographic and socio-economic 
changes, for example population growth, so decisions 
taken now must take account of these wider trends as 
well as the impacts of climate change. 

Avoiding dangerous climate change cannot be achieved 
by the UK alone: it is a global challenge which needs  
to be addressed through comprehensive and effective 
global action. The UK continues to work within the  
EU and internationally to secure a legally binding 
agreement for emissions reduction commitments from 
developed countries, mitigation actions from developing 
countries and the provision of financial and technology 
support that are consistent with an overall limit of two 
degrees in global warming. The Copenhagen Accord 
agreed in December 2009 was an important step 
forward towards reaching that international agreement. 
It also reinforced the need for strong action on climate 
change across the world. 

The UK has already responded to this call. The Climate 
Change Act 2008 created a new approach to managing 
and responding to the challenge of climate change in 
the UK. It acknowledged and addressed the need to 
mitigate to avoid dangerous climate change and adapt 
to take account of the changing climate.

Executive Summary

Avoiding dangerous climate change is one of the greatest 
challenges facing the world. The UK is committed to playing its 
part and this document gives an overview of how government 
departments are taking a more co-ordinated approach to reducing 
emissions, through delivery of their departmental carbon budgets 
and embedding consideration of the need to adapt to a changing 
climate in their planning and decision making.

Climate Change: Taking Action | Executive Summary6




7Climate Change Plan

Mitigation

The Climate Change Act set greenhouse gas emission 
targets in legislation and set up a system of five year 
carbon budgets. The first three carbon budgets, 
covering the period 2008 to 2022, were announced at 
Budget 2009 and set in law in May 2009 following their 
approval by Parliament. These budgets require a 22% 
reduction in emissions below 1990 levels in 2008-2012, 
a 28% reduction in 2013-2017 and a 34% reduction  
in 2018-2022.

In July 2009, the government published The UK Low 
Carbon Transition Plan (LCTP). The Plan set out how, 
in order to deliver the necessary level of emissions 
reductions, government departments were to be given  
a share of the UK carbon budget which they would  
have responsibility for. Departments were given a share 
according to emissions from both their own estate and 
operations and sectors over which they have levers or 
influence to reduce emissions. It was recognised that  
the first budget would be a pilot for this new approach 
and lessons learnt would be taken into account in its 
future development. To underpin delivery of the  
required emissions reductions, the LCTP said that each 
department would produce a Carbon Reduction Delivery 
Plan setting out in detail the actions the department  
will take on its own and in collaboration with other 
departments to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 

This system of departmental carbon budgets,  
an international first, is a new and innovative way  
of delivering emissions reductions across the whole 
economy through sharing responsibility across 
government. This new system is designed to reinforce 
delivery of the UK carbon budgets and to ensure that 
every part of government is involved.

The Department of Energy and Climate Change (DECC) 
is the department at the heart of the carbon budget 
system and plays a central role in establishing and 
supporting all government departments as the system  
is developed. Part of this approach is to ensure the right 
performance management system is established that 
will create the right incentives to reduce emissions, 
monitor delivery through indicators and use that 
evidence base to underpin delivery of departmental 
carbon budgets. 

Adaptation

The Climate Change Act 2008 sets out a framework for 
dealing with adaptation, recognising that the country 
needs to be prepared to deal with changes to the 
climate that we are already starting to face, and wider 
economic and demographic trends.


 

Executive Summary 7


8


Some of the most widely expected adverse impacts in 
the UK as a result of these changes include: an increased 
risk of flooding and coastal erosion which could disrupt 
essential services and businesses; increased pressure 
on drainage systems; habitat and species loss; summer 
water shortages and low stream flows; increased 
subsidence risk in subsidence-prone areas; increasing 
thermal discomfort in homes and buildings; possible 
increased disruption to infrastructure affecting the 
delivery of essential services; transport delays; and health 
issues due to flooding and to heat in summer. These 
effects would have a real impact on people’s quality  
of life, the economy and the natural environment. 

Central government will continue to play a major role in 
raising awareness, providing evidence and encouraging 
action at all levels. Through the Adaptation Reporting 
Power, introduced under the Climate Change Act 2008, 
government has required certain public bodies and 
utilities companies to identify and plan for future climate 
risks. Government departments will also play their part 
and demonstrate leadership by example. They will do so 
by visibly taking steps to identify and address the risks 
and opportunities presented by climate change: to their 
individual policy objectives and services, and to the 
buildings they work in. Departments will continue their 
work to embed adaptation into corporate processes and 
decision-making. They will also encourage and support 
the adaptation progress of the sectors that they 
sponsor, because this is key to delivering their wider 
policy objectives.

Action being taken by departments in 
response to the challenge of climate change

This document is published alongside departmental 
Carbon Reduction Delivery and Adaptation Plans.  
It explains:

Climate Change: Taking Action | Executive Summary8

The Climate Change Act 2008 
created a new approach to 
managing and responding 
to the challenge of climate 
change in the UK.

Hyde Park in 2006 during a prolonged summer drought. © Phil Coombes/BBC News website




9Climate Change Plan

For mitigation:

• the approach to departmental carbon budgets;

• action that departments are taking to deliver their 
carbon budgets;

• the process by which current and future progress will 
be monitored and evaluated; and

• initial thinking on an appropriate governance and 
performance management framework, which will be 
put in place to drive delivery.

For adaptation, how government is:

• working with the private sector to improve awareness 
of climate risks, develop new skills, and encourage 
innovation to create new business opportunities;

• protecting our national infrastructure from climate 
risks – through the planning system, and by working 
closely with engineers and the construction industry;

• taking action to safeguard our natural environment, 
recognising the vital role it plays in offering protection 
from climate change to homes, infrastructure, 
livelihoods, and human life;

• making sure that our cities are designed and built, 
or adapted, to cope with the challenges of pollution 
and the urban heat island effect;

• improving our heat-wave plans to reduce the 
expected health impacts of climate change; and

• understanding the risks and opportunities that the 
UK faces as a result of climate impacts in other countries.

Executive Summary 9

Central government will 
continue to play a major  
role in raising awareness, 
providing evidence and 
encouraging action at  
all levels. 




Climate Change: Taking Action

Part 1 
Delivering the Low 
Carbon Transition Plan

Climate Change: Taking Action | Delivering the Low Carbon Transition Plan10




11Climate Change Plan

INTRODUCTION

The Act1 set a clear and credible long term framework 
for the UK to reduce its greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions including: 

• a legal requirement to reduce emissions by at least 
80% below 1990 levels by 2050 and by at least 
34% in the period 2018-2022;

• compliance with a system of five-year carbon 
budgets, set up to 15 years in advance, to deliver the 
emissions reductions required to achieve the 2020 
and 2050 targets;

• the setting up of a Committee on Climate Change 
(CCC) to advise Government on the level of the 
carbon budgets and how they might be met and 
report annually on progress.

The first three carbon budgets, covering the period 
2008 to 2022, were announced at Budget 2009 and 
set in law in May 2009 following their approval by 
Parliament. These budgets require a 22% reduction  
in emissions below 1990 levels in 2008-2012, a  
28% reduction in 2013-2017 and a 34% reduction  
in 2018-2022.

In July 2009, the Government published the ‘UK Low 
Carbon Transition Plan (LCTP)’2, alongside a suite of 
other publications including the ‘UK Renewable Energy 
Strategy’3, ‘Low Carbon Transport: A Greener Future’4, 
and the ‘Low Carbon Industrial Strategy’.5 The Transition 
Plan sets out how the UK will meet its carbon budgets, 
describing the policies through which emissions will be 
reduced in all sectors of the economy. The package of 
policies is expected to save around 700 million tonnes 
of carbon dioxide equivalent (MtCO


2

e) over the three 

budget periods. While the cost of delivering these 
emission reductions is around £25 to £29 billion, they 
are substantially lower than the costs which would be 
incurred were there to be no action. 

The LCTP also detailed how, in order to help delivery, 
each major government department had been given  
a share of responsibility for the total carbon budget, 
which it would be accountable for delivering. To 
underpin the delivery each department committed to 
producing a Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan (CRDP) 
setting out in detail the actions the department would 
take on its own and in collaboration with others to 
reduce GHG emissions. 

Introduction 11

The Climate Change Act 2008 created a new approach to managing 
and responding to the challenge of climate change and reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions in the UK. 

1 http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/legislation/cc_act_08/cc_act_08.aspx
2 http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/publications/lc_trans_plan/lc_trans_plan.aspx
3 http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/what_we_do/uk_supply/energy_mix/renewable/res/res.aspx
4 http://www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/sustainable/carbonreduction/
5 http://www.berr.gov.uk/whatwedo/sectors/lowcarbon/lowcarbonstrategy/page50105.html




12 Climate Change: Taking Action | Delivering the Low Carbon Transition Plan12

This document is published alongside the CRDPs of 18 
departments. It details the approach to departmental 
carbon budgets, the process by which the Government 
will monitor progress and initial thinking on an 
appropriate performance management framework  
to drive delivery. 

The international context

Avoiding dangerous climate change is a global 
challenge which needs to be addressed through 
effective global action. The UK continues to work 
within the EU and through our overseas network of 
climate change attachés internationally to encourage 
low carbon investment in developed and developing 
economies and to secure a new legally binding 
agreement that will contain emissions reduction 
commitments that are consistent with an overall limit 
of two degrees in global warming. The Copenhagen 
Accord, which was agreed by major developed and 
developing countries in December 2009, is an 
important step forward. It sets a benchmark to limit 
global temperature increases to no more than two 
degrees in global warming, it also sets out:

• that developing as well as developed countries need 
to take action to reduce their GHG emissions, 

• provisions for the international scrutiny and 
transparency of developed and developing country 
actions to ensure emissions reductions are  
being delivered, 

• a commitment that countries provide up to US$10 
billion (£6.5 billion) a year by 2012 to help developing 
countries respond to the challenges of climate change, 
as well as working towards a longer term financing of 
US$100 billion (£65 billion) a year by 2020. 

The Copenhagen Accord reinforced the need for 
strong domestic action on climate change across the 
world, as the UK is itself doing through its LCTP. It is 
essential that the UK continues to take the action 
needed to become a low carbon economy. The 
Climate Change Act requires the UK to reduce its 
emissions by at least 80% by 2050 and the carbon 
budgets put us on the right trajectory to achieve that. 

Taking action domestically also gives credibility to the 
role we play internationally in pressing for ambitious 
commitments from others. That does not mean that 
we now need to set ourselves higher targets and 
tighter budgets but, as recommended by the CCC, we 
should take the action needed domestically in order to 
ensure we are well placed to take on higher targets in 
the light of an ambitious international agreement.

The LCTP sets out how the Government will meet the 
budgets and the Government has committed to meet 
these budgets through domestic action and without 
the use of international credits in the non-traded 
sector. The departmental CRDPs set out how we will 
monitor and report on the progress we are making.

Our vision for the UK

As set out in last year’s LCTP, the Government vision is 
for the UK to become a low carbon economy, cutting 
emissions whilst maintaining secure energy supplies, 
maximising economic opportunities and protecting  
the most vulnerable. To do this requires action in all 
sectors of the economy.

The challenge of reducing UK GHG emissions to 
extremely low levels by 2050 is likely to mean that 
emissions from the power sector will need to be 
reduced to almost zero, whilst ensuring we continue  
to enjoy secure, sustainable and competitively priced 
energy. Along with encouraging new nuclear capacity, a 
significant growth in renewables and clean coal we are 
reviewing the current electricity market arrangements 
and identifying the pathways to meeting our 2050 
target and what that might mean for our energy supply. 
Government will also continue to provide support 
measures to drive investment in the development and 
deployment of low carbon technologies for energy 
generation, transmission and supply.

In the workplaces and jobs sector we have put in 
place a variety of measures to incentivise businesses to 
reduce their demand for energy and to switch to lower 
carbon technologies. A number of these measures, 
such as the Climate Change Agreements (CCA) and the 
CRC Energy Efficiency Scheme (CRC), will encourage 




1313Introduction

businesses to use energy more efficiently in both 
industrial processes and non-domestic buildings, but 
will also encourage the transition to low carbon fuel 
sources. Other measures, such as Feed in Tariffs (FITs) 
and Renewable Heat Incentives (RHI), will introduce  
a further incentive to boost small scale renewable 
electricity generation. We are also assessing how to 
address the need for energy efficiency in small and 
medium sized businesses.

Reducing the energy consumption and emissions from 
homes and communities is one of the most cost 
effective ways to reduce UK emissions. By 2050 we 
will need to have made housing near zero in emissions 
terms to achieve an 80% emissions reduction across 
the economy. To meet this challenge we are requiring 
high environmental standards for new homes with all 
new homes in England to be zero-carbon from 2016. 
And for existing homes we are significantly increasing 
the rates of delivery of measures like loft and cavity 
wall insulation and have committed to insulating all 
lofts and cavities where practical by 2015. We will  
also need to deliver large numbers of more expensive 
technologies such as solid wall insulation and low-
carbon or renewable energy micro-generation 
systems. A number of schemes will help deliver the 
emissions reductions needed including the Feed in 
Tariffs (FITs) to be introduced in April 2010 aimed at 
low-carbon electricity technology for small scale 
installations, the Renewable Heat Incentive (RHI), 
starting a year later, which will support renewable heat 
at all scales, and the Pay As You Save (PAYS) pilots, 
launched in December 2009 which will enable 
households to invest in energy efficiency and 
microgeneration technologies in their homes with 
reduced upfront cost. The Warm Homes, Greener 
Homes Strategy sets out a strategic plan of how  
to achieve the longer term aims leading to 2020, 
including plans for new obligations on energy 
companies following on from the Carbon Emissions 
Reduction Target (CERT) and the Community Energy 
Saving Programme (CESP).

Our aim in the transport sector is to harness the full 
potential of low carbon technology across all transport 
modes. On the roads vehicles will be vastly more fuel-
efficient by 2020, driven by ambitious EU Regulation. 
Ultra-low emission vehicles will have made the transition 

onto the mass-market through Government support  
for new infrastructure to support electric vehicles and 
provision of new consumer incentives. Individuals and 
businesses also need to think about the travel choices 
they make on a daily basis and so we are promoting 
walking and cycling as real alternatives and providing 
public transport that will be accessible, attractive, low 
carbon and an easy-to-use option for individuals and 
businesses. From 2012 emissions from aviation will be 
capped through the EU Emissions Trading System  
(EU ETS) and we will also continue to negotiate 
internationally for global agreements to reduce  
emissions from aviation and shipping.

Our aim for the agriculture, forestry and land 
management sector is to reduce emissions by as 
much as is technologically possible whilst still 
protecting an environmentally secure, global food 
supply. The LCTP identified the scope for 15MtCO


2e 

savings in England in the third budget period. We  
are working with the industry who have developed  
an action plan that identifies areas for emissions 
reductions. In the waste sector we are looking to 
continue to reduce emissions, building on the 
significant reductions already achieved. We will be 
looking in particular at the scope to prevent waste 
from being created and will be consulting on whether 
restrictions should be introduced on sending certain 
types of waste to landfill. 

In the public sector, our aim is to lead by example, 
and to ensure that we continue to go further, faster. 
Even though the public sector is only responsible for  
a small proportion of overall emissions, its role in 
demonstrating leadership, bringing through new 
technologies, and embedding good practice is 
paramount. The public sector has set itself a stretching 
2020 target but has already made good progress. 
Central government has already achieved a 10% 
reduction in CO


2

 emissions since 1999/00 from its 

offices and has plans in place to achieve over 17% 
reductions by 2010/11. The health and education 
sectors are also grasping the challenge of emissions 
reductions and will have their own carbon budgets to 
manage and meet – ensuring that increasingly across 
the public sector action is being taken to deliver both 
carbon and financial savings. 




14 Climate Change: Taking Action | Delivering the Low Carbon Transition Plan14

The UK carbon budget

The UK carbon budget is a cap on the total quantity  
of GHG emissions emitted in the UK over a specified 
time, set in tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent 


(CO2

e). Under a system of carbon budgets, every 

tonne of GHG emitted between now and 2050 and 
beyond will count. Where emissions rise in one sector, 
we will have to achieve corresponding falls in another.

Each carbon budget covers a five-year period, with 
three budgets set at a time. The first three carbon 
budgets will run from 2008-12, 2013-17 and 2018-22, 
see Figure 1. The fourth carbon budget, covering the 
period 2023-2027, must be set in legislation by 30 
June 2011. Carbon budgets set the trajectory to our 
2020 and 2050 targets and provide a clear, credible, 
long-term framework for the move to a low-carbon 
UK economy, and give businesses and individuals the 
direction and certainty they need to play their part.

DEPARTMENTAL CARBON BUDGETS 

Why have departmental carbon budgets?

The UK takes delivery of emissions reductions seriously 
which is why it has set targets and budgets in legislation 

in order to ensure they are met. Responsibility for 
meeting the obligations in the Climate Change Act in 
practice requires the involvement of all government 
departments. In recognition of this, the Government 
agreed that the UK carbon budgets should be shared 
between departments. By allocating departmental 
budgets not only is responsibility for managing GHG 
emissions shared but it should encourage increased 
collaboration between departments, especially where 
there is shared responsibility for emissions reductions in 
specific sectors.

What are departmental carbon budgets and 
how were they determined?

The Low Carbon Transition Plan (LCTP) set out the 
creation of a pilot system of departmental carbon 
budgets, illustrating how the UK carbon budgets can be 
shared out across Government. It gave departmental 
carbon budgets to relevant central government 
departments. In agreeing to these budgets all 
departments are committing themselves to managing 
the emissions associated with departmental policies  
and within the sectors for which they have some 
responsibility either directly or indirectly. Departments 


01002003004005006007008000100200300400500600700

800 Actual Forecast

UK net CO


2

 emissions (emissions minus removals)

UK non-CO


2

 greenhouse gas emissions

UK net emissions including the effect 
of trading under the EU ETS

Emissions projection 2009-2022

2050 target of at least 80% reduction from 1990 levels

Kyoto Protocol Target


201620172018201920202021202220152014201320122011201020092008Millions tonnes CO2 equivalent200720061990


2008-12 carbon budget

2013-17 carbon budget
2018-22 carbon budget

Figure 1: Greenhouse Gas emissions projections to 2022 
Actual data up to 2008. For 2009 onwards data are based on projections under a central scenario. 




15Departmental Carbon Budgets 15

will be held responsible for their contribution to the 
management of total emissions in the UK to ensure  
that we meet the UK budgets. Departmental carbon 
budgets will play an important part in our management 
of emissions across the economy.

The departmental budgets are made up of two elements:

• an allocation to all departments to reflect emissions 
from the departments’ own estate and operations and;

• an allocation to a number of departments to reflect 
the policies available to them and/or the degree of 
influence they have in reducing emissions in various 
sectors of the economy. 

The assignment of the sectoral shares of a carbon 
budget to departments cannot be calculated precisely, 
thus they are indicative rather than having been based 
on any precise calculation. They have been determined 
taking account of the following three elements: 

Carbon reduction policies: This element was given 
the greatest weighting and took account of the 
department’s ability to directly influence emissions 
through their policies. Where possible, the size of the 
department’s share has been based on the projected 
emission reductions of their policies. 

Other relevant policies (indirect): This element 
includes the effect of the department’s own activities  
or those on sectors which they have ownership within 
Whitehall. These activities may increase or decrease 
emissions. Where possible, this is based on published 
data on emission sources and levels. For example, 
activities or policies in the tourism sector (sponsored by 
the Department of Culture, Media and Sports (DCMS)) 
may generate activity in the transport sector. Data on 
trips taken for leisure/day-trips was therefore used to 
inform calculation of a share of the transport sector 
emissions to DCMS.

Sponsorship and influence: This element was given 
the lowest weighting and takes account of the broad 
‘influence’ or sponsorship role which departments have 
over particular sectors, recognising the potential for 
them to use their broader levers and influence to reduce 
emissions. This has been done largely on the basis of 
assigning a small notional percentage share in the 
absence of specific data to ensure that relevant 
departments have a representative share of the relevant 
sector to reflect their role. For example, the Department 
for Business, Innovation and Skills (BIS) clearly has a role 
in influencing the business community this is recognised 
in its budget allocation.

This methodology inevitably results in a broad 
approximation, rather than an exact measurement,  
of a department’s relative degree of influence over a 
sector’s emissions. The budgets are not designed to 
demonstrate the precise contribution that a department 
will make to reducing emissions from a particular  
sector. However what is important in the creation of 
departmental carbon budgets is that they bring 
departments together to work collaboratively by sector 
to reduce emissions.

The method used to assign the public sector element of 
departmental budgets differs from that for assigning 
sectoral emissions and is based on the existing 
Sustainable Operations on the Government Estate 
(SOGE)6 framework. The public sector part of the carbon 
budget is derived from the projection for the SOGE 
carbon reduction targets, this covers CO


2

 emissions from 

government offices and official car fleets7. The Ministry 
of Defence (MoD)’s share of the public sector is 
comparatively large as it reports on an expansive and 
diverse estate. DECC’s share is also large since its 
allocation currently includes the wider public sector  
i.e. emissions beyond those covered under the SOGE 
framework (e.g. emissions from hospitals, schools and 
local authorities). The intention over time is to allocate 
these wider public sector emissions to their parent 
department’s budget starting with schools, further and 
higher education and the NHS.

6  Launched by the Prime Minister and the Secretary of State for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs in June 2006. The SOGE framework 
comprises targets and mandates that aim to improve energy, water and waste management, and reduce the Government’s environmental impact 
through informed decisions about the procurement of goods and services. It is a mandatory framework that applies to all central government 
departments and their Executive Agencies.

7   The framework is expected to lead to a 12.5% reduction in carbon emission from offices by 2010/11 (on 1999 levels) and at least a 30% 
reduction by 2020. Emissions from road vehicles used for Government administrative operations are also included, with targets of a 15% 
reduction in emissions from vehicles by 2010/11 (on 2005/6 levels) and 30% by 2020. 




16 Climate Change: Taking Action | Delivering the Low Carbon Transition Plan16

Having identified each department’s share of the UK’s 
emissions the final stage was to set their budgets in 
line with the downward trajectory of the first three UK 
carbon budgets. 

The LCTP explains that government will use the first 
budget period as an opportunity to pilot this new 
approach. Government will conduct a review of the 
system of departmental carbon budgets ahead of the 
second budget period, this will include an evaluation 
of the methodology for allocating budgets. Annexes 1 
and 2 detail the departmental carbon budgets for 
budget periods 1, 2 and 3 (consistent with Annex B  
of the LCTP) and a summary of the factors taken into 
consideration in determining each departments 
allocation respectively.

The diagram below summarises the key steps that were 
taken to produce the departmental carbon budgets:

This system results in nine departments having a 
budget based on their share of public sector emissions 
[Cabinet Office (CO), Foreign and Commonwealth 
Office (FCO), Department for International 
Development (DFID), Department for Work and 
Pensions (DWP), HM Revenue and Customs (HMRC), 
HM Treasury (HMT), Home Office (HO), Law Officers’ 
Departments (LOD) and Ministry of Justice (MoJ)] and 
nine departments having a share of both public sector 
emissions and emissions from specific sectors 
[Department of Energy and Climate Change (DECC), 
Communities and Local Government (CLG), 
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs 
(Defra), Department for Transport (DfT), Department 
for Business, Innovation and Skills (BIS), Department 
for Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS), Department for 
Children, Schools and Families (DCSF), Department  
of Health (DH) and Ministry of Defence (MoD)].  
This gives this second group of departments the 

Stage 1: Decide which Government 
departments are to participate in the allocation.

Stage 3: Aggregate each department’s 
responsibility based on the LCTP emissions 

projection.

Final stage: Scale the departmental emissions 
to the level of each budget.

Stage 2: Allocate shares in each sector of the 
economy based on each department’s influence 

over emissions from that sector. Allocations  
are based on: 1) carbon reduction policies;  
2) other relevant policies; 3) sponsorship of  

influence over the sector.

Stage 2: Base public sector element of the 
budgets on share of those emissions covered under 
Sustainable Operations of the Government Estates 

(SOGE) framework. Surplus assigned to DECC.

Figure 2: Methodology used to determine departmental carbon budgets




17Departmental Carbon Budgets 17

responsibility for helping deliver emissions reductions 
in those sectors of the economy where they have a 
share and encourages collective action (see figure 3 for 
details of which departments have a share of which 
sectoral emissions). For each sector one department 
has taken on the role of lead department in managing 
delivery for that sector’s emission reductions. This is 
usually, but not always, the department with the 
biggest percentage share in that sector. The lead 

department will work in collaboration with other 
departments to ensure cost-effective emissions 
reductions are achieved within a sector and that  
new opportunities for abatement are identified. This 
should also encourage discussions on how and where 
further emissions reductions can be found in order to 
take account of new policies that may result in 
increased emissions.


02004006008001000




1200




DCMSMOD




DCFSDHCLGBISDf T

DEFRA



DECC


Industrial
processes
(DECC)

Waste
(Defra)

agriculture, food,
forestry and land

management
(Defra)

Homes &
Communities

(GLG)


Emissions (Mt CO2e) 

Department

Heating workplaces
(DECC)

Transport
(Dft)

Power & Heavy
Industry (DECC)


02004006008001000




1200




DCMSMOD




DCSFDHCLGBISDf T

DEFRA



DECC


Waste
(Defra)

agriculture, food,
forestry and land

management
(Defra)

Homes &
Communities

(GLG)


Emissions (Mt CO2e) 

Department

Heating workplaces
(DECC)

Transport
(Dft)

Power & Heavy
Industry (DECC)

Public sector
2% Homes & communities


14%


Transport


21%

Waste


4%

Power


33%

Industrial process


3%

Heating workplaces


15%

Agriculture, forestry
and land management


8%

Public sector
Lead department: DECC 

(53 MtCO


2e)


Homes & communities
Lead department: CLG 

(408 MtCO


2e)


Transport
Lead department: DfT 

(648 MtCO


2e)


Waste
Lead department: Defra 

(115 MtCO


2e)


Power
Lead department: DECC 

(1,011 MtCO


2e)


Industrial process
Lead department: DECC 

(85 MtCO


2e)


Heating workplaces
Lead department: DECC 

(452 MtCO


2e)


Agriculture, forestry and 
land management

Lead department: Defra 
(247 MtCO


2e)DECC74%Mo D18%

All other
departments


8%

Defra


1%BIS9%CLG27%DECC

63% DfT


76%


BIS 9%

CLG 4%

DCMS 4%

MoD 3%

DECC, DCSF, 
Defra & DH
1% each

Defra


70%BIS15%DECC7%CLG7%Df T1%DECC100%




DECC51%BIS19%

Defra


24%

DfT 6%


BIS15%DECC80%

Defra 2%

DH, CLG and DCMS
1% each

Defra


88%

DECC, DCSF, DH, 
BIS, CLG & DfT

2% each

Figure 3: Departments’ share of each sector’s emissions and the lead department for each
The figures for the sector’s represent indicative shares for their potential contribution to the first UK carbon budget 
attributed on the basis of the UK emissions projections.




18 Climate Change: Taking Action | Delivering the Low Carbon Transition Plan18

The public sector

While the Sustainable Operations on the Government 
Estate (SOGE) framework is mandatory and applies to  
all central government departments and their executive 
agencies, only a few executive NDPBs and non-
Ministerial departments have been included to date on  
a voluntarily basis. The scope and coverage of public 
sector targets in the first carbon budget will be the 
same as the SOGE target, i.e. all emissions from 
departments’ own operations and office estate, and 
emissions from administrative transport. 

New targets or changes resulting from the review of  
the SOGE framework will be reflected in departments’ 
carbon budgets from period 2, once individual budgets 
have been recalculated and assigned to departments. 

Currently, the SOGE framework has a number of targets 
measuring performance towards carbon reduction.  
As these targets expire, the carbon budget framework 
will provide the one over-arching target for central 
Government, to ensure that emissions are reduced in line 
with the requirements of the Climate Change Act. This 
framework will be supported by a number of indicators 
and milestones. The milestones are to reduce emissions 
from the office estate by 12.5% by 2010/11 and to 
reduce total emissions (from the estate and business-
related transport) by 34% by 2020 on 1999/00 baselines. 
The full details of the indicators are being announced  
as part of the SOGE update. Reporting against the 
milestones will continue to be done annually via the 
Office of Government Commerce (OGC).

All parts of the public sector will need to take into 
account the growing evidence base about where and 
how carbon reductions can be made in the most 
cost-effective way. A major cross-cutting study into the 
low carbon potential of the public sector will inform 
energy efficiency planning and carbon budgeting, and 
will also help to deliver the commitment that £300m of 
financial savings will be found from energy efficiency 
measures across the public sector in 2012/13. As the 
findings from the study emerge, they may be used to 

inform future assessments of which parts of the public 
sector can achieve savings in the most effective way in 
each carbon budget period, as well as helping to identify 
actions to ensure the public sector is on track to meet 
carbon and financial savings.

Incorporation of the wider public sector 

The health and education sectors have identified targets 
for emissions savings by 2020 and details are contained 
within the DCSF (for schools), BIS (for further and higher 
education) and DH (for health) CRDPs. The emissions 
allocations these sectors are responsible for will be added 
to the departmental carbon budgets for DCSF, BIS and 
DH in advance of budget period 2 and as part of a wider 
review of the budgets. For now they will be treated as 
additional to their carbon budgets in the LCTP. 

Carbon Reduction Delivery Plans

The Low Carbon Transition Plan (LCTP) committed each 
department to publishing a Carbon Reduction Delivery 
Plan (CRDP) by Spring 2010. These plans underpin 
delivery of each department’s carbon budget. The 
plans, which are published alongside this document, 
set out in detail the actions that departments will take, 
on their own and in collaboration with others, to 
reduce emissions in the sectors that they can influence 
as well as from their own estate and use of transport. 
These plans also include the indicators and milestones 
against which they will measure progress and ensure 
that action is taken.

A link to each department’s plan can be found at  
http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/what_we_do/
lc_uk/carbon_budgets/departments/departments.aspx.

Most of these plans also include action that they are 
taking in relation to adapting to the consequences of 
climate change.




19Departmental Carbon Budgets 19

In total there are 18 Delivery Plans. They can be 
considered in three different categories, with category 1 
departments including in their plans an overview of 
each sector for which they have lead department status.

Delivery Plans, where appropriate, include the 
following key components:

• Details of the aims of a department and how they 
relate to climate change and the size and 
components of their department carbon budget;

• Details of the policies and measures the department 
is and will be implementing to ensure delivery of 
emissions reductions and their carbon budgets;

• Indicators and milestones to be used to track and 
report on progress;

• Governance arrangements and how they will work 
with other departments, the devolved 
administrations and other delivery partners.

HMT will play a key role in the departmental carbon 
budget system, supporting the delivery of carbon 
budgets in keeping with its role at the centre of 
government. HMT’s CRDP explains that this role involves:

• Helping to make the right policy choices, including 
formulating tax policy and the role of environmental 
taxes;

• Supporting efficient delivery across Government: 
overseeing the PSA (public service agreement) 
performance management framework and ensuring 
that departments plan for and allocate sufficient 
resources to delivery;

• Working towards an international deal to reduce 
emissions, including through the G20 process;

• Integrating climate change into fiscal and 
economic policy;

• Providing leadership on delivery of sustainability 
targets and sustainability reporting across 
Government through the role of the OGC;

• Reducing its own carbon footprint.

HMT will continue to work closely with all 
departments in reducing emissions through domestic 
action in the UK.

Carbon Budgets Review Process 

All departments will undertake a major review of their 
Delivery Plans in the year before the beginning of the 
subsequent carbon budget period (i.e. in 2012, 2017, 
2022, etc). Plans, or parts of plans, will also be 
updated where there are significant policy 
developments or amended UK budgets.

In addition, DECC in consultation with other 
government departments will conduct a review of the 
departmental carbon budget approach during budget 
period 1 which will in particular seek to refine the 
methodology for how budgets are allocated to 
departments and how they are monitored and 
managed. The review will consider a number of factors: 

• How well departmental budgets help support the 
effective delivery of the UK’s carbon budgets;

Are a lead department for one or more sectors

Have shares in other sectors

Budget covers own estate and operations

Have shares in one or more sectors of the economy

Budget covers own estate and operations

Budget covers own estate and operations only

Category 1 
DECC, Defra, DfT, CLG 

Category 2 
BIS, DCSF, DCMS, DH, MoD 

Category 3 
CO, DFID, DWP, FCO, HMRC, HMT, HO, LOD, MoJ




20 Climate Change: Taking Action | Delivering the Low Carbon Transition Plan20

• How well the initial allocations reflect the real influence 
that each department has within each sector of  
the economy;

• How best to take account of the extent to which 
responsibility for different sectors of the economy is 
devolved in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland and 
the role of regional and local government;

• How best to capture the emission reductions that we 
want to deliver from across each part of the public 
sector and;

• How departmental carbon budgets should be managed.

DELIVERY OF DEPARTMENTAL BUDGETS

Monitoring of progress: The need for a 
comprehensive monitoring framework

The Government is putting in place a comprehensive 
monitoring framework to track progress towards 
meeting UK carbon budgets. As highlighted by the 
Committee on Climate Change (CCC) in its first annual 
report8 there are a variety of external factors driving 
emissions which would not necessarily result in 
sustainable emissions reductions, such as milder 
winters than expected or an economic downturn. 
These factors could lead emissions to be lower (or 
higher) in any given year but they would not contribute 
to long term changes in emissions and could therefore 
send the wrong signal about overall progress towards 
lowering UK emissions. Secondly, some of our policies 
which will result in emissions reductions have long 
project lead times and so a mechanism which will 
track whether intermediate measures are being put in 
place to deliver the expected reductions is essential. 

The Government also needs to ensure that it can 
identify the causes of changes in emissions, by keeping 
track of whether policies are being implemented in a 
timely fashion and delivering the expected emissions 
reductions. The system of departmental carbon 

budgets and the monitoring framework that will 
support them is intended to provide a means of 
effectively keeping track of progress and identifying 
the various factors that impact on it. Many of the 
elements of the CCC framework have been 
incorporated into this system. 

The design of the monitoring framework and 
the role of the indicator pyramids

The monitoring framework has two main components: 
(i) a focus on overall UK economy emissions broken 
down by the different sectors of the economy, and  
(ii) on the delivery of policies that affect emissions.  
An essential part of the monitoring framework is 
understanding how progress in delivering policies 
affects changes in total sector emissions over time.  
The sector level indicator pyramid is a key analytical 
and communication tool which aims to bring these 
two components together and is a vital constituent  
of the monitoring framework. 

Figure 4 illustrates the structure of the indicator 
pyramids, which have four tiers representing the links 
between emissions and policy. The lowest tier of the 
pyramid, tier 4, presents the relevant policies or policy 
outcomes,9 with information on the specific milestones 
and policy indicators contained in the indicator pyramid 
tables. These policy indicators are linked to tier 3 of the 
pyramid by the way in which policies are expected to 
impact on the drivers of emissions within the pyramid. 
This may be, for example, through (i) a policy affecting 
the level of demand for energy used in an activity e.g. 
heating or car travel; or (ii) a policy causing a change  
in the energy fuel mix and therefore the associated 
amount of GHG emitted when undertaking the 
activity. Finally there are the changes in the tier 3 
drivers which pick up the effects across the range of 
policies acting on them, and how they impact on the 
emissions within the sector at tiers 2 and 1.

8  http://www.theccc.org.uk/reports/progress-reports
9  Depending on the sector these are labelled within the pyramid as either the policy itself or the policy outcome – see individual indictor pyramids 

within sector lead CRDPs for details as to which approach has been chosen and why.




2121Delivery of Departmental Budgets

At the tier 4 policy level, the indicator pyramids focus 
on monitoring those things which the Government is 
actively doing or is intending to put in place to help 
reduce GHG emissions in the UK. For this reason,  
tier 4 policy indicators alone can only give a partial 
understanding as to the performance of the overall 
sector emissions. The impact assessment process will 
be used to identify policies that may decrease or 
increase a sector’s emissions. In addition it will be 
necessary to track non-policy orientated external 
factors which can have a significant impact on 
emissions within any given sector such as weather or 
economic activity. There are other external factors too, 
which are more specific to a particular sector, such as 
the level of home working within the homes and 
communities sector. These external factors are 
captured within the indicator pyramids as ‘contextual 
factors’ and indicators have been developed for these.

Responsibilities of departments for indicators 
within the sector indicator pyramids and 
departmental carbon reduction delivery plans

There are six sector indicator pyramids which together 
form the overall monitoring framework for capturing 
progress with respect to the UK carbon budgets. The 

policies and other activities government departments 
are undertaking to reduce emissions are attributed  
to a sector based on where the emissions impacts  
are expected to occur. All relevant departments that 
have a share in the emissions from a particular sector, 
contribute through their policy milestones and 
indicators to the overall sector indicator pyramid. 
Figure 5 shows the different types of indicators within 
the indicator pyramid according to the tier they relate 
to and the responsibilities of departments for these. 

Using the framework to track progress and 
measure success

The monitoring framework based around the indicator 
pyramids will build up an historic record across the 
four tiers. The policy indicators and milestones will 
provide a record of how policies are delivering and will 
provide a means of measuring performance against 
policy milestones. If policies are under-delivering, the 
framework will reveal potential risks to meeting the UK 
carbon budgets. It will also collect information on how 
the key drivers of a sector’s emissions have responded 
over time; this will help to assess the contribution of 
policies to delivering emissions reductions.

Figure 4: Model indicator pyramid

Absolute change in non-traded sector CO


2e 


emissions since 1990 / previous year

Contextual factors

Tier 4

Tier 3

Tier 2

Tier 1

Change in sub sector 
emissions

Change in demand 
side drivers of 

emissions

Policy 
milestones and 

indicators
Policy 

milestones and 
indicators

Traded emissions 
to power sector

Grid electricity 
consumption

Impact on 
supply side 

power sector 
emissions

Policy 
milestones and 

indicators
Policy 

milestones and 
indicators

Change in supply 
side drivers of 

emissions

Change in demand side 
drivers of emissions

[efficiency/behavioural 
change drivers]

Change in supply side 
drivers of emissions
[affecting the fuel 

source mix]

Change in sub sector 
emissions




22 Climate Change: Taking Action | Delivering the Low Carbon Transition Plan22

Policy changes in one period will also affect emissions  
in future periods. The UK LCTP set out policies and 
proposals to meet the first three carbon budgets and  
a set of projections consistent with the emissions 
reductions expected to be delivered by them. Regular 
updates to the projections will enable us to track 
progress against the LCTP. And as new evidence  
on savings from existing policies becomes available,  
and new policies and proposals are announced, the 
monitoring framework will take account of these. 
Similarly, expected changes to contextual factors such 
as growth forecasts, weather patterns and household 
formation will be logged. In this way, expected 
performance against the LCTP across all carbon budgets 
will be monitored, changes to the projections will be 
explained, and it will be possible to identify whether 
there is a need for changes to the policy mix or 
introduction of new measures to ensure the reductions 
in emissions necessary to meet the UK carbon budgets.

The Low Carbon Transition Plan sets out the 
contribution that different sectors of the economy can 
make to help the UK achieve its overall UK carbon 

budgets, this is depicted in Figure 6. This document 
explains that departments have been set carbon 
budgets based on their ability to influence emissions in 
the different sectors of the economy. Responsibility for 
emissions reductions for the first budget period has 
therefore been shared across departments, on the 
basis of the LCTP projections, to create departmental 
carbon budgets. 

The projections in the LCTP give an indication of the 
current expected emissions reductions potential from 
policies in different sectors of the economy to help in 
achieving the UK carbon budgets. These should not be 
viewed as sector specific carbon reduction targets – they 
are a useful tool to illustrate the potential impacts of 
policies across the sectors. The system of five yearly  
UK carbon budgets was created to enable flexibility in 
meeting the budget, so that higher emissions in any  
one year can be compensated by lower emissions in 
another over the five year period. In this way changes in 
expected emissions reductions or actual emissions above 
what was previously projected in one sector can be 
offset by additional reductions in another sector; what  

Figure 5: Departmental and sector level indicators and departmental responsibility

Information contained in 
departmental carbon 
reduction delivery plans 
–responsibility of 
departments responsible for 
policy or measure 

Information contained in 
sector indicator pyramid only

– Tiers 1,2,3 responsibility of 
sector lead department.

– Tier 4 responsibility of 
department responsible for 
policy/measure

Tier 4

Tier 3

Tier 2

Tier 1Total sector GHG emissions

Disaggregated sector emissions

Change in sub sector emissions

(outcome) Indicators for 
drivers of emissions 

Change in sub sector emissions

Change in sub sector emissions

Policy 
milestones and 

indicators




2323Delivery of Departmental Budgets

is important is how the UK is doing across the board. 
Monitoring progress and updating projections to reflect 
developments in different sectors is however necessary 
in order to understand the developments in the overall 
UK emissions figures and to identify where additional 
effort to reduce emissions should be concentrated.

Figure 6 presents the central case projections from the 
LCTP for the first three budget periods. There are, 
however, uncertainties associated with projections which 
are subject to change over time owing to changes in the 
underlying factors that determine them. The monitoring 
framework will help us track these changes and manage 
the uncertainties effectively. On the basis of the LCTP 
central projections the UK is expected to over-achieve its 
budget but given that projections are subject to revisions 
we must be vigilant and continue to ensure that overall 
our policies deliver as planned.

The individual CRDPs of the sector lead departments 
(DECC, CLG, DfT, Defra) contain more detailed 
information on how government will track progress 
within individual sectors. The indicators are not based 
around trajectories for individual policy measures, 
although for some policies the Government has set 
specific goals for their delivery and these are listed. 
Many of the UK’s key policies for reducing emissions 

within the power sector and industry sectors, for 
example, are based on market mechanisms (e.g. the 
EU ETS, CCAs and CRC). This means the Government 
does not anticipate in advance the uptake of the 
various types of technology or abatement measures 
that could be promoted through the incentives these 
mechanisms provide. 

In order to minimise the net cost to society of 
mitigating climate change, it is important that policies 
implemented to meet carbon budgets are cost-
effective. Policy cost-effectiveness is therefore a key 
measure of success, which is assessed during policy 
development using estimates of the cost per tonne  
of emissions reductions with the Government’s 
benchmark carbon values10. It is also important to note 
that non-monetised impacts (such as the long-term 
security of energy supplies, increased skills and 
innovation, other wider environmental and social 
issues and international leadership on climate change) 
are not included as part of these estimates and that 
qualitative assessments of these impacts may justify 
some policies that appear cost-ineffective in terms of 
their quantified effects. Cost-effectiveness assessments 
are updated when new evidence, for example from 
evaluations or from reappraisals, becomes available. 


010020030040050060070080002004006008001000




12000100200300400500600700

202220212020201920182017201620152014201320122011201020092008

Industrial Processes

Public


Mt CO2e

Agriculture, Forestry 
& Land Management

Waste

Homes & Communities

Transport

Heating Workplaces

Power

Budget Period 1 Budget Period 2 Budget Period 3

Figure 6: Low Carbon Transition Plan emissions projections over the first three UK carbon budgets

10  See Carbon Valuation – http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/what_we_do/lc_uk/valuation/valuation.aspx




24 Climate Change: Taking Action | Delivering the Low Carbon Transition Plan24

The traded and non-traded sectors in UK 
carbon budgets and the departmental carbon 
budgets monitoring framework 

To achieve the UK’s carbon budgets, effort is shared 
between emissions reductions captured under the  
EU Emissions Trading System (EU ETS), known as the  
traded sector, and all other UK emissions, known as the 
non-traded sector. The EU ETS covers CO


2

 emissions from 

all large electricity producers and heavy industry. The 
distinction is important when referring to contribution to 
the UK carbon budget because it is the UK share of the 
EU ETS traded sector allocation (or cap) that is taken into 
account for the traded sector in calculating whether the 
UK has met its budget. In reality the UK’s emissions may 
exceed or undershoot its fixed share of the EU ETS cap 

and be adjusted through buying or selling carbon units/
credits. Whatever the actual level of emissions, they do 
not affect the contribution of the EU ETS traded sector 
towards meeting the UK’s carbon budget. 

This distinction between the traded and non-traded 
sectors is brought out in the monitoring framework 
though the indicator pyramids. The focus of the homes 
and communities, transport, workplaces, agriculture, 
forestry and land use management and waste sector 
pyramids are on non-traded emissions only as the 
emissions from these sectors’ electricity use (traded 
emissions) are accounted for in the power sector. Sector 
emission allocations to departments from these sectors 
for the purpose of departmental carbon budgets are 

11  Projections for the agriculture and waste sectors are currently highly uncertain due to the models and assumptions on which they are based. 
Defra is working with others to develop more sophisticated methodologies for measuring emissions from the two sectors, which will in turn 
improve the robustness of future projections – See Defra’s Climate Change Plan for further details.

Figure 6 continued

LCTP Projections by sector

 Budget 1  
(2008-2012)

Budget 2  
(2013-2017)

Budget 3  
(2018-2022)

Power 988 851 686

Heating Workplaces 442 441 463

Industrial Processes 85 83 82

Transport 634 612 565

Homes & Communities 400 342 302

Public 53 49 41

Agriculture, Forestry & Land Management 242 255 247

Waste11 112 108 101

Total (LCTP projections excluding EU ETS) 2,955 2,741 2,488

EU ETS^ -19 23 -17

Carbon Budgets 3,018 2,782 2,544

Difference LCTP & Carbon Budgets* -44 -64 -39

*  Negative figures imply overachievement against budgets.
^  To account for the impact of the EU ETS in setting the level of the UK carbon budgets, the EU ETS cap is not 

factored in to these projections. 




2525Carbon Budget Sector Indicators

therefore, for the most part, related to non-traded 
emissions. The exception to this is the power sector in 
contrast which contains the emissions from the traded 
sector owing to electricity generation and DECC takes 
the full share of these emissions. When monitoring 
progress on emissions by sector, and the contribution of 
progress within these sectors to departments’ carbon 
budgets, the focus in all sectors, apart from the power 
sector, is therefore on the non-traded emissions as it is 
reductions in these emissions that will contribute to 
departments meeting their budgets and ultimately the 
UK carbon budgets.

The monitoring framework measures what is happening 
to traded power sector12 emissions through tracking 
the actual level of emissions in the power sector over 
time and not just simply the level of the EU ETS cap, 
see power sector overview below. The Government has 
set out policies for promoting low carbon generation 
sources in energy supply as well as demand side 
measures that will affect demand for different sources 
of energy and electricity consumption. These demand 
side measures are influenced by other sectors of the 
economy but will affect the level of power sector 
emissions. The impact of the demand side policies on 
the traded power sector emissions is shown separately 
within the individual sector pyramids with the link 
made to the power sector indicator pyramid.13 

CARBON BUDGET SECTOR INDICATORS 

Set out in this section are the key indicators and policy 
milestones that will be used to track delivery of policies 
and progress on reducing emissions. It presents for 
each sector an overview of sources of emissions  
and how department’s policies may contribute to 
influencing a sector’s emissions. The relationships 
between the policies, their indicators and expected 
drivers of change in emissions are explained in greater 
detail in individual departmental plans.

Power 
The power sector includes emissions from a number of 
sources. Some 80% of the sector’s emissions are from 
power stations with the majority of the remaining 
emissions coming from refineries (7%), oil and gas 
exploration (8%) and a number of smaller sources. 

DECC has been allocated full responsibility for power 
sector emissions. This reflects the sector’s focus 
(supply-side issues) as well as DECC’s ownership of  
the key policy levers for managing sector emissions 
through the EU ETS and lead on energy policy. 
However, other government departments also have an 
interest in and an influence on this sector. For example, 
CLG has an important role to play in terms of planning 
policy, since much of the infrastructure needed to 
decarbonise electricity supply in the UK needs to be 
built and is subject to planning controls.

The vast majority of emissions in the power sector  
fall within the EU ETS and are therefore subject to an 
EU-wide cap. About 5% of the sector’s emissions are 
from greenhouse gases other than CO


2

. These are 

principally nitrous oxide and methane from power 
generation, refinery activities, gas leakage and mining 
and exploration. These gases are not currently subject 
to the EU ETS. The EU ETS additionally covers CO


2 


emissions from heavy industry, which are included in 
the workplaces and jobs sector.

The existence of a cap guarantees that emission 
reductions will be achieved in this sector. However, both 
the LCTP and the first annual report from the Committee 
on Climate Change (CCC) make it clear that the EU ETS is 
not enough in itself. This is because other barriers exist to 
the early development and deployment of innovative 
energy technologies, including high development costs 
combined with uncertainty over future cost and revenue 
streams (including the carbon price), which mean that 
risks to investors are high. Government intervention is 
therefore necessary to overcome these barriers.

The table below details the leading indicators being 
used to track progress in delivering emissions 
reductions in this sector. There are also important 
policy and infrastructure development milestones 
within this sector which are set out in full in the DECC 
plan. For further details on this sector and full indicator 
pyramids please see the DECC CRDP.

12  The workplaces sector currently includes the part of heavy industry that is covered under the EU ETS as a result those departments with a share 
of the workplaces sector contain a small element of traded emissions.

13  See also DECC CRDP on the power sector for more information on the link between departments’ demand side policies and the power sector. 




26 Climate Change: Taking Action | Delivering the Low Carbon Transition Plan26

POWER SECTOR INDICATORS

Headline emissions indicators

Power sector emissions Absolute level and percentage change in total emissions from 
the power sector and projected emissions

Electricity generation Absolute level and percentage change in total emissions from 
generation of electricity by Major Power Producers (MPP)

Non-electricity related emissions from  
power sector

Absolute level and percentage change in total emissions from 
sources other than generation of electricity by MPP covered by 
the sector (e.g. refineries)

Supporting indicators – drivers of emissions

Electricity consumption Total final electricity consumption in the UK

Electricity consumption by sector Total final electricity consumption broken down by sector 
(Agriculture forestry and land management , Workplaces, 
Homes and Communities, Transport, Waste)

Carbon intensity of power generation Carbon intensity of UK electricity generation (gCO


2

/KWH)

Electricity capacity and generation Total capacity and generation of UK power sector broken 
down by source (nuclear, gas and coal (with or without 
Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) and renewables.)

Policy milestone and policy indicators

Electricity capacity under construction Total capacity under construction, broken down by source – 
nuclear/non CCS coal and gas/CCS coal/renewables

Electricity capacity in planning applications Total capacity in planning, in application to IPC received and 
approved broken down by source – nuclear/non CCS coal and 
gas/CCS coal/renewable

Renewables obligation (RO) Electricity derived from renewable sources on a RO basis

Combined Heat and Power Total capacity and generation of Combined Heat and  
Power plants

Feed in tariffs (FITs) Indicators under development

Grid MW of generation connected to onshore and offshore grid

Planning Total number of power sector applications considered by IPC 
and where available to TCPA

Planning Proportion of energy applications to IPC that are not 
determined within statutory time limit




2727Carbon Budget Sector Indicators

Workplaces and Jobs

The workplaces and jobs sector covers both the 
industrial processes and heating workplaces sub-
sectors outlined in the LCTP. This sector accounted  
for 12% of UK GHG emissions in 2008 and covers 
emissions from the wide array of activities and 
processes associated with the workplace, primarily use 
of energy in the course of commercial operations and 
from industrial processes. 

Most of the key policies that have an influence on the 
workplaces and jobs sector are DECC’s responsibility, 
which is why the department leads on this sector. 
Examples of these are the EU ETS, CCA, the CRC and 
the RHI. In addition, BIS has a significant share of 
emissions for the sector as the department with overall 
sponsorship for business, while Defra and DfT have 
shares due to their role with regard to non-CO


2 


emissions (in particular methane and fluorinated 
gases). Other departments have a smaller, notional 

share, to reflect the impact of their policy levers:  
CLG (Energy Performance Certificates, Buildings 
Regulations), DCMS (public events) and DH (impact  
of the NHS). 

The success of these policies in reducing electricity 
demand will be vital in helping the UK achieve its 
targets within the power sector. The indicators within 
this sector have been designed to track how policies 
are encouraging businesses to make more effective 
and efficient use of energy in the course of their 
operations, either directly by reducing energy demand, 
or through the take up of specific technologies  
or practices. 

The table below details the leading indicators and 
milestones being used to track progress in delivering 
emissions reductions in this sector. For further details 
on this sector and full indicator pyramid please see the 
DECC CRDP.

WORKPLACES INDICATORS

Headline emissions indicators

Reduction in overall workplaces emissions 
and industrial processes direct (non traded)

Absolute level and percentage change in Workplace and 
Industrial processes direct emissions (non-traded) and 
projected emissions

Energy consumption (supporting indicator) Final non electricity energy consumption

Supporting indicators – drivers of emissions

Improvement to energy efficiency of non-
domestic buildings

Future Indicator: Improvement in average energy efficiency of 
non-domestic stock, as measured by EPC register (SBEM)

Improvement to energy efficiency of 
industrial activity processes

Ratio of energy use for process heat and other energy (minus 
grid electricity) for industry and services

Change in carbon intensity of fuel mix used 
by firms


 

Non electricity fossil fuel dependency of Workplaces-;
Auto-generation using renewables by Workplaces;
Volume and capacity of (renewable) CHP;
Volume of renewable heat

Level of non CO


2

 emitting industrial processes Production of nitric acid




28 Climate Change: Taking Action | Delivering the Low Carbon Transition Plan28

WORKPLACES INDICATORS continued

Policy milestone and policy indicators

Overarching policies CCAs and CRC

Climate Change Agreements (CCAs) Total emissions split electricity and other fuels; 
Total emissions saved split electricity and other fuels

CRC Energy Efficiency Scheme (CRC) Total annual emissions split electricity and other fuels; Total 
emissions saved split electricity and other fuels; Incidences of 
non compliance

Change in the carbon intensity of fuel source – policy delivery indicators

CHP and District Heating framework Capacity of CHP (MWe and MWth) (fossil fuel)
Capacity of CHP (MWe and MWth) (renewable)


CO2

 savings due to decarbonising the heat supply through CHP

Renewable Heat Incentive (RHI) Milestone information in main indicator table in DECC plan 
Indicator to be determined

Feed in tariffs (FITs) Milestone information in main indicator table in DECC plan 
Indicator to be determined

Improvement in energy efficiency of non-domestic buildings: zero carbon new non-domestic  
buildings and Building Regulations

Energy efficiency of new  
non-domestic buildings 

Reduction in emissions from new build, demonstrated through 
better EPC rating

Energy efficiency of non-domestic stock Future indicator: improvement in average energy efficiency of 
non-domestic stock, as measured by EPC ratings

Other cross-cutting policies

Smart Meters Indicator to be determined

Sustainable consumption and production 
(SCP) programme – Energy Using Products

Cumulative UK CO


2

 emissions savings expected from EU 

Implementing Measures (minimum standards plus labelling) 
introduced to date 

Carbon Trust support Annual tonnes of CO


2

 saved by CT projects; Annual cost 

savings delivered through the implementation processes of 
Carbon Trust projects; CO


2

 saved per £ of DECC funding

Green innovation and Low Carbon Products Number of Green or Environmentally friendly patents fast 
tracked; Level of economic activity in the emerging low carbon 
goods; energy management and building technologies 
sectors; Expenditure on UK based Chemicals and Mechanical 
Engineering Research and Development. 




2929Carbon Budget Sector Indicators

Transport

The transport sector emissions encompasses all UK road, 
rail and domestic aviation and shipping emissions, plus  
a small quantity of emissions from military aviation and 
naval shipping. It does not cover international aviation 
and shipping, though addressing emissions from these 
sectors through international forums is a key objective. 
DfT has lead responsibility for reducing emissions in the 
transport sector, other departments with a part share 
are: BIS (9%), CLG (4%), DCMS (4%), MoD (3%), DECC 
(1%), DCSF (1%), DH (1%) and Defra (1%). This sector 
accounts for 21% of all UK emissions. 

DfT’s carbon reduction strategy Low Carbon Transport: 
A Greener Future, published in July 2009, detailed 
actions to reduce transport carbon emissions against 
three themes:

The first theme, Supporting a shift to new technologies 
and cleaner fuels, includes legislation aimed at increasing 
use of sustainable biofuels across the transport sector, 
and regulations aimed at increasing the efficiency of 
cars and vans. These are supported by a range of other 
important policies, including consumer incentives and 
demonstration funding for ultra-low carbon vehicles;  
a major programme of rail electrification; funding  
for low carbon buses; and the development of  
a framework for low-carbon HGV technology.

The second theme, Promoting lower carbon choices, 
includes support for public transport, cycling and 
walking, and increasing integration between modes; 
better consumer information and promotion of travel 
planning; promoting sustainable travel through 
Sustainable Travel Town demonstrations; and providing 
support and tools for regional and local partners in 
reducing carbon emissions.

The final theme, Using market mechanisms to encourage 
a shift to lower carbon transport, includes work to 
reduce carbon emissions in the aviation and shipping 
sectors, especially through international negotiation,  
and the use of fiscal measures to encourage and 
incentivise environmentally-friendly behaviour.

The measures set out in the strategy mean that we 
project to save 17.7 million tonnes of CO


2

 in 2020 in 

addition to our existing policies, equating to 85 million 
tonnes of CO


2

 over the third carbon budget period 

from 2018-2022. 

The following table details the leading indicators and 
milestones being used to track progress in delivering 
emissions reductions in this sector. For further details 
on this sector and full indicator pyramid please see the 
DfT’s CRDP.

Non CO


2

 – Indicators for F gas only

F-gas Certification All companies have to have full company certification by  
4 July 2011

F-gas Guidance Number of queries received and number of times F-Gas 
support’s e-learning pack for regulators is accessed

International negotiations Successful contribution to negotiations in Mexico aimed at 
securing progress towards a global deal on phasing down 
F-gas production and consumption;

Conclusion of EU review of European F-gas regulations

Traded sector indicators

Indirect (traded sector) emissions from 
electricity consumption

Change in CO2e emissions from grid electricity used in non EU 
ETS workplaces

EU ETS heavy industry emissions Change in verified CO2e emissions from EU ETS firms 
consumption of energy




30 Climate Change: Taking Action | Delivering the Low Carbon Transition Plan30

TRANSPORT INDICATORS

Headline emissions indicators

Overall transport emissions Change in Transport GHG emissions since 1990 and  
previous year

Transport emissions by mode Change in GHG emissions since 1990 and previous year (freight, 
buses, cars & vans, trains, aviation, shipping)

Supporting indicators – drivers of emissions

Distance travelled Total distance travelled (vehicle-km) for all passenger and freight 
modes except aviation and shipping. Number of flights for 
aviation. Tonne kms for shipping, and for other freight modes

Policy milestone and policy indicators

Cars and Vans

New Car CO


2

 regulation Average new car gCO


2

/km emissions

New Van CO


2

 regulation Average new van gCO


2

/km emissions (Future Indicator)

Complementary measures Milestones set out in transport CRDP

Eco-driving Number of drivers trained in smarter driving by the EST

Biofuels policy Volume of biofuels supplied; target for 10% renewable energy 
in transport fuel by 2020

Electric Vehicles Support Number of Electric Vehicles registered; key milestones set out in 
transport CRDP

Buses

Green bus fund Number of low carbon buses (future indicator); First low-carbon 
buses in service in Summer 2010

Eco-training for bus drivers Consultation with option for mandatory eco-driving in driver 
CPC in March 2010

BSOG reform BSOG replaced with per passenger incentive by 2020



Rail


Electrification Electrification in northwest of England 2013-16; Electrification 
of Great Western Mainline 2016-17

Freight

Lower carbon HGVs Framework to encourage uptake of Lower carbon HGVs in 
place Autumn 2011

Eco-driving Consultation on increasing the uptake of eco-driving March 2010

Carbon measurement and reporting Guidance produced summer 2010




3131Carbon Budget Sector Indicators

Homes and Communities

The homes and communities sector covers emissions 
from all energy use in UK households and accounts for 
just under a quarter of all UK emissions. Most household 
emissions come from heating our homes and our water. 

The Department for Communities and Local Government 
(CLG) leads on this sector. However, DECC has a very 
high level of interest due to the large number of specific 
policies on which it takes a lead. Broadly speaking,  
CLG leads on policies such as planning, the building 
regulations, and standards for new homes whilst DECC 
leads on policies that deliver carbon savings in the 
existing stock. Other departments with part shares in 
this sector are: BIS (9%) and Defra (1%).

DECC, along with other departments which share in 
responsibility for this sector, has a wide range of policies 
and measures aimed at reducing energy use in the home. 
The Government focus is on home insulation and 
heating in domestic policy, whilst DECC’s focus 
specifically lies on existing housing stock. Roughly 70% 
of all homes that will exist in 2050 have already been 
built, which means DECC’s policies to retrofit existing 
housing will account for most of the carbon savings 
during the first budget periods. 

Key policies that drive down emissions in this sector 
include Carbon Emissions Reduction Target (CERT) 
(DECC’s flagship household scheme, which since 2002 
has delivered key insulation measures to some 7 million 

homes), Community Energy Saving Programme (CESP), 
and Warm Front (Government’s main scheme for tackling 
fuel poverty). Warm Front has assisted nearly 2.1 million 
homes in England since 2000. The Renewable Heat 
Incentive and Feed-in Tariffs are new schemes aimed to 
deliver microgeneration technologies from small to large 
scale. Smart meters are also being rolled out with the aim 
of reaching every household by 2020. Further measures 
are in place to drive behavioural change through 
information and education driven by sponsorship of the 
Energy Savings Trust (EST) and the Act on CO


2

 campaign. 

These policies all help to deliver emissions reductions in 
the first budget period, however, looking to future budget 
periods, the Government has a number of other initiatives 
in train under its overall Warm Homes, Greener Homes 
Strategy, published on 2nd March. The strategy provides 
further detail of our targets in this area, and outlines the 
future delivery and financing landscape that is being put 
in place to meet the challenge for the period from 2013 to 
2020 (i.e. Budget periods 2 and 3). Delivery through the 
strategy will be focused on three key areas: a continued 
supplier obligation, financing through a Pay As You Save 
model and improved standards for rental accommodation. 

The table following details the leading indicators and 
milestones being used to track progress in delivering 
emissions reductions in this sector. For further details 
on this sector and full indicator pyramid please see the 
CLG CRDP.

TRANSPORT INDICATORS continued

Aviation and shipping

International negotiation Milestones set out in transport CRDP

Sustainable Travel

Sustainable Travel Towns Sustainable Travel Town evaluation early 2010

Walking and Cycling Milestones set out in transport CRDP

Local and Regional Work Milestones set out in transport CRDP




32 Climate Change: Taking Action | Delivering the Low Carbon Transition Plan32

HOMES AND COMMUNITIES INDICATORS

Headline emissions indicators

Overall residential CO


2

e emissions GHG (CO


2

e) non-traded (direct) and traded (indirect) emissions 

from the residential sector


CO2

e emissions from gas used in homes Change in emissions from domestic gas used in homes


CO2

e emissions from other fossil fuels used 

in homes
Change in emissions from other fossil fuels

Supporting indicators – drivers of emissions

Energy efficiency of homes Average energy efficiency rating of homes in England (SAP 
rating) – split by tenure, age; 
Specific energy consumption index (English housing)

Reducing the demand for energy in  
the home

Overall energy consumption in the UK – domestic: Split by fuel 
into gas and other fossil fuels, and electricity

Behaviour change Monitored responses to the ‘Survey of Public Attitudes and 
Behaviours towards the Environment’

Changes in the fuel source Main fuel type for heating the home (broken down by tenure 
and age)

Policy milestone and policy indicators

Insulation measures All cavities to be filled where feasible by 2015 
All lofts to be filled where feasible by 2015

Cavity walls: number insulated, and uninsulated  
cavities remaining; 
Loft insulation: number of lofts that have: no insulation; up to 
100mm insulation; 100 to 199mm; and 200mm or more; 
Solid wall insulation: number of homes with external or internal 
solid wall insulation installed, and number of uninsulated remaining

Uptake of energy efficient fossil fuel boilers Number of energy efficient fossil fuel boilers installed (broken 
down by rating)

Energy efficiency of new homes All new homes in England to be Zero Carbon from 2016

Average energy efficiency (SAP) rating of new dwellings  
in England; 
Number of homes built to Code for Sustainable Homes level 3, 
level 4 and levels 5/6

Low Carbon Products Cumulative UK CO


2

 (non-traded) emissions savings expected 

from EU Implementing Measures (minimum standards plus 
labelling) introduced to date 
Level of economic activity in the emerging low carbon goods, 
energy management and building technology sectors 
Number of green or environmentally friendly patents fast tracked




3333Carbon Budget Sector Indicators

Agriculture, forestry and land  
management (AFLM)

This sector (known as the farming and land sector in the 
LCTP) is responsible for emissions of about 7.7% of total 
UK GHG emissions. Most of these emissions are caused 
by livestock, fertilisers, and fuel use in farming. The 
remainder are from changes in natural carbon balances 
caused by the way land is used and managed. There are 
unique challenges to reducing agricultural emissions:

• There are large scientific uncertainties in estimating 
agricultural emissions and predicting the effects of 
changing practices;

• There are physical limits to how far emissions from 
agriculture can currently be reduced;

• The need to guarantee food security globally and in 
an environmentally sustainable manner.

Defra is the lead department in this sector with an 88% 
share because of the proportion of policy levers it is 
responsible for and its leading role in the sponsorship of 
the relevant sector interests. DECC, BIS, CLG, DfT, DH 
and DCSF all have an equal but small role (2% each) in 
this sector. 

In the LCTP, the Government called on the agricultural 
industry to take action, so that in the third carbon 
budget period (2018 – 2022) annual agricultural 
emissions in England would be 3 MtCO


2

e lower than 

they would be if current practices continued. The 
agricultural industry’s task force (National Farmers 
Union, Country Land and Business Association and the 
Agricultural Industries Confederation) has produced its 
Greenhouse Gas Action Plan14 in order to respond to 
this challenge. The Plan details, sector by sector, how 
the wider adoption of resource-efficient farming and 
land management can reduce emissions and improve 
competitiveness, without compromising levels of 
productivity. The Action Plan focuses on using 
resources more efficiently through:

• Better use of nitrogen in animal and crop nutrition; 

• Better management systems for livestock;

• Better use of on-farm energy and fuel.

The Government and the task force will work together, 
and with other industry stakeholders and delivery 
bodies, to take the action plan forward by spreading 
good practice across the industry. A successful voluntary 
approach makes sense both for the industry and for the 

HOMES AND COMMUNITIES INDICATORS continued

Real Time Displays Smart Meter roll out to 2012 – all homes to have smart meters 
by 2020

Number of smart meter installations in homes  
(future indicator)

Communal heating schemes Number of district heating schemes built (future indicator)

Renewable heat technologies Number of installations and cumulative capacity  
(future indicator)

Informations Tools Monitor on improvement of Energy Performance Certificates 
[EPCs] (future indicator)

Industry Capacity and competence Level of qualifications within house building (Skills);
Level of process innovation in Construction (Proxy for  
green innovation)

Amount of peat extracted Change in the amount of peat extracted in the UK 

14  http://www.nfuonline.com/Our-work/Environment/Climate-change/GHG-emissions---reducing-agricultural-emissions/ 




34 Climate Change: Taking Action | Delivering the Low Carbon Transition Plan34

Government. However, achieving the emissions targets 
required under the Climate Change Act is a legal 
requirement. If progress is insufficient to provide 
confidence that the industry-led approach is working, 
the Government will need to intervene more directly.

Other initiatives being developed by Defra and the 
other government departments with a share in this 
sector which will help us understand and drive down 
emissions in this sector include:

• launching improved low carbon farming advice in 2011;

• commencing a large scale research programme to 
understand better and measure more accurately 
emissions;

• implementing the new UK soils strategy;

• consulting on a new peat framework for action.

There are also a number of Government initiatives to 
support the development of bio-energy. Some of 
these may cause an increase in agriculture, forestry 
and land management (AFLM) emissions depending 
on what the land had been used for previously but 
these should be outweighed by emission savings 
elsewhere because of the substitution of fossil fuels 
with lower-carbon bio-energy. 

The table below details the leading indicators and 
milestones being used to track progress in delivering 
emissions reductions in this sector. For further details 
on this sector and full indicator pyramid please see the 
Defra CRDP.

AGRICULTURE SECTOR INDICATORS

Headline emissions indicators

Total AFLM emissions Change in non traded (direct) and traded (indirect) GHGs from 
the sector in CO


2

 equivalent by gas

Agriculture emissions Change in non traded (direct) and traded (indirect) GHGs from 
agriculture in CO


2

 equivalent by gas

Forestry emissions Total net emissions from forestry

LULUC emissions Change in total net emissions from LULUCF excluding forestry

Supporting indicators – drivers of emissions

Livestock Indices of breeding livestock populations

Intensity of GHG emissions from livestock 
(Indicator to be determined)

Nutrient use Soil nitrogen balance for agriculture 
(Separate balances for livestock and crops under development)

Fuel use Volume of fuel and electricity used in agriculture

Change in woodland area Change in woodland area and new woodland – disaggregated 
for England and UK

Change in sequestration rate of woodland Total GHG removals through growth and management of post 
1919 woodland; disaggregated for England and UK


CO2

 removals in forest biomass




3535Carbon Budget Sector Indicators

AGRICULTURE SECTOR INDICATORS continued

Policy milestone and policy indicators

Breeding: longevity and fertility Multiple indicators see CRDP

Animal health: mortality and disease Multiple indicators see CRDP

Animal feed Multiple indicators see CRDP

Nutrient management Proportion of farmers testing nutrient content of soils  
and manures; 
Timing of fertiliser applications

Anaerobic digestion (AD) Proportion of farmers using anaerobic digestion (AD)

Biofuels Production and consumption of biofuels

Industry Action Plan March 2010 – publication 
2012 – Review (proxy indicators of success to be decided

Policy instruments to tackle GHG emissions 
from farming

2011 – consultation 
2013 – implementation (subject to insufficient progress at time 
of review of GHG action plan in 2012)

Forest carbon projects Consultation 2010 Implementation 2011

Amount of peat extracted Change in the amount of peat extracted in the UK

Waste 

In 2008, the direct GHG emissions from waste were 
22.7 MtCO


2

e, accounting for around 4% of total UK 

emissions. Around 90% of these emissions came from 
landfills where biodegradable wastes15 decompose, 
often over many decades, to release landfill gas 
(typically 60% methane, 40% CO


2

). A proportion of 

this gas is captured for energy recovery or flaring16 
(currently assumed to be 75%), however, a significant 
amount does escape into the atmosphere. The rest of 
the emissions from the waste sector come from the 
incineration of wastes (although not for energy, these 
emissions are covered by the power sector), or dealing 
with waste water from homes and businesses. 

Defra is the lead department in this sector with a 70% 
share because of the proportion of policy levers it is 
responsible for and its leading role in the sponsorship 
of the relevant sector interests. Other departments 
with a share include BIS (15%), DECC (7%), CLG (7%) 
and DfT (1%). 

Emissions from the waste sector have fallen by 57% since 
1990 largely as a result of successful implementation of a 
mix of policy levers which provide strong incentives not to 
put waste into landfills. Emissions from waste are already 
projected to fall further to 21.1MtCO


2

e by 2020. But in 

the LCTP, it was estimated that even greater reductions, 
an additional 1MtCO


2

e by 2020, could be achieved 

through the introduction of additional policy measures.

As with the agriculture, forestry and land management 
sector, there are significant uncertainties in estimating 
waste emissions, e.g. in relation to the methane 
capture rate at landfill sites. Research projects have 
been put in place to try to understand these complex 
interactions better.

15 Organic materials, such as food, wood, paper, green waste, and textiles, which decay through the action of bacteria.
16 Methane flaring: the direct conversion of methane to carbon dioxide through burning, but without energy recovery. 




36 Climate Change: Taking Action | Delivering the Low Carbon Transition Plan36

The Government’s approach to managing waste is 
based on the ‘waste hierarchy’ (Figure 7). Options 
towards the top of the hierarchy tend to be more 
sustainable ways of managing waste than those lower 
down, e.g. preventing waste from being created in the 
first place is usually more resource and carbon efficient 
than recycling it or disposing of it in another way. 

Actions within the sector aiming to reduce emissions 
focus on three main areas:

• Reducing the amount of biodegradable waste 
produced especially food and wood waste;

• Diverting waste away from landfill by making the 
alternatives easier and more economic (supporting 
recycling and composting, supporting energy  
from waste, helping people to chose the right 
management options, etc) and ensuring that landfill 
becomes the choice of last resort;

• Capturing more methane emissions from landfill by 
supporting and promoting industry best practice.

The table below details the leading indicators and 
milestones being used to track progress in delivering 
emissions reductions in this sector. For further details 
on this sector and full indicator pyramid please see the 
Defra CRDP.

Figure 7: The waste hierarchy

Waste prevention/Re-use

Preparing for re-use

Recycling/Composting

Recovery/Energy 
Recovery

Disposal

WASTE SECTOR INDICATORS

Headline emissions indicators

Total UK waste sector emissions Change in non-traded (direct) waste and traded (indirect) 
sector CO


2

e emissions since 1990/ previous year

Total non-traded emissions produced by the 
incineration of waste in the UK

Change in incineration emissions since 1990/ previous year

Total non-traded emissions produced by 
landfill sites in the UK

Change in landfill emissions since 1990/ previous year

Total non-traded emissions produced by the 
treatment of waste water in the UK

Change in waste water emissions since 1990/ previous year

Supporting indicators – drivers of emissions

Change in volume of sewage sludge Change in total wastewater sludge  
(thousands of tonnes of dried solids)

Carbon intensity of treatment process Percentage of sewage sludge going to recycling

Total volume of incinerated waste in the UK Change in volume of incinerated waste

Change in volume of biodegradable  
waste landfilled

Change in total biodegradable municipal waste sent to landfill 
in the UK

Change in total biodegradable Commercial & Industrial waste 
sent to landfill




3737Carbon Budget Sector Indicators

WASTE SECTOR INDICATORS continued

Change in methane capture rate National average percentage of total methane emissions 
released from landfill sites that is captured for energy recovery 
or flaring

Policy milestone and policy indicators

Recycling levels UK household green recycling (composting) rate; 
UK household dry recycling rate; 
Commercial and Industrial recycling rate.

Market incentives for EfW (FITs, ROCs,RHI, 
renewable fuels -RTFO)

Launch of FITs in April 2010;  
Uptake indicator of FIT in Great Britain 

Number of Renewables Obligation Certificates (ROC) claimed 
for EfW & AD in the UK

Launch of RHI in April 2011; 
Uptake indicator of RHI in Great Britain 

The number of RTFO certificates issued for waste in the UK

Industry voluntary agreements Measure of success of the following agreements – precise 
indicators to be determined:

• Courtauld Commitment

• Strategy for Sustainable Construction

• Home Improvement Sector Commitment

Landfill audits and best practice Number of technical reviews of landfill gas completed at 
operational landfill sites in England and Wales

Additional amount of landfill gas going through engine or 
flared at operational landfill sites as a result of completion of 
the technical reviews/audits

Capacity of EfW facilities The percentage of facilities for recycling and energy recovery 
as a percentage total of waste facilities granted planning 
permission (England)

Existing and projected (by 2020) capacity of Energy from 
Waste facilities (including AD) in England

The public sector

Under the carbon budgets framework, the public sector 
is considered a sector in its own right on account of its 
scale and influence, as well as the strategic importance 
of understanding how Government and the rest of the 
public sector are reducing emissions. The Government 
can also play a key role in encouraging low carbon jobs 
and supporting new technologies though pioneering 

use of these skills and products across the public  
sector estate.

The public sector employs 6 million people, owns a tenth 
of all UK land and has significant purchasing power – 
around £150 billion per year. As a whole, the sector is 
directly responsible for around 3% of the UK’s emissions, 
with £3.2 billion spent on electricity and gas last year. 


38

Each main government department has been set a 
departmental carbon budget which includes an 
allocation for its own operational emissions. On  
account of its policy levers DECC currently has overall 
responsibility for the wider public sector’s progress 
towards meeting its budgets.

Currently, the SOGE framework has a number of targets 
measuring performance against carbon reduction. As 
these targets expire, the carbon budget framework will 
provide the one over-arching target for central 
government, to ensure that emissions are reduced in line 
with the requirements of the Climate Change Act. This 
framework will be supported by a number of indicators 
and milestones. The milestones are to reduce emissions 
from the office estate by 12.5% by 2010/11 and to 
reduce total emissions (from the estate and business-
related transport) by 34% by 2020 on 1999/00 baselines. 
The full details of the indicators will be announced as part 
of the SOGE update. 

All parts of the public sector will need to take into 
account the growing evidence base about where and 
how carbon reductions can be made in the most 
cost-effective way. A joint HM Treasury/DECC review of 
the low carbon potential of the public sector will inform 
energy efficiency planning and carbon budgeting, and 
will also help to deliver the commitment that £300m of 
financial savings will be found from energy efficiency 
measures across the public sector in 2012/13. As the 
findings from the study emerge, they may be used to 
inform future assessments of which parts of the public 

sector can achieve savings in the most effective way in 
each carbon budget period. For further details on this 
sector please see the DECC CRDP.

PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT 

Governance 

The Department of Energy and Climate Change has 
overall responsibility for Climate Change policy in the 
UK, however the UK’s success in meeting its legally 
binding emissions reductions is the responsibility of all 
of Government. The governance structures in place 
(Figure 8) therefore reflect this shared responsibility, 
reinforced by the introduction of departmental carbon 
budgets. To ensure delivery:

• each department has appointed a Senior Responsible 
Owner (SRO) for its carbon budget who provides 
oversight for successful delivery of their carbon 
budget, supported by an individual or team, 
depending on the size and scope of the departments 
carbon budget;

• sector working groups consider the management of 
emissions at a sectoral level. These groups are led by 
the lead department and include members from 
other government departments with a part share;

• across Whitehall the management of departmental 
carbon budgets is brought together through the 
cross-Whitehall carbon budgets working group 
where cross cutting issues can be discussed and 
progress reviewed. It is also brought together 
through the cross-Whitehall Delivery And Strategy 

38 Climate Change: Taking Action | Delivering the Low Carbon Transition Plan




39Performance Management

Figure 8: The governance structures in place to manage departmental carbon budgets

Department X


SRO

National Programme Board DASH Board Cabinet Committee

DECC Sectoral Account Managers

Department X


SRO

Department X


SRO

Department X


SRO

Department X


SRO

Sector working groups

SRO for UK carbon budget

Cross-Whitehall working group
Membership: Representatives from all departments with a carbon budget

Purpose: Discussion of technical and policy specific projects

High-level (DASH) board and the National 
Programme Board (NPB). The DASH board focus is 
on high level strategic risks often of a cross-cutting 
nature with the more specific delivery risks managed 
by the NPB;

• DECC supports all of these cross-Whitehall activities 
through its carbon budget management team which 
provides support and advice to all Departments.

Delivering emissions reductions in the UK is not the sole 
responsibility of departments and Whitehall officials  
but also depends on the actions of others including 
businesses and individuals. In most cases emissions 
reductions are achieved though the action and influence 
of delivery partners e.g. agencies, regional and local 
government and the devolved administrations to name 
a few. Each department’s delivery plan sets out how the 
department will work with others. In particular the role 
of the devolved administrations in delivering emissions 
reductions by sector are detailed in the sector overviews 
contained in the CRDPs of the lead departments (DECC, 
Defra, CLG and DfT).

Building capacity across Government

Each department will be responsible for ensuring the 
right mechanisms are in place to deliver the policies 
and measures required to meet its carbon budget. A 
key means in achieving this is the building of capacity 
and knowledge across the department coupled with  
a demonstration of strong leadership from the top 
down. DECC is working with departments to consider 
what mechanisms will work best.

Reporting 

Departments will report progress in meeting their 
carbon budgets:

• as part of the Government’s response to the 
Committee on Climate Change’ annual report in 
October each year;

• for the public sector the existing mechanisms under 
SOGE will be the means by which progress in 
meeting the public sector element of departmental 
carbon budgets will be reported. Reporting on 
progress will be made annually in the OGC’s 
December report.


39

404040 Climate Change: Taking Action | Preparing for a changing climate40

Climate Change: Taking Action

Part 2
Preparing for  
a changing climate

The Thames Barrier




41Climate Change Plan

Climate change presents everyone – central government, local 
authorities, other public sector organisations and the private sector – 
with an enormous challenge and also some important opportunities. 

INTRODUCTION

The UK Climate Projections 2009 (UKCP09) show – 
through three different greenhouse gas emissions 
scenarios – how our future climate could change 
dramatically should the world fail to reduce its emissions. 
Based on a ‘medium emissions’ pathway, projections  


41

A further challenge – for all organisations – is to plan 
for the uncertainties that still exist over the impacts 
of climate change and keep options flexible if the 
climate or other socio-economic factors change 
faster or more slowly than we expect. 

The UK Climate Projections 2009 (UKCP09) are based 
on the latest science from the Met Office Hadley 
Centre, and include observational data and 
information from other internationally recognised 
climate models. They show a range of possibilities for 
the country’s future climate up to 2100 – using three 
different greenhouse gas emissions scenarios – with 
associated probabilities to indicate the strength of 
evidence in each case. Some processes that contribute 
to climate change (such as rising temperatures 

triggering the production of methane beneath the 
arctic permafrost) are not represented in current 
climate models and so the probabilities do not 
account for these. UKCP09 illustrates clearly that it 
would be wrong to plan a strategy to deal with just 
one single projection (such as the central estimate for 
the medium emissions scenario). Adaptation planning 
needs to recognise that uncertainties remain, and be 
sufficiently flexible to allow for modification in the 
light of new projections as they emerge.

For the future, a priority across government 
departments will be to ensure that UKCP09 is used 
effectively and appropriately to inform policy and 
investment decisions.

Managing uncertainty

Introduction

17 Figures given represent the 50% probability level followed by the 10%-90% probability level range in brackets.

of summer average temperatures in the south-east are 
+3.9°C (+2.0 to +6.5°C) by the 2080s. Average summer 
rainfall in the south east decreases by 23% (-48% to 
+7%) and average winter rainfall in the north west 
increases by 16% (+3% to +34%) by the 2080s17, with 
increases in the amount of rain on the wettest days. 




424242 Climate Change: Taking Action | Preparing for a changing climate42

Global emissions could be higher, with more severe 
consequences. Or alternatively through concerted 
international action we could put the world on a lower 
emissions pathway, resulting in less change.

Our water resources, health, coastal communities, 
cherished places and landscapes, even our food supply, 
face impacts from a changing climate that we need to 
prepare for. Government, local authorities, businesses 
and individuals all have a part to play in addressing  
this challenge.

The need for action

Although individual weather events cannot be directly 
attributed to climate change, we have seen how floods 
and heat-waves in recent years have tested the UK’s 
emergency and local government services, businesses 
and resilience. The serious impact of the flooding in 
Cumbria in 2009 shows the effects of the extreme 
weather events and the kinds of challenges we will 
face in adapting to future climate change. 

There are also some clear economic drivers that 
indicate the need to make progress on adaptation 
now, even though the future is uncertain. Adaptation, 
including appropriate risk management, is likely to be 
more effective and cost less if it is implemented at the 
appropriate time and this needs to be identified and 
planned for now. When organisations embed climate 
risk in their risk management processes and decision 
making, they are more likely to develop the evidence 
base which will allow them to make the appropriate 
and most sustainable adaptation decisions. Building up 
adaptive capacity will take time for all organisations, 
but we believe that early action will pay off.

18 http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/sternreview_index.htm

The Stern Review of the Economics of Climate 
Change18 demonstrated the value of applying 
economic analysis to one of the greatest 
challenges of our time. It showed that climate 
change is not solely an environmental issue: 
there is a convincing economic case for action 
to tackle climate change.

The graph below illustrates how the total costs of 
climate change without adaptation (top black line) 
contrast with reduced costs through adaptation 
(orange line). Adaptation incurs costs but results in 
benefits, i.e. it reduces the residual damages from 
climate change. 

Adaptation and the costs  
of climate change

Cost of climate change 
without adaptation

Cost of adaptation and 
residual climate change 
damage

Residual climate 
change damage

Global mean temperature


Cost of climate change

Gross benefits  
of adaptation

Total cost of  
climate change  
after adaptation

Net benefits  
of adaptation

Source: Stern (2006)

DEPARTMENTAL ADAPTATION PLANS

Government has already made progress, for example 
by actively managing the impacts of flooding and 
coastal erosion, and the importance of planning ahead 
and preparing for climate risks is now much better 
understood. But there is still much more to be done. 
Adaptation is a continuing process and organisations 
are learning how best to incorporate it into their 
normal business practices. Some local authorities and 
businesses are really starting to embed adaptation  
in their work. But some are not and many parts of 
government are also at an early stage in developing 
their response to a changing climate.




43Climate Change Plan 43

19 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/programme/across-government.htm 
20 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/programme/objectives.htm

In June 2009, government departments committed to 
producing individual Departmental Adaptation Plans 
(DAPs)19 by spring 2010. The central focus of the Plans 
is on looking at priority policy objectives and parts of 
the central government estate that are likely to be 
significantly affected by climate change, or where 
decisions will be taken in the short-term which have 
long-term consequences and therefore require immediate 
consideration (such as major construction projects).

All departments have 
conducted a high-level 
assessment of the potential 
implications of climate change 
for their policy objectives, key 
services and operations. 

DAPs build on the initial success of the cross-
departmental Adapting to Climate Change Programme 
in moving adaptation into the mainstream policy 
agenda. They will move us forwards towards a more 
co-ordinated, joined-up programme of government 
action on adaptation. For the first time, all 
departments have conducted a high-level assessment 
of the potential implications of climate change for their 
policy objectives, key services, and operations. The 
planning process is also helping to raise the profile of 
adaptation and awareness of the scale of the climate 
challenge right across government. 

Departmental Adaptation Plans:

• are being published by major central government 
departments, and will be shared with their 
stakeholders and key delivery partners;

• are closely aligned with central government work 
to deliver targeted reductions in greenhouse gas 
emissions. In many cases, departments have 
produced combined Climate Change Plans, which  
set out an integrated approach to mitigation  
and adaptation;

• show that departments are making progress and will 
increasingly take climate change considerations into 
account in their planning and decision-making;

• focus on issues that are critical to get right in the 
next two years – for example, where departments 
are committing significant funds, or making 
decisions that will be difficult to change;

• will continue to be shared and discussed across 
government to ensure consistency and agree how  
to take forward issues which go beyond the remit  
of a single department;

• will help departments to ensure there is an 
increasingly resilient national infrastructure to cope 
with future climate change;

• will be an important building block in the 
development of the government’s first National 
Adaptation Programme20 in 2012;

• are only a first step – they will be reviewed annually, 
but more substantially in two years’ time and again 
every five years, to ensure that further progress is 
being achieved in terms of government risk 
assessment, decision-making and capacity-building 
to deal with climate change; and

• show stakeholders the direction that departments 
are taking on adaptation and the levels of progress 
being made, to open the process up to comment 
and scrutiny, and to provide an example to other 
organisations which are starting to consider 
adaptation in their operations.

Departmental Adaptation Plans




444444 Climate Change: Taking Action | Preparing for a changing climate44

21 http://www.nao.org.uk/publications/0809/adapting_to_climate_change.aspx 

All organisations need to take a systematic 
approach to identifying climate risks and 
opportunities and to plan how best to respond  
to these. In developing their adaptation plans, 
government departments have made progress in:

• examining how their business and operations 
have been affected by extreme weather events in 
the past;

• considering a wide range of possible risks to their 
business – including any indirect impacts, such as 
disruption to their supply chains, or changing 
customer needs;

• examining which of these are the priority risks 
that require an early adaptation response (these 
include significant risks that departments are 
already facing, and those where it is important to 
take steps now because it could take some time 
to plan and implement an effective response);

• identifying areas where the immediate priority is 
for further research and analysis to understand 
impacts and build a stronger basis for future 
decision-making;

• considering which of the risks they are dealing 
with could best be taken forward in conjunction 
with their delivery partners, other stakeholders or 
with other departments; and

• improving their organisational capability through 
embedding adaptation risk management into their 
existing corporate processes and ensuring staff 
have access to relevant information and training.

Assessing climate risks and 
building adaptive capacity

At the same time, the plans start to define the  
actions needed to build organisational capacity and  
a stronger evidence base within departments to deal 
systematically with climate change for the longer-term. 

A review21 carried out by the National Audit Office 
for the House of Commons Environmental Audit 
Committee in spring 2009 showed that awareness and 
understanding of climate change varied considerably 
between departments. Previous work has often been 
driven by events; for instance, through the response to 
immediate problems affecting the delivery of particular 
services such as the hot summers of 2003 and 2006, 
or the severe flooding events of 2007 and 2009. 
Government recognises the need to embed a more 
systematic approach to the assessment and 
management of climate risks that looks to and plans 
for the future. The development of DAPs is a key 
milestone on this journey.

Severe flooding can have a devastating impact on 
communities, homes and businesses.
© Environment Agency / www.petersmith.com




45Climate Change Plan 45

22 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/programme/index.htm

Adaptation is a devolved issue. In England,  
the Department for Environment, Food and 
Rural Affairs (Defra) has lead responsibility for 
adaptation through the cross-government 
Adapting to Climate Change (ACC) 
Programme22. Other departments are 
responsible for many individual services and 
policies which may be affected by climate 
impacts, and need to systematically assess the 
significance of these risks and the steps 
required to manage these. 

The ACC Programme is facilitating further work  
by all government departments, as well as key 
organisations in the public and private sectors.  
Its objectives are to: develop a more robust and 
comprehensive evidence base about the impacts 
and consequences of climate change; raise 
awareness of the need to take action and help 
others to take action; work across government at 
the national, regional and local level to make sure 
the need to adapt is embedded into government 
policies, programmes and systems; and evaluate 
progress and take steps to ensure effective delivery 
of the Programme’s objectives.

However, work on adaptation is the responsibility 
of a much wider range of people and organisations. 
Whilst the evidence base and a framework for risk 
assessment and response is being provided by 
government, adaptation is the responsibility of  
all and will bring benefits to those organisations 
and individuals who respond to climate  
change appropriately.

Key adaptation principles

Many departmental operations, policies, investments 
and buildings will be directly or indirectly affected by  
a changing climate. Central government – as well as 
organisations in the wider public and private sectors 
– is considering climate change and taking account of 
good adaptation principles:

• Any adaptation needs to be sustainable. This 
means that our responses should not add to climate 
change, or limit the ability of other parts of the 
natural environment, society or business to carry out 
adaptation elsewhere. Our responses must avoid any 
detrimental impacts on other parts of society, the 
economy or the natural environment. 

• Actions should be flexible. Although there is still 
uncertainty over the future climate, we should 
consider options now and make decisions that 
maximise future flexibility – in many cases it is failure 
to take decisions that locks us into inflexible pathways.

• Action needs to be evidence-based – making full 
use of the latest research, data and practical 
experience so that decision-making is well-supported 
and informed.

• Our response to climate impacts should be prioritised 
– for example, by focusing more attention on policies, 
programmes and activities that are most affected by 
the weather and climate, those which have long-term 
lifetimes or implications, where significant investment is 
involved or high values are at stake, or where support 
for critical national infrastructure is involved. 

• Adaptation measures need to be effective (reducing 
the risks from climate change without introducing 
perverse effects), efficient (the long-term benefits 
of adaptation actions should outweigh the costs), 
and equitable (the effects of the activity on 
different groups and where the costs should fall 
should be taken into account).

Responsibility for adaptation

Departmental Adaptation Plans




464646 Climate Change: Taking Action | Preparing for a changing climate46

23 Accounting for the Effects of Climate Change: http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/documents/adaptation-guidance.pdf 
24 http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/data_greenbook_index.htm 

DELIVERING PRACTICAL ACTION

Through their adaptation plans, departments have 
considered the need to manage risks and opportunities 
in a wide range of areas; in particular, the risks to 
business and the economy, national infrastructure, the 
built environment, transport, agriculture, food security, 
the natural environment, homes, buildings and 
communities, and public health.

Some significant activity is already taking place across 
government – including updating planning policy  
on climate change, improved management of risks 
from flooding and coastal erosion, water resource 
management, health advice and heatwave management. 
DAPs are an opportunity to review these activities,  
to assess how far current efforts are contributing to 
successful adaptation to climate change, and to 
identify what more needs to be done.

DAPs set out the actions that government will be 
taking over the next two years to address key climate 
risks and to take their adaptation planning to a more 
advanced level. Whilst the Plans have been developed by individual 

departments, there are a number of important  
cross-cutting areas where co-ordinated action will  
be necessary.

Business and the economy 

Climate change is likely to have a major impact on 
businesses and on economic growth. There is a risk  
to many businesses if they fail to plan ahead for a 
changing climate. Extra costs will be incurred by those 
who are poorly adapted, who rely on vulnerable 
supply lines or processes, or are affected by 
fluctuations in global commodity prices as a result of 
climate change in other countries. This could mean 
higher prices for consumers and even business failure. 
Businesses, from small and medium-scale enterprises 
through to global blue-chip companies, need to 
understand their exposure to climate change and how 
to respond to risks or take advantage of the new 
opportunities that a changing climate will bring. 
Investors will be increasingly concerned with the 
long-term resilience of companies. 

The Government is committed to making sure 
that all new publicly funded assets are resilient 
to climate change over their lifespan. 

In future, all departments will ensure that their 
major policy and investment decisions take account 
of the latest supplementary guidance23 to the HM 
Treasury’s Green Book: Appraisal and evaluation in 
central government24. This gives advice on when 
and how to consider climate change risks and 
adaptation responses in major policy decisions and 
procurements; how to test the long-term costs  
and benefits of different options; and effective 
monitoring and evaluation. It provides a framework 
to ensure that public funds are spent on activities 
that provide the greatest net benefits.

Departments’ use of the guidance will be reviewed 
in 2010-11.

Climate resilient investment 

Chiswick Park, London. Blinds and a central 
garden area, with a lake and trees, create a well 
adapted working environment. © Chiswick Park




47Climate Change Plan 47

25 http://www.ukcip.org.uk/ 
26 http://www.ukcip-arcc.org.uk/ 

Climate risks can become financial risks  
for UK businesses and may affect:

• Assets: impacts on premises, building 
design, construction, maintenance and  
facilities management;

• Logistics: vulnerability of supply chain, utilities 
and transport arrangements;

• People: implications for workforce, customers 
and changing lifestyles;

• Process: impacts on production processes and 
service delivery;

• Markets: changing demand for goods and 
services; and

• Finance: insurance costs, availability and cost 
of finance.

Climate change also offers opportunities for 
British businesses, both at home and abroad:

• Agriculture: increased yields for some crops and 
opportunities to diversify into new varieties;

• Construction: opportunities to exploit expertise 
in retrofitting buildings with flood resistant 
measures, install natural cooling systems, 
construct flood defences on the coast, etc.;

• Domestic tourism: as summer temperatures 
increase, the country could become a more popular 
destination for domestic and overseas tourists;

• New markets: development and manufacturing 
of new products and services to cope with a 
changing climate, such as water harvesting/
conservation technology, risk management, 
sustainable construction;

• Skills and knowledge economy – developing 
the right skills and knowledge to deal with 
adaptation will be essential, from using climate 
change models to developing and making use of 
more practical skills such as engineering, planning 
and architecture. 

Impacts on the economy
Climate change will present new challenges to all parts 
of the economy. Many different skills are needed  
to help in building a climate resilient economy, for 
instance, degree-level skills in risk management and 
strategic planning, architecture, planning and design, 
or more practical skills to do with retrofitting and 
manufacture. Business leaders, managers and 
workforces in all sectors need to develop their skills 
and knowledge to deal effectively with opportunities 
and climate risks. 

The issue of skills development has been identified 
through the DAPs as a priority area for government 
action. Across government, work is being done to 
identify and address skills needs on a priority basis, 
including through the National Skills Strategy 
(published in December 2009) and the new Low 
Carbon Skills Strategy (published in March 2010). 
Government will continue to work with the Sector 
Skills Councils and with the UK Commission for 
Employment and Skills to support this process.

The UK Climate Impacts Programme (UKCIP)25 is 
mainly funded through the ACC Programme to provide 
essential information to help decision-makers plan 
their response to the impacts of climate change. UKCIP 
provides free support and online tools to organisations 
in the public and private sector to help them assess 
their vulnerabilities and understand the latest scientific 
information. UKCIP works through trade associations 
and directly with some companies. It is also involved  
in steering research, including through the Adaptation 
and Resilience to a Changing Climate (ARCC)26 
research programme.

All sectors need to develop 
their skills and knowledge  
to deal effectively with 
opportunities and climate risks.

Delivering Practical Action




48 Climate Change: Taking Action | Preparing for a changing climate

27 http://www.innovateuk.org/
28 http://www.farmingfutures.co.uk/ 
29 http://www.brc.org.uk/ 
30 http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/d/fin_insuranceindustry270709.pdf

Departments are working directly with a range  
of key business sectors, including:

• Construction: The Department for Business, 
Innovation and Skills (BIS) is working closely with the 
construction industry and the relevant Skills Councils 
to boost understanding and awareness of climate 
risks. Through the Technology Strategy Board27, a 
new £4.9 million ‘Design for Future Climate Change’ 
competition will be launched in 2010, to encourage 
further innovation in this sector and to deal with the 
risks and opportunities of a changing climate both 
to new and existing buildings.

• Agriculture: Farming Futures28 is a collaboration 
between the main agricultural representative bodies 
and research groups. Co-funded by Defra, this 
initiative provides farmers with a range of practical 
information and advice on how to prepare for the 
impacts and opportunities of climate change. A 
series of events and workshops on adaptation will 
be held throughout England during 2010. Some of 
the opportunities for farm businesses as a result of  
a changing climate are illustrated on page 49.

• Retail: BIS is working with the British Retail 
Consortium to develop a Guide to Adaptation for 
Retailers29. This will include advice on identifying 
and managing climate risks, as well as future 
business opportunities. The Guide will be 
distributed in 2010 through Business Link.

• Insurance: Insurance is an industry in which Britain 
has a global lead. The Insurance Industry Working 
Group (co-chaired by the Chancellor of the 
Exchequer) has published its Vision for the Industry 
in 202030. This recognises that government and 
the insurance industry already work together to 
improve outcomes, for example to reduce floods, 
crime and road accidents. The report sets out  
an agenda for government to work with industry 
and seek new ways of co-operating, sharing data 
and expertise.

• Opportunities in overseas markets: The 
transition to a low carbon, well-adapted, global 
economy could create hundreds of thousands of 
new, sustainable ‘green’ jobs. Through the UK  
Low Carbon International Marketing Strategy, UK 
Trade and Investment is promoting the country’s 
reputation as a world leader in low carbon goods 
and services. Early successes include agreements to 
market sustainable and environmental technology 
solutions in three Chinese cities: Wuhan, 
Chongqing, and Changsha. With a combined 
population of almost 50 million, the three cities 
offer British companies major opportunities for 
low-carbon and sustainable construction, as well  
as retrofitting existing infrastructure to address the 
impacts of climate change. 

Working with business




49Climate Change Plan 49Delivering Practical Action


Changes to crops Diversification of crops grown (eg. olives, grapes) to make the most of longer growing seasons and reduced frost. Changes to existing varieties, planting and harvest times to cope with hotter, drier summers. Land management Improved land management to prevent soil erosion and ensure drainage can cope with increased rainfall eg. by planting trees and creating sustainable drainage such as porous surfaces and ponds. Livestock management Trees planted to provide shade for animals, act as a source of renewable fuel, windbreaks and provide woodland habitat. Improved livestock housing to cope with warmer summers (reducing heat stress in animals) and wetter winters (keeping livestock off wet soils to reduce erosion). River and flood plain Rivers given space in which to flood (at farm and catchment level), with buffer strips of grass, trees and/or shrubs created next to watercourses to reduce pollution during heavy rainfall and serve as habitats for wildlife. Crop and water storage Improved facilities for storing and drying crops to cope with increased or new pests and wet conditions. Rain water captured and stored for use around the farm. Farm shop/cafe Shop to sell home grown produce, raise public awareness of sustainable farming, and cafe to take advantage of increased domestic tourism. Combined heat and power plant Combined heat and power plant used to save money, reduce emissions and increase energy security. Powered by wood grown on the farm and used to heat neighbouring crop storage facility. FUTURE OPPORTUNITIES FOR FARMINGThe Adapting to Climate Change Programme has developed a series of images to show what a well-adapted world might look like by the 2030s. Developed with stakeholders, this illustration shows a range of priority adaptation measures which may help farm businesses to address some of the key risks and opportunities of climate change. These will not be relevant in all cases, and will depend on the location and circumstances of a particular farm. To allow inclusion in the illustration some features are shown closer together than they might ideally be situated. Improved  technology Advances in technology will enable farmers to apply pesticides and fertilisers only where needed, improving efficiency and reducing pollution from increased rainfall.50

31 http://www.nationalpolicystatements.org.uk/ 
32 http://infrastructure.independent.gov.uk/ 

Infrastructure 

Infrastructure is vital to the country – transport, 
energy, water and electronic communication networks 
move key resources around the UK and provide our 
global links. A high quality national infrastructure  
is essential for supporting economic growth and 
productivity, attracting globally mobile businesses  
to the UK, and promoting social well-being. Yet our 
national infrastructure, much of it built in the Victorian 
era, is increasingly at risk from the impacts of climate 
change. Recent extreme weather events – heat-waves 
and floods – illustrate the impact that climate change 
can have on our infrastructure and economy.

Infrastructure is usually designed to last for decades,  
so it is important to consider adaptation when planning 
and building new assets as well as in the routine 
maintenance, renewal and replacement of existing 
infrastructure. This approach will minimise the risk to 
key services and functions and reduce the possibility  
of long-term disruption and extra costs to the UK 
economy. Some sectors, such as the engineering 
profession, also have the opportunity to lead the way  
in developing new strategies and techniques.

• Higher temperatures: effects on road surfaces 
and rail lines, sewage treatment, power supply 
efficiency, and IT systems

• Drought: pressure on water supplies, especially 
in the south east

• Flooding and sea level rise: higher risks for 
transport, water treatment, electricity substations 
and power stations

• Storms: affecting power and telecommunications 
networks and operations at ports and airports

Impacts of climate change  
on infrastructure:

Increasingly, action is underway to support well-
adapted national infrastructure:

• Government is embedding adaptation into National 
Policy Statements (NPS)31 and the decision-making 
of the new Infrastructure Planning Commission32, 
which will consider planning applications for all new 
nationally important infrastructure. The Department 
for Energy and Climate Change (DECC) has already 
produced a suite of Energy NPSs for consultation, 
and the Department for Transport (DfT) has 

In November 2009, flooding in Cumbria forced the Port of Workington to close due to damaged infrastructure and communications. 
The port’s quick response and coordinated efforts with central and local Government, agencies and contractors ensured that it was fully 
operational within a few weeks. © Workington Port Authority

Climate Change: Taking Action | Preparing for a changing climate50




51Climate Change Plan 51Delivering Practical Action

33 http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/ukresilience/news/sfps-consultation.aspx
34 http://www.rssb.co.uk/pdf/reports/research/T643_rpt_final.pdf 

produced an NPS for the Ports sector. In both cases, 
applicants will need to consider the impacts of 
climate change when planning the location, design, 
build and operation of new infrastructure. Future 
NPSs on National Networks and Airports (DfT) and 
Water – Supply and Treatment – and Hazardous 
Waste (Defra) will be issued over the next two years.

• The UK’s engineering sector is vital to tackling the 
challenge of climate change and is well-placed to 
lead in designing and engineering climate resilient 
and low carbon infrastructure for global markets,  
as well as the UK. The “Engineering the Future” 
group (which brings together organisations from the 
professional engineering community to promote the 
contribution of engineering to the UK’s economy 
and the wellbeing of society) is working with 
government to identify opportunities for the 
country’s engineering sector to take a global lead, 
the barriers preventing action, and further 
development of engineering skills. 

• By establishing Infrastructure UK within HM Treasury, 
government is taking a more strategic view of the 
country’s infrastructure needs across a range of 
sectors, and improving the way that we plan, 
prioritise, finance and deliver the required investment. 
Infrastructure UK has developed, and published at 
Budget 2010, the UK’s first Strategy for Infrastructure. 
This looks ahead over the next 5 to 50 years and 
examines the need for resilience to future pressures 
such as the impact of climate change.

• The Cabinet Office is carrying out an assessment 
of the resilience of critical national infrastructure to 
flooding and other natural hazards33 and is working 
with lead departments, economic regulators and 
operators to reduce existing vulnerabilities. For 
example, the Energy Resilience team in DECC is 
working with Cabinet Office to address risks to 
energy supplies. In the coming months, work will 
focus on enhancing the resilience of power stations, 
and DECC will publish a revised Sector Resilience 
Plan in December 2010.

Climate change is likely to increase the severity 
of wave, tide and wind effects on coastal 
defences. At Dawlish, in Devon, the railway 
line and station are built close to the sea wall, 
and are vulnerable to storm damage and sea 
level rise. 

The Rail Safety and Standards Board, Network Rail 
and the Environment Agency have joined forces  
to investigate the impact of climate change on  
the railway assets at Dawlish and the reliability of 
trains. Their report34 provides recommendations 
for future action and highlights likely investment 
requirements. Its findings are being used to identify 
infrastructure and assets elsewhere in the UK  
which are also vulnerable to extreme weather  
at the coast. The report will also influence the 
development of new engineering strategies to deal 
with the effects of climate change. 

The impact of climate change  
on the railways

© Richard Hargreaves


52

35 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/marine/legislation/index.htm 
36 http://uknea.unep-wcmc.org/
37 http://www.defra.gov.uk/foodfarm/landmanage/climate/rccf/index.htm 
38 http://www.defra.gov.uk/foodfarm/landmanage/climate/rccf/documents/rccf-10-01.pdf 

Government is currently undertaking a UK-
wide National Ecosystem Assessment (NEA)36 
to assess how terrestrial, freshwater and 
marine ecosystems across the whole of the UK 
have changed in the past and how they might 
continue to change in the future. 

The Assessment will help to quantify the state and 
value of the natural environment and the services  
it provides to society. It will assess policy and 
management options to ensure the integrity of 
natural systems in the future, and help raise 
awareness of their central importance to human 
well-being and economic prosperity. The NEA 
involves and is relevant for a range of research 
funders, government departments, academia,  
NGOs and private institutions.

Throughout 2009, the NEA has looked back 60 
years to understand how our ecosystems and the 
services they provide have arrived at their current 
state and value. In 2010, the assessment will look 
forward 50 years, developing scenarios to illustrate 
how our ecosystems may change in future and how 
climate change is likely to affect them. The NEA  
will consider how society might respond to these 
changes to maintain and enhance the benefits, 
including adaptation benefits, that our natural 
environment can provide in a changing climate.

The National Ecosystem Assessment 
The natural environment 

Future climate change could have a major impact  
on our natural environment, including wildlife and  
the habitats they rely on. Yet to cope with climate 
change we will increasingly rely on the effective 
functioning of natural processes within the environment; 
for instance, the free flood control and storm buffering 
benefits provided by coastal habitats like salt marsh and 
sand dunes have been estimated at over £1 billion per 
year. Conserving a healthy natural environment is  
a fundamental and cost-effective way to prepare our 
country for the impacts of climate change ahead.  
We need to ensure that adaptation planning is 
underpinned by cross-government action so that the 
natural environment can continue to provide these 
essential services.

For example, the Government is:

• preparing for the recommendations of a major 
independent review, which is exploring whether 
England’s collection of key wildlife sites continues to 
represent a coherent and robust ecological network 
capable of responding to the challenges of climate 
change and other pressures. The review will present 
its findings by June 2010;

• establishing marine conservation zones, under the 
Marine and Coastal Access Act 200935. These will 
help to address the impacts of climate change, such 
as coastal erosion and habitat loss, which represent 
an increasing threat to the marine environment. This 
approach can help to conserve thousands of species 
that inhabit UK waters and reduce pressures on 
vulnerable populations;

• working with the Environment Agency to ensure that 
adaptation is taken into account in the delivery of 
new River Basin Management Plans as part of the 
Water Framework Directive. Integrated river basin 
management is an important vehicle for adaptation, 
which will allows us to take action to respond to any 
climate change impacts on water resources; and

• seeking views from industry, Non-Government 
Organisations (NGOs), and government bodies at  
a senior level through the Rural Climate Change Forum 
(RCCF)37. The RCCF was created to provide advice, 
greater awareness, and a clearer view of future 
research needs on climate change and other rural 
land management issues. Defra hosted a joint 
stakeholder event, Agricultural Adaptation to Climate 
Change – Meeting the challenges to 2020 and 
beyond38, in December 2009 which will inform the 
Forum’s work programme for 2010 onwards.

Climate Change: Taking Action | Preparing for a changing climate52




53Climate Change Plan 53Delivering Practical Action

Lundy is an island off the north Devon coast.  
Its surrounding waters became England’s first 
Marine Conservation Zone (MCZ) on 12 January 
2010, under the Marine and Coastal Access Act. 
The healthy marine habitats provided by natural 
reefs, sandbanks and sea caves host a wide 
variety of wildlife including grey seals and many 
different species of coral.

The Act allows local byelaws to be put in place to 
protect the marine life within the MCZ from the 
potentially damaging effects of human activities and 
from pressures such as climate change. MCZs can 
be changed or moved over time. This will help us  
to respond if, for example, the effects of climate 
change alter the distribution of species. 

Lundy Island Marine  
Conservation Zone

Jewel Anemones, Lundy. © Sally Sharrock

In March 2010 Defra will publish a discussion document 
on the natural environment and adaptation, building 
on work with stakeholders and partners to consider 
the importance of ‘whole systems’ approaches. This 
recognises that the resources and services which we 
receive from our environment cannot be adequately 
understood in isolation from one another. Instead, we 
are more likely to find efficient and effective solutions 
to the challenges of climate change by considering 
water, biodiversity, agriculture and landscape as parts 
of a highly complex and interdependent network of 
natural systems. The document highlights the need for 
ongoing discussion with a range of experts, stakeholders 
and delivery partners, and for evidence-based approaches.

To cope with climate change 
we will increasingly rely  
on the effective functioning 
of natural processes.  
A healthy environment is  
a fundamental and cost-
effective way to prepare  
for the challenges ahead.




Climate Change: Taking Action | Preparing for a changing climate54


Retained andincreased woodland Woodland and scrub develops in appropriate locations to reduce soil erosion, improve water quality, increase biodiversity, store carbon and for use as a renewable fuel. Diversity andresilience of habitats Semi-natural habitat patches created in a range of different locations to increase variety of microclimates and soil conditions.  Existing conservation habitats protected by creating similar habitats around them to act as a buffer. Biodiversity Species given the best possible chance to adapt by minimising the effect of both climate-driven pressures and existing pressures that may be exacerbated by climate change. Potential for species dispersal to new habitats improved by reducing fragmentation.  Conservation/creation of appropriate size, variety and quality of habitat to support a wide range of species. Ongoing monitoring and prompt action taken to control the spread of invasive species. Re-creating flood plains Rivers re-connected to their flood plains to hold water during flooding and release it more slowly at drier times. Flood plains otherwise used for occasional grazing, water-tolerant crops, or to create wetland and water meadow habitats. Tourism Footpaths reinforced to reduce the effects of erosion resulting from hotter drier summers and increased heavy rainfall, as well as an increase in the numbers of tourists visiting the countryside.  More information made available to the public to raise awareness of what they can do to benefit the countryside and how they can enjoy it without damaging it. Fire Management Planning Controlled burning used where appropriate to reduce the impact of wildfires and maximise ecological benefits. Management of countryside access and more information on risks used to reduce likelihood of wildfires. Improve-ments to emergency access, staff training and water storage for fire-fighting, to reduce impact of wildfires in hotter drier summers. Peat bogs Artificial drainage ditches in peat bogs blocked and bare soil vegetated to slow water-flow, limit soil erosion and carbon loss, improve water quality and reduce likelihood of wildfires. Grazing formultiple benefits A variety of grazing livestock used at different scales and intensities to achieve benefits such as food, habitat diversity and water quality improvement.  This illustration is designed to provoke thought about what good adaptation could entail for our natural environment. It features measures designed to minimise the negative impacts of climate change and exploit the opportunities. It does not attempt to provide any definitive answers or solutions, as the most appropriate action will often depend on local circumstances.2030s COUNTRYSIDE

39 http://www.communities.gov.uk/publications/planningandbuilding/ppsclimatechange 
40 http://www.communities.gov.uk/planningandbuilding/buildingregulations/legislation/codesustainable/ 
41 http://www.innovateuk.org/ 

The built environment

Adapting the built environment (our homes and 
offices, green spaces and local transport routes) is  
vital to ensure that the UK as a whole is adapting well. 
Most of the UK’s population lives in urban areas.  
We need to make sure that our cities are designed  
and built, or adapted, to cope with the challenges  
of flood risk, pollution problems and the urban heat 
island effect; for example, the temperature difference 
between London and the surrounding areas can be  
as high as 10oC. The 2007 floods across the UK and 
the heat-wave of 2003 in London underline the 
importance of adapting our urban areas.

Throughout 2010, the ACC Programme – in conjunction 
with the Department for Communities and Local 
Government (CLG), Defra, other departments and a range 
of external interests – will be scoping and designing  
a new project looking at the impacts of climate change 
on the built environment. This will focus on reviewing 
the latest research evidence, proposing new evidence 
gathering and approaches to address key knowledge 
gaps (particularly around the urban heat island effect 
and heat-waves), and developing new policy and 
delivery options. It will work alongside the planned 
review of building regulations, the Code for 
Sustainable Homes and the work of the Retrofit 
Consortium on public sector refurbishment.

Government is already taking more specific and 
practical action, for example by:

• embedding adaptation into the planning system – 
in particular, the Climate Change Supplement to  
PPS 139 sets out a clear expectation of how adaptation 
will be integrated into the preparation of regional 
spatial strategies and local development frameworks, 
and in decision-making on planning applications.  
A revised PPS was published for consultation on  
9 March;

• working to promote adaptation in new homes 
and buildings through a comprehensive review of 
adaptation challenges: as part of its rolling programme 
for reviewing the building regulations; through 
further development of the Code for Sustainable 

Homes40; and through work with BIS and the 
Technology Strategy Board41 to promote good 
adaptation through design;

• launching (in 2010) a new Retrofit Consortium of key 
public and private sector partners with large property 
portfolios and procuring power, to facilitate energy 
efficiency, low carbon and adaptation measures at 
scale. This supports a collaborative approach to 
research, development and mainstreaming of 
mitigation and adaptation technologies to get better 
value, more robust testing and greater effectiveness 
in practice;

• taking forward further work with stakeholders to 
agree a Warm Homes standard for the management 
of England’s existing four million properties in the 
social housing sector, to complement the Decent 
Homes standard. This will include appropriate 
measures to adapt to climate change; and

• publishing, in spring 2010, a Vision Statement 
on the Historic Environment for England. Climate 
change presents a unique challenge for the historic 
environment, both in terms of adapting to impacts 
and finding ways to reduce energy emissions. 
Government, working with English Heritage,  
the Heritage Lottery Fund and other partners,  
will promote ways to reduce emissions which are 
sensitive to the historic environment, develop 
responses to ensure that the historic environment  
is adapting well, and examine in more depth the 
existing evidence about the relationship between  
the historic environment and climate change. 

We need to make sure that 
our cities are designed and 
built, or adapted, to cope 
with specific challenges, 
including the urban heat 
island effect.

55Delivering Practical Action




Climate change will have a significant impact  
on our wildlife and the habitats they rely on.  
But a healthy natural environment is also our 
safety net, delivering vital services to mitigate 
the adverse effects of climate change; for 
example, urban green spaces can help to cool 
surrounding built up areas by up to 4°C, while 
trees can provide shady areas

High quality places are typified by safe, attractive  
and well managed parks and other green spaces. 
They will also have ample ‘green infrastructure’ –  
the ‘nature’ between, around and on buildings, 
streets and squares, including trees, waterways, 
ponds and lakes, paths, gardens, green roofs and 

terraces, and nature reserves. The last few years have 
seen a growing appreciation of the value of green 
infrastructure and the need to do more to protect 
and increase it. 

Existing planning guidance on biodiversity, geodiversity, 
landscape and green and open spaces has been revised 
and consolidated as a new draft Planning Policy 
Statement. The proposed new PPS aims to provide  
a clearer, more strategic national policy framework 
for the protection and enhancement of the natural 
environment. In bringing these policies together it 
provides planning policy on the provision of green 
infrastructure. It expects regional strategies to 
address biodiversity, landscape protection and green 
infrastructure, particularly in areas of growth and 
renewal where substantial amounts of development 
will be delivered and in areas where the population will 
be most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, 
such as flooding and overheating. It also requires 
local development frameworks to set out a strategic 
approach for the creation, protection and management 
of networks of green infrastructure, particularly in 
locations where it will assist in reducing the impacts 
of climate change by providing flood water storage 
areas, sustainable drainage systems, urban cooling 
and local access to shady outdoor space. This builds 
on existing policy to emphasise the importance of 
green infrastructure in tackling climate change.

565656 Climate Change: Taking Action | Preparing for a changing climate56

All departments also recognise the importance of 
responding to the impacts of climate change on 
buildings within their specific remits, including 
hospitals, schools and government offices:

• Starting in 2010, the Ministry of Defence (MoD) plans 
to roll out a new Climate Impacts Risk Assessment 
Methodology (CIRAM)42 across priority operational 
sites to better understand the risks to its existing 
operational estate and guide its response to climate 
impacts. This methodology – which makes use of 
UKCP09 – will enable MoD site managers to make 
more informed decisions about the resilience and 
continuity, future planning and development of their 

sites, the location and design of new buildings, and 
priorities for future work. 

• In 2010, the Department for Children, Schools and 
Families (DCSF) will commission new research on  
the impact of warm weather on staff and pupils  
in schools and the measures needed to reduce 
overheating. This will inform new guidance to support 
the adaptation of existing schools and improve the 
designs of new school buildings and their grounds,  
to ensure they can cope with future climate change. 
By 2012, DCSF will develop a range of demonstration 
projects to showcase best practice adaptation.

Green infrastructure 

42 http://www.mod.uk/DefenceInternet/MicroSite/DE/WhatWeDo/Property/AdaptationToTheImpactsOfClimateChangeOnTheModEstate.htm 

A green roofed office in farm business park, 
Aylesbury, Bucks.




57Climate Change Plan 57

43 http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/Publicationsandstatistics/Publications/PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/DH_109705 

A new study, published in September 2009 by the 
Health Protection Agency, analyses temperature, 
population, death rates and climate change 
projections for the West Midlands region. The 
report suggests that a changing climate could lead 
to more food poisoning, water-borne diseases, 
extreme weather events and changes to the quality 
of drinking water. The study also found that the 
most deprived people in the West Midlands will be 
the most susceptible to climate change impacts, 
because of the location of many of these people  
in hotter city centres and the fact they have less 
opportunity to adapt their behaviours and lifestyles.

Evidence of health impacts

Delivering Practical Action

Dragonfly House in Norwich provides offices for  
the Broads Authority, the Environment Agency  
and Natural England. The new building is clad  
in sustainably sourced timber, with brise soleil 
sunshades to provide natural cooling. Air drawn 
through an earth duct helps to warm the building 
in winter and cool it in summer. Rooftop solar 
panels heat up to 35% of the water used in the 
building and water efficiency will be increased by 
collecting rainwater that falls on the building roof 
and filtering and storing it for use in flushing toilets. 
A sustainable drainage system is in place to reduce 
the risk of flooding and protect water quality.

People and Health

The potential impacts of climate change on human 
health are complex and diverse (and not all negative). 
Hotter drier summers, milder wetter winters and more 
frequent extreme weather events could mean a decrease 
in cold-related winter deaths, but also an increase in 
heat-related summer deaths. We could also see an 
increase in diseases carried by ticks and mosquitoes, 
and more cases of sunburn and skin cancer as people 
spend more time outdoors. 

The whole health sector will potentially be affected by 
these impacts, and it is important to improve the current 
level of preparedness and awareness. Ultimately, the 
requirement to assess and address the impacts of climate 
change will form part of the NHS regulatory framework, 
which will also need to be aligned with the NHS 
Operating Framework. The priorities for the NHS have 
been set for the Comprehensive Spending Review 
period for the remainder of 2008-11. The Department 
of Health (DH) will work during this period to see how 
the need to assess and address the impacts of climate 
change can form part of the next regulatory framework.

Climate change could exacerbate health problems,  
or create new ones. For example, the experience of 
flooding can lead to stress and mental health issues. 
New Horizons: A shared vision for mental health43 is 
a cross-government programme of action, led by the 
Department of Health. In 2010, the programme will 
identify and explore the implications of linkages 
between weather events and mental health.

The Department of Health is actively supporting the 
development of programmes for the NHS workforce, 
equipping them with the knowledge, awareness and 
skills to take action on preparing for climate change. 
This includes the establishment of the NHS Sustainable 
Development Unit (SDU) and the development of a 
pack on climate change awareness, advocacy and 
action for public health trainees.

Dragonfly House

© Appleyards




585858 Climate Change: Taking Action | Preparing for a changing climate58

The London Climate Change Partnership46 (LCCP) 
was set up to help London and Londoners prepare 
for the impacts of climate change. The Greater 
London Authority (GLA), on behalf of the LCCP, is 
commissioning a project to develop a Health and 
Social Risk Assessment and Action Plan for London. 
Reporting in spring 2010, the project will: identify 
the specific climate impacts on health for the 
region; map out the adaptation responsibilities  
of different health and social organisations; and 
provide local, regional and central government  
with a series of future actions to consider.

Climate and health in London

A key priority for the Department of Health is to 
ensure that national and local adaptation plans are in 
place to address the expected health impacts from 
climate change (such as the National Heatwave Plan44) 
and to ensure that plans are fully implemented with 
regular evaluation. The Heatwave Plan was triggered 
at the end of June 2009, including media messages 
and specific actions for health professionals to help 
protect vulnerable people. The Health Protection 
Agency45 is conducting an evaluation of excess deaths 
and hospital admissions to inform and improve future 
Heatwave Plans. This will report later in 2010.

Some of the groups most vulnerable to the effects  
of climate change may also be the least able to adapt. 
The Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) 
recognises the need for ongoing research to fully 
understand climate change as a problem for the most 
vulnerable people in society. In the meantime, DWP is 
working closely with DCSF, DH and the Cabinet Office 
(CO) to address climate impacts on children and on 
child poverty objectives and initiatives. 

In government decision- and policy-making, the 
consequences of different responses to climate change 
need to be carefully analysed to take account of the 
effects of any proposed activity on different social 
groups. The latest Green Book methodology provides a 
framework for economic assessment of the social costs 
and benefits of all new government policies, projects 
and programmes.

44 http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/publicationsandstatistics/Publications/PublicationsPolicyAndGuidance/DH_099015
45 http://www.hpa.org.uk/HPA/Topics/EmergencyResponse/RespondingToConventionalHazards/1246260037969/
46 http://www.london.gov.uk/lccp/

There are simple steps that all of us can take to cope with hotter summers. 
© Department of Health Photo Library




59Climate Change Plan 59

Flooding and coastal erosion 

Flooding and coastal erosion can cause significant 
damage and disruption. Around 5.2 million properties 
in England are currently at some risk of flooding from 
surface water (e.g. rainwater running across land), 
rivers and/or the sea. Flooding also presents a risk to 
many government objectives, and is likely to become 
more severe and frequent with climate change.

Investment in flood and coastal erosion risk 
management has reduced the risk for many 
communities around the country, and the level of 
investment has risen in previous years from £394 
million in 2002-3 to £800 million in 2010-11. Defra 
works with other departments and stakeholders to 
reduce both the likelihood of flooding from all sources 
and the impact of flooding when it does occur. 

The Flood and Water Management Bill will alter the 
responsibilities for flood risk management and put the 
country in a better position to cope with the additional 
challenges posed by climate change. The Bill will give 
local authorities the lead role for managing local flood 
risk, including surface water and groundwater flooding. 
Defra is investing over £15 million to support the work 
of local authorities to develop surface water management 
plans, and to fund immediate actions to manage and 

reduce surface water flooding. Climate risks are an 
important factor in the development of these plans. 
Approximately £2 million is being invested to develop 
and share local authority expertise and build capacity. 

Delivering Practical Action

The Environment Agency’s Thames Estuary 2100 
(TE2100) project sets the strategic framework for 
the on-going delivery of flood and coastal risk 
management for London, taking account of future 
climate change and sea level rise. The project has 
developed a number of ‘flexible pathways’, mapped 
against future scenarios of sea level rise, which can 
be implemented depending on the severity and 
extent of observed climate change over the next 
century. The on-going monitoring and evaluation of 
sea level rise in the Thames will play a crucial part 
of informing future decisions needed to manage 
risks. For example, the project found that the existing 
Thames Barrier is currently thought fit for purpose 
until approximately 2070, at which point a decision 
will need to be made as to whether or not an 
‘outer barrage’ will be necessary to protect London. 
Management of the Thames Barrier will continue to 
take account of the latest data on climate change, 
ensuring that London continues to remain safe 
from flooding. The Environment Agency’s work 
helped inform the development of the Green Book 
Supplementary Guidance on adaptation and is 
a good example of its practical application. 

Protecting our capital

Flooding in Cockermouth, Cumbria (November 2009);  
900 homes and businesses were inundated.  
© Environment Agency/www.petersmith.com




606060 Climate Change: Taking Action | Preparing for a changing climate60

DFID works extensively with developing 
countries around the world, supporting both 
practical action and research. Much of DFID’s 
support for adaptation to climate change is 
done through bilateral aid programmes. These 
are increasingly focussed on climate change.

Nepal is one of the most vulnerable countries to 
climate change, facing the melting of the glaciers  
in the Himalayas and erratic monsoon rains. This 
means droughts, floods and landslides. The impact 
of climate change in the Himalayas will affect 27 
million people in Nepal and another 500 million  
in India and Bangladesh. In November 2009, the 
Government announced £50 million over 10 years 
to combat climate change in Nepal. Of this, £40 
million will support a long-term National Forestry 
Programme, with £10 million used to help the 
poorest people adapt to climate change. 

£100 million will be invested by DFID in climate 
change research over the next 5 years. New 
approaches to managing soil fertility, improving 
water retention and diversifying crops are being 
tested across 34 African countries. In Kenya, new 
ways of communicating weather forecasts by radio 
to poor farmers are being trialled and in Morocco 
new community water agreements are being tested 
to help manage possible conflict over increasing 
water scarcity. 

In summer 2009, Defra consulted on how coastal 
communities can successfully adapt to the impacts  
of coastal change47, and how the government can 
support them. The consultation recognised that 
successful adaptation depends on producing solutions 
for a wide variety of socio-economic conditions; for 
instance, some locations will have high levels of social 
well-being, with other locations facing greater levels  
of deprivation. 

Planning policy on development and flood risk (PPS 
25) is an important part of the approach to climate 
change adaptation. This provides a risk-based approach 
to managing future changes in flood risk to new 
development. It is being supplemented by new planning 
policy on coastal change which will provide a framework 
to help affected communities to manage risk and 
adapt to an ever changing coastline.

Approaches to managing flooding and coastal erosion 
risks on the coast are being developed and delivered 
through Shoreline Management Plans (SMPs). These 
outline the agreed management policies for each 
section of the coast for the next 20, 50 and 100 years, 
taking account of increased sea level rise from climate 
change. SMPs are currently being revised and will be 
published throughout 2010-11. 

International impacts of climate change

Engaging at the international level is crucial for the  
UK. The country will face further challenges as a result  
of international climate change impacts which make 
other parts of the world less habitable and productive. 
These could include economic impacts, such as changes 
to the availability of food and energy supplies, risks 
relating to migration, both legal and illegal, and security, 
such as increased conflict overseas, exacerbated by 
international climate change.

The Foresight programme, delivered by the 
Government Office for Science, helps government to 
think systematically about the future. Several ongoing 
Foresight studies are making use of the latest scientific 
evidence and analysis to help decision-makers 
understand future international challenges:

Support for developing countries

47 http://www.defra.gov.uk/corporate/consult/coastal-change/index.htm 

© G M B Akash/Panos Pictures




change. According to the Partnership for European 
Environmental Research52 the UK is seen as a “frontrunner 
country in many respects: [with] a comprehensive 
approach, strong scientific and technical support, attention 
to legal framework, implementation and review.”53

Climate change adaptation will need to be embedded 
through relevant EU policies and programmes, and the UK 
will continue to work with the EU Commission and other 
member states to achieve this. The EU Commission 
President has emphasised the importance of adaptation, 
and it is important that the new DG Climate Action will 
now have the cross-cutting responsibility for developing 
adaptation to climate change within the EU, ensuring it is 
reflected in all relevant community policies. 

61Climate Change Plan 61

48 http://www.foresight.gov.uk/OurWork/ActiveProjects/EnvironmentalMigration/Migration.asp 
49 http://www.foresight.gov.uk/OurWork/ActiveProjects/FoodandFarmingFutures/FoodandfarmingProjectHome.asp
50 http://www.foresight.gov.uk/OurWork/ActiveProjects/climatechange/climatechangeprojecthome.asp
51 http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts2008/ukpga_20080027_en_1
52 http://www.peer.eu/ 
53 Quoted from: Peer Report 1. Europe Adapts to Climate Change: Comparing National Adaptation Strategies, page 19. 
 http://www.peer.eu/publications/europe_adapts_to_climate_change/

In some of the world’s poorest countries, changes 
in land use, population growth and climate change 
all threaten the ability of communities to harvest 
the plants they have traditionally relied on for food, 
shelter and medicine. Sponsored by Defra, the Royal 
Botanic Gardens, Kew holds the world’s greatest 
concentration of knowledge about plants. Kew’s 
scientists work globally with other botanic gardens 
and partners to help reduce the extent and impact 
of climate change, to rescue species and habitats 
from destruction, and to offer help in growing 
locally appropriate species for a changing world.

Delivering Practical Action

• Global Environmental Migration48: this project is 
exploring the global patterns and impacts of migration 
over the next 50 years arising from environmental 
change (including climate change), the challenges 
and opportunities that could result from changing 
migration patterns and how these might be addressed. 
Its report is due in 2011.

• Global Food and Farming Futures49: this project 
is considering the challenge of how a future global 
population of 9 billion people can all be fed healthily 
and sustainably. The project will also look ahead to 
2050 and take a global view of the food system, 
considering issues of demand, production and supply 
as well as broader environmental issues such as the 
effects of climate change on agriculture and marine 
production. The project’s findings are due to be 
launched in October 2010.

• International Dimensions of Climate Change50: 
this project will improve the understanding of how 
climate change occurring in other parts of the world 
may affect the UK. The output of the project, due in 
2010, will be used to augment the evidence base of 
the UK’s First Climate Change Risk Assessment (CCRA).

The FCO is using both its Science and Innovation Network 
(shared with BIS) and its network of Climate Change 
Attachés, to support the Foresight Project by looking for 
partners abroad who may be able to help the research. 
Embassies and High Commissions have already 
contributed a number of climate impact studies and 
assessments from around the world to inform Foresight’s 
thinking. Following publication, Departmental Adaptation 
Plans will also be shared with other governments so  
that they can draw on our analysis and planning when 
developing their own adaptation plans, facilitating the 
exchange of best practice and collaboration.

In 2008, the UK was one of the first countries to adopt  
a national adaptation strategy. The Climate Change Act 
(2008)51 was the first legally binding framework in the 
world to address mitigation and adaptation to climate 

Sharing knowledge and expertise

© Kew Photo Library




626262 Climate Change: Taking Action | Preparing for a changing climate62

The DAP process has reinforced the need for close 
working between departments on international 
challenges. The ACC Programme will facilitate this work.

BUILDING THE GOVERNMENT’S  
CAPACITY TO ADAPT

Government has an important role to play in supporting 
and encouraging public and private sector organisations to 
adapt to climate change. Each department is considering 
how best to drive progress and support capacity-building 
in the sectors which they are responsible for.

Equally, departments’ delivery of key policy objectives 
in the longer-term will depend on their ability to identify, 
assess and manage the risks arising from the impacts 
of future climate change. 

The primary areas where departments are working to boost 
their own knowledge, skills, organisation and capacity to 
respond to climate change are summarised below. 

To enhance internal leadership:

• Departments have identified ‘senior owners’ to take 
responsibility for adaptation across their portfolio, 
and ensure Board-level awareness of the main 
climate risks affecting their business.

• Most departments now have a dedicated adaptation 
team, who will ensure that actions within their DAPs 

are delivered and work to continue strengthening 
the profile and improving the co-ordination of 
climate change adaptation with their policy and 
operational colleagues.

To ensure that adaptation is increasingly embedded 
in mainstream policy and decision-making: 

• The government is taking steps to ensure that the 
new Green Book supplementary guidance – 
Accounting for the Effects of Climate Change54 
is used by all departments and will monitor and 
evaluate progress later in 2010.

• All departments have carried out systematic work 
through the development of their individual DAPs to 
identify climate change risks to their individual policy 
areas, and will continue their work to respond to 
those risks.

To ensure that departmental staff are better 
equipped and supported to manage climate 
change risks:

• Following the successful Projections in Practice events 
(which were attended by around 5,000 people) the 
ACC Programme will continue to run training events 
in 2010-11, in partnership with UKCIP. These will 
provide further information and guidance on the UK 
Climate Projections 2009 to people working in key 
sectors and government departments. 

54 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/documents/adaptation-guidance.pdf 

© Mark Potter




63Climate Change Plan 63

55 http://www.defra.gov.uk/sustainable/government/gov/estates/index.htm
56 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/legislation/reporting.htm 
57 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/action/local-authorities.htm 
58 http://www.lwec.org.uk/ 
59 http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/default.htm
60 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/adaptation/assess-risk.htm 

• UKCIP provides a wide range of web-based tools 
and learning materials to help policy-makers better 
understand how climate change can affect their 
areas of responsibility, and will be refining and 
adding to the available suite of tools in response  
to feedback from users.

• Many departments are now developing their own 
programmes aimed at further developing staff 
awareness and providing training for policy-makers and 
operational teams. The Cabinet Office is also leading 
work with the National School of Government to 
develop climate change training for senior civil servants.

To ensure that departments have effective 
processes to deal with climate risks: 

• The ACC programme and the Office of Government 
Commerce have jointly produced guidance to 
government and the wider public sector on how 
adaptation can be embedded into the public 
procurement process. This is being published 
alongside DAPs.

• A new target for adaptation across the government 
estate will be introduced from April 2010 through 
the new Sustainable Development in Government 
framework55. All departments will be required to 
undertake risk assessments and to develop and 
implement action plans which will improve the 
resilience of their estate to climate impacts.  
Progress will be reviewed on an annual basis.

To support more effective working  
with partners:

• Departments have consulted their main delivery 
partners in developing their plans and will continue 
to work collaboratively and share best practice with 
key organisations and suppliers in addressing future 
climate risks. In many cases, these government 
agencies have a crucial role to play in developing 
guidance and standards and influencing the sectors 
and industries that they regulate or engage with.

• The statutory Adaptation Reporting Power56 is 
a new mechanism that will support engagement 
with regulators (including Ofcom, Ofwat and Ofgem)  
and other key bodies in the wider public sector. 
Departments have an important role to play in working 
with their sectors to encourage robust risk assessment, 
analyse actions proposed in the context of their 
current policy aims and objectives, and discuss 
emerging barriers to sustainable adaptation.

• The Local and Regional Partnership (LRAP)57 Board 
– funded by Defra via the ACC Programme – will 
continue to facilitate action on climate change 
adaptation at a local and regional level by highlighting 
best practice, enhancing skills, providing toolkits,  
and encouraging joint working between local  
and regional agencies. 

To ensure the continued development of a robust 
and comprehensive evidence base about the 
impacts and consequences of climate change  
on the UK:

• Government will continue to fund relevant research 
to provide policy makers with the evidence they 
need to help with informed, cost-effective and 
timely decisions on preparing for a changing climate.

• Foresight projects, activities carried out under the 
Living With Environmental Change (LWEC)58 research 
partnership and through the UK research councils59, 
and the specific research portfolios of individual 
departments will further enhance the emerging 
evidence base. In addition, the production of the UK 
Climate Change Risk Assessment (CCRA60) by 2012 
will tell us more about the likely impacts of climate 
change, providing government with a more robust 
and reliable basis for decision-making.

Building the Government’s Capacity to Adapt




646464 Climate Change: Taking Action | Preparing for a changing climate64

The Climate Change Act (2008) commits the 
UK Government to carry out an assessment of 
the risks for the UK of climate change every 
five years. The first cycle is required to report 
to Parliament by end of January 2012.

The CCRA will provide evidence and analysis which 
will enable all UK Administrations to:

• understand the level of risks (both threats and 
opportunities) posed by climate change including 
their likelihood and the potential scale of their 
economic, social and environmental impact; 

• compare the risks of a changing climate with  
other pressures that the Government needs to 
consider; and

• prioritise adaptation policy geographically and  
in sectors. 

The CCRA will include an economic assessment  
of possible adaptation measures. This will give an 
overall indication of the scale of the challenge and 
help to identify priority areas for action.

The UK Climate Change Risk 
Assessment (CCRA)

NEXT STEPS

Through the process of developing their initial plans, 
all departments have considered how they should 
respond to the challenges that climate change presents 
– the immediate risks that we can already foresee, and 
the uncertainties which are yet to be resolved. 

There are a number of ways in which the process of 
planning and responding to climate risks will now be 
taken forward:

• an analysis of the risks and policies identified in DAPs 
will be one of the sources of evidence used to inform 
the CCRA. In turn, the evidence gathered from other 
sectors and organisations for the CCRA will be one 
of the inputs to future departmental plans; 

• alongside the CCRA, a suite of indicators will be 
developed to measure progress, including advances 
made by government departments in implementing 
their plans;

• the CCRA will inform development of the National 
Adaptation Programme to be put in place in 2012;

• the ACC Programme will provide an annual update 
of how departments are delivering against the 
actions promised in DAPs. This will be reported to 
Ministers and published on the ACC website so that 
stakeholders can hold government to account; and

• all departments will prepare a second round of DAPs 
for 2013-2018.

Birling Gap marks the start of the Seven Sisters, the continually eroding iconic white cliffs 
on the south coast. The risk of coastal erosion could be exacerbated by climate change.




65Climate Change PlanNext Steps 65




66666666 Climate Change: Taking Action | Annexes

 HOMES AND 
COMMUNITIES 
2008-2012

TRANSPORT 
2008-2012

WASTE 
2008-2012

POWER  
2008-2012

WORKPLACES & JOBS  
2008-2012

INDUSTRIAL 
PROCESS

HEATING 
WORKPLACES

% MtCO


2

% MtCO


2

% MtCO


2

% MtCO


2

% MtCO


2

% MtCO


2

DECC 63 257 1 6 7 8 100 1011 51 43 80 361

DfT 0 0 76 493 1 1 0 0 6 5 0 0

Defra 1 4 1 6 70 80 0 0 24 20 2 9

BIS 9 37 9 58 15 17 0 0 19 16 15 68

CLG 27 110 4 26 7 8 0 0 0 0 1 5

DCMS 0 0 4 26 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 5

DH 0 0 1 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 5

MoD 0 0 3 19 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

DCSF 0 0 1 6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

CO 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

DFID 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

DWP 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

FCO 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

HMRC 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

HMT 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

HO 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

LOD 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

MoJ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

TOTAL 100 408 100 648 100 115 100 1,011 100 85 100 452

Annex 1 Departments’ Carbon Budgets 




67Climate Change PlanAnnex 1 67

AGRICULTURE, 
FORESTRY & LAND 
MANAGEMENT  
2008-2012

PUBLIC SECTOR ALLOCATION % SHARE  
OF TOTAL 
CARBON 
BUDGET 
PERIOD 3

2008-2012 2013-2017 2018-2022 2008-2012 2013-2017 2018-2022

% MtCO


2Mt CO2

e MtCO


2

e MtCO


2

e MtCO


2

e MtCO


2

e MtCO


2e %

2 5 39.47 37.48 30.2 1731.38 1542 1358.2 53

2 5 0.16 0.14 0.13 503.92 482.41 447.17 18

88 217 0.19 0.17 0.15 337.80 343.76 347.17 14

2 5 0.07 0.07 0.06 201.18 191.74 186.53 7

2 5 0.14 0.12 0.11 153.83 135.74 123.25 5

0 0 0.02 0.02 0.02 30.47 29.27 27.62 1

2 5 0.05 0.04 0.04 15.99 15.88 15.76 1

0 0 9.51 8.95 7.61 28.96 27.18 24.80 1

2 5 0.07 0.07 0.06 11.49 11.44 11.11 0

0 0 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0

0 0 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0

0 0 0.99 0.89 0.79 0.99 0.89 0.79 0

0 0 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.06 0.05 0.05 0

0 0 0.88 0.80 0.71 0.88 0.80 0.71 0

0 0 0.04 0.03 0.03 0.04 0.03 0.03 0

0 0 0.15 0.13 0.12 0.15 0.13 0.12 0

0 0 0.07 0.06 0.05 0.07 0.06 0.05 0

0 0 0.76 0.68 0.60 0.76 0.68 0.60 0

100 247 53 49 41 3,018 2,782 2,544 100




68686868 Climate Change: Taking Action | Annexes

DEPT RATIONALE BY SECTOR RATIONALE BY SECTOR continued

Homes and Communities Transport Waste Power Workplaces and Jobs: 
Industrial Process

Workplaces and Jobs: 
Heating Workplaces

Agriculture, land & 
forestry management

DECC Ownership of key policy levers  
over residential emissions (energy 
efficiency measures).

Responsibility for emissions associated 
with energy-related freight transport.

Lead Department on issues such as 
energy generation from waste.

DECC takes all of this sector as 
owner of the main policy levers 
and emissions sources.

DECC holds all of the ‘traded’ 
element of this sector as owner 
of the EU ETS levers.

Impact of policy levers and 
emissions from sponsored 
sectors. Impact of policy levers 
including Climate Change Levy.

Impact of bio-energy policy.

DfT Holder of main policy levers  
and influence.

Facilitates development of using energy 
from waste in the transport sector. 

Responsible for a share of 
implementation of EU level 
agreements on non-traded.

Facilitates development of using 
energy from biofuels in the 
transport sector.

Defra Ownership of policy levers on product 
standards and behavioural change.

Responsible for emissions from 
agriculture related travel.

Sector sponsorship and Policy levers to 
reduce emissions from Waste Sector. 

Responsible for regulations  
relating to fluorinated gases  
(except in the transport  
sector), and nitrous oxide  
and methane emissions from  
industrial processes.

Responsible for policy to 
encourage sustainable 
consumption and production.

Holder of main levers and 
sectoral sponsorship. Oversight 
of procurement through OGC’s 
sustainable procurement policy.

BIS Influence through regulatory reform  
and encouragement of lower emission 
products and construction. Influence on 
innovation and skills in industry capacity 
& competence for reducing emissions.

Influence on emissions from business-
related freight and car transport.  
Impact of innovation and skills on 
transport emissions.

Emissions from commercial, Industrial 
and construction waste, and a notional 
share of ‘pull’ measures to represent BIS’s 
influence over the regulatory framework. 
Influence on innovation and skills which 
help to reduce emissions. (originally 
allocated to DIUS and BERR)

Responsible for implementation 
of EU agreements on non-traded 
fluorinated gases. Influence on 
innovation and skills which help 
to reduce emissions.

Overall sponsorship and 
Influence of the business sector, 
including share of emissions for 
business sub-sectors. Indirect 
policy levers to influence 
improved technology and skills.

Innovation and research.

CLG Sectoral sponsorship and ownership of 
levers for reducing residential emissions 
(building regulations/planning)

Influence via planning levers. A notional share to represent the impact 
of planning policy, and emissions from 
municipal waste.

Impact of policy levers including 
buildings regulations.

Planning (affecting land-use 
change, and also applications  
for on-farm bio-energy).

DCMS Responsible for emissions from leisure 
related travel.

Emissions from sponsored 
sectors including recreation and 
sporting activities.

DH Responsible for health related travel  
(e.g. to and from hospitals).

Mainly emissions from 
pharmaceuticals sector.

Procurement/impact on demand, 
and sponsorship of FSA.

MoD Responsible for military transport, 
aviation and shipping.

DCSF Responsible for emissions from school-
run and education related travel.

Procurement and influence on 
consumer behaviour.

Annex 2 The Rationale for Departmental Allocations




69Climate Change PlanAnnex 2 69

DEPT RATIONALE BY SECTOR RATIONALE BY SECTOR continued

Homes and Communities Transport Waste Power Workplaces and Jobs: 
Industrial Process

Workplaces and Jobs: 
Heating Workplaces

Agriculture, land & 
forestry management

DECC Ownership of key policy levers  
over residential emissions (energy 
efficiency measures).

Responsibility for emissions associated 
with energy-related freight transport.

Lead Department on issues such as 
energy generation from waste.

DECC takes all of this sector as 
owner of the main policy levers 
and emissions sources.

DECC holds all of the ‘traded’ 
element of this sector as owner 
of the EU ETS levers.

Impact of policy levers and 
emissions from sponsored 
sectors. Impact of policy levers 
including Climate Change Levy.

Impact of bio-energy policy.

DfT Holder of main policy levers  
and influence.

Facilitates development of using energy 
from waste in the transport sector. 

Responsible for a share of 
implementation of EU level 
agreements on non-traded.

Facilitates development of using 
energy from biofuels in the 
transport sector.

Defra Ownership of policy levers on product 
standards and behavioural change.

Responsible for emissions from 
agriculture related travel.

Sector sponsorship and Policy levers to 
reduce emissions from Waste Sector. 

Responsible for regulations  
relating to fluorinated gases  
(except in the transport  
sector), and nitrous oxide  
and methane emissions from  
industrial processes.

Responsible for policy to 
encourage sustainable 
consumption and production.

Holder of main levers and 
sectoral sponsorship. Oversight 
of procurement through OGC’s 
sustainable procurement policy.

BIS Influence through regulatory reform  
and encouragement of lower emission 
products and construction. Influence on 
innovation and skills in industry capacity 
& competence for reducing emissions.

Influence on emissions from business-
related freight and car transport.  
Impact of innovation and skills on 
transport emissions.

Emissions from commercial, Industrial 
and construction waste, and a notional 
share of ‘pull’ measures to represent BIS’s 
influence over the regulatory framework. 
Influence on innovation and skills which 
help to reduce emissions. (originally 
allocated to DIUS and BERR)

Responsible for implementation 
of EU agreements on non-traded 
fluorinated gases. Influence on 
innovation and skills which help 
to reduce emissions.

Overall sponsorship and 
Influence of the business sector, 
including share of emissions for 
business sub-sectors. Indirect 
policy levers to influence 
improved technology and skills.

Innovation and research.

CLG Sectoral sponsorship and ownership of 
levers for reducing residential emissions 
(building regulations/planning)

Influence via planning levers. A notional share to represent the impact 
of planning policy, and emissions from 
municipal waste.

Impact of policy levers including 
buildings regulations.

Planning (affecting land-use 
change, and also applications  
for on-farm bio-energy).

DCMS Responsible for emissions from leisure 
related travel.

Emissions from sponsored 
sectors including recreation and 
sporting activities.

DH Responsible for health related travel  
(e.g. to and from hospitals).

Mainly emissions from 
pharmaceuticals sector.

Procurement/impact on demand, 
and sponsorship of FSA.

MoD Responsible for military transport, 
aviation and shipping.

DCSF Responsible for emissions from school-
run and education related travel.

Procurement and influence on 
consumer behaviour.




70707070 Climate Change: Taking Action | Annexes

Annex 3 Glossary

ACC Adapting to Climate Change
AD Anaerobic Digestion
AFLM Agriculture, Forestry and Land Management
ARCC Adaptation and Resilience to Climate Change
ASHPs Air Source Heat Pumps
BIS Department of Business Innovation and Skills
CCA Climate Change Agreements
CCC Committee on Climate Change
CCP Climate Change Programme
CCRA Climate Change Risk Assessment
CCS Carbon Capture and Storage
CERT Carbon Emissions Reductions Target
CESP Community Energy Saving Programme
CHP Combined Heat and Power
CIRAM Climate Impacts Risk Assessment 

Methodology

CLG Department for Communities and 
Local Government

CO Cabinet Office


CO2

 Carbon Dioxide


CO2

e Carbon Dioxide Equivalent

CRC CRC Energy Efficiency Scheme
CRDP Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan
DAP Departmental Adaptation Plan
DCMS Department for Culture,Media and Sport
DCSF Department for Children, Schools 

and Families

DECC Department of Energy and Climate Change
Defra Department for Environment, Food and 

Rural Affairs

DFID Department for International Development
DfT Department for Transport
DG Directorate-General 

(European Commission department)

DH Department of Health
DWP Department for Work and Pensions
EST Energy Saving Trust
EU ETS EU Emissions Trading System
FCO Foreign and Commonwealth Office
FITs Feed-in Tariffs
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GHG Greenhouse Gas

GLA Greater London Authority
HMT Her Majesty’s Treasury
HMRC Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs
HO Home Office
IPC Infrastructure Planning Commission
LCCP London Climate Change Partnership
LCTP Low Carbon Transition Plan
LOD Law Officers’ Departments
LRAP Local and Regional Adaptation Partnership
LWEC Living with Environmental Change
MCZ Marine Conservation Zone
MoD Ministry of Defence
MoJ Ministry of Justice


Mt CO2

e Million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent 

NAO National Audit Office
NAP National Adaptation Programme
NEA National Ecosystem Assessment
NGO Non-Governmental Organisation
NHS National Health Service
NPS National Policy Statement
Ofcom Office of Communications
Ofgem Office of the Gas and Electricity Markets
Ofwat Water Services Regulation Authority
OGC Office of Government Commerce
PFI Private Finance Initiative
PPS Planning Policy Statement
PSA Public Service Agreement
RCCF Rural Climate Change Forum
RHI Renewable Heat Incentive
RO Renewables Obligation
ROC Renewables Obligation Certificate
SCP Sustainable Consumption and Production
SDAP Sustainable Development Action Plan
SDU Sustainable Development Unit
SMP Shoreline Management Plan
SOGE Sustainable Operations on the 

Government Estate

TE2100 Thames Estuary 2100
UKCIP UK Climate Impacts Programme
UKCP09 UK Climate Projections 2009
WRAP Waste & Resources Action Programme




Further information

Carbon Reduction Delivery Plans and Departmental 
Adaptation Plans are publicly available from individual 
departments’ websites. 

All Carbon Reduction Delivery Plans can also  
be accessed from the DECC website: 
http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/what_
we_do/lc_uk/carbon_budgets/departments/
departments.aspx

All Departmental Adaptation Plans are available on  
the Adapting to Climate Change Programme website: 
http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/
programme/across-government.htm 

Feedback

Government’s collective adaptation planning is at an 
early stage. Your feedback would be appreciated as 
your views will influence the way ACC delivers, and will 
feed into future adaptation planning. Feedback can be 
sent to Acc.Mailbox@defra.gsi.gov.uk, or to:

ACC Mailbox 
Adapting to Climate Change Programme 
Area 3A, Defra 
Nobel House 
17 Smith Square 
London SW1P 3JR

2 Climate Change: Taking Action | Contents




CLIMATE CHANGE:
TAKING ACTION 

Delivering the Low Carbon Transition Plan  
and preparing for a changing climate

© Crown Copyright 2010 
PB13359 March 2010

Copyright in the typographical arrangement  
and design rests with the Crown.

Printed on material that contains a minimum  
of 100% recycled fibre for uncoated paper.




