



International Climate Fund (ICF)


 

International Climate Fund (ICF) 

Implementation Plan 2011/12 – 2014/15 


 

Technical Paper 


 

Context 


  

1. Recognising the growing importance and urgency of tackling climate 
change and its impact on growth and poverty reduction, the Coalition 
Government has set up the International Climate Fund (ICF). The purpose 
of the ICF is to support international poverty reduction by helping 
developing countries to adapt to climate change, take up low carbon 
growth, and tackle deforestation. 


 

2.  The Spending Review 20101 allocated £2.9 billion of Official 
Development Assistance (ODA) to the ICF for the period 2011/12 – 2014/15. 
The ICF will fully fund the UK’s commitment to deliver £1.5 billion Fast Start 
between 2010-12 and demonstrates the UK’s commitment to meeting its 
fair share of $100bn of public and private international finance per year by 
2020. 


 

3.  All spending from the ICF must be consistent with the DAC definition of 
ODA and help maintain the UK’s exemplary reputation for providing high 
quality ODA. The overall purpose of UK development assistance is poverty 
reduction. 


 

4.  Funding for the International Climate Fund (ICF) will be provided by 
DFID (£1.8bn), DECC (£1bn) and Defra (£100m) (the latter with respect to 
forestry finance). 


 

Oversight 


 

5.  There will be joint ministerial oversight of the ICF between the 
Secretary of State for International Development, the Secretary of State for 
Energy and Climate Change and Chief Secretary to the Treasury, and (on 
forestry) with the Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 
and in consultation with the Foreign Secretary. 


 

6.  Proposals for ICF expenditure will be prepared for Ministers by an ICF 
Board comprising of Directors General from DECC, DFID, FCO, Defra, 
HMT, and chaired by DFID. 


 

Policy coherence 


 

7.  Ministerial decisions on the ICF will be taken in the context of the 
international climate change strategy agreed by the National Security 
Council and other related NSC decisions. Decisions have also been guided by 




the outcome of DFID’s Bilateral and Multilateral Aid Reviews. The Board will 
be further guided by the strategy set by the cross Whitehall International 
Climate Change Programme Board. 


 

Strategic objectives 


 

8.  The ICF will contribute to the delivery of the UK’s 2020 international 
climate change objectives as reaffirmed in Cancun in December 2010 and 
related EU Council Conclusions: 


 

i) Developing countries have adopted low carbon development 
pathways in line with the trajectory to a 2 degree goal. 


 

ii) Poor and vulnerable people in developing countries supported to 
respond effectively to existing climate variability and future impacts 
of climate change. 


 

iii) 50% reduction in deforestation achieved in developing countries 


 

iv) Mobilisation of $100 billion per annum for low carbon, climate 
resilient development. 


 

9.  Ministerial direction for climate funding suggests three priorities for the 
ICF: 


 

i) Demonstrate that building low carbon, climate resilient growth 
at scale is feasible and desirable. This will build confidence that 
climate resilient growth and adaptation to climate change are 
achievable, and it will also help to lay the foundations of a global 
deal. 


 

ii) Support the negotiations, particularly through providing support 
for adaptation in poor countries and building an effective 
international architecture. 


 

iii) Recognise that climate change offers real opportunities to drive 
innovation and new ideas for action, and create new 
partnerships with the private sector to support low carbon 
climate resilient growth. 


 

10.  To support the delivery of these priorities, Spending Review 2010 ICF 
resources will be used to: 


 

i) Build global knowledge and evidence that low carbon, climate 
resilient development, including Reducing Emissions from 
Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD), supports growth 
and reduces poverty. 


 

ii) Develop, pilot and scale up innovative low carbon, climate 
resilient programmes and approaches to reduce emissions, 




support adaptation and protect forests, including biodiversity. 


 

iii) Support country level action on low carbon, climate resilient 
development, including REDD. 


 

iv) Build an enabling environment for private sector investment 
and to engage the private sector to leverage finance and deliver 
action on the ground. 


 

v) Mainstream climate change into UK overseas development 
assistance, EU development assistance and Multilateral 
Development Bank (MDB) lending. 


 

Guiding principles for ICF Expenditure 


 

11. ICF spending decisions will be guided by the following principles: 


 

i) consistent with the DAC definition of ODA and maintain the UK’s 
exemplary reputation for providing high quality ODA; 


 

ii) consistent with UK commitments on aid effectiveness agreed under 
the Paris Declaration (to be modified in Busan); 


 

iii) results driven both in terms of poverty reduction and climate 
impacts; 


 

iv) open and transparent to scrutiny from the Independent Commission 
for Aid Impact and the British taxpayer and other partners; 


 

v) use appropriate aid instruments to maximise value for money and 
impact; 


 

vi) take into account development experience and invest in countries 
with a conducive political and policy environment for taking climate 
action. 


 

Thematic spending split 


 

12. The ICF will aim for a balanced allocation between adaptation (50%), low 
carbon development (30%) and forestry (20%). This is in line with the 
HMG agreed thematic split for Fast Start. The split recognises the 
political imperative of UK support to the most vulnerable countries to adapt 
to climate change. 


 

13. The thematic split will be kept under review so that it is responsive to new 
opportunities in developing countries, political priorities within the 
negotiations, and ongoing assessment of impact and value for money 
across the three themes. 


  

Results and value for money 


 

14.  Climate change is a new sector for development. The evidence base to 
inform investment decisions is of variable quality, and the results chains to 
demonstrate impact and value for money are still limited. Building a more 
robust evidence base will be a priority for ICF spend during the Spending 
Review period. 


  

15.  Departments will use a common approach to achieving impact and 
value for money. Resources will be allocated in line with ICF objectives and 
an agreed set of expected results. All programmes will be subject to rigorous 
appraisal and risk assessment. Monitoring and evaluation systems for ICF 
spend will be aligned across departments to ensure a coherent approach 
to assessing impact and that lessons are fed back into the design of future 
programmes. The Independent Commission on Aid Impact (ICAI) will also 
conduct independent evaluations of impact and value for money in the 
second year of the ICF. 


 

16.  The ICF will use a set of high level indicators to measure impact and 
value for money. Table one sets out some illustrative examples of indicators 
that will be used to monitor the results of the ICF. 


 

Table one: measuring impact and results 


 

Theme 


 

Indicator 

Low carbon development 


 

i)Tonnes of C02 equivalent reduced 
or avoided (with cost per ton of 
emissions abated as measure of 
VfM) 
ii) Number of poor people (women 
and men) with access to low carbon 
energy 
iii) Gigawatts (GW) of low carbon 
energy capacity supported in 
developing countries 
iv) Number of jobs created 
(women/men/poor people) in low 
carbon development 
v) Volume of leveraged low carbon 
finance (including private finance and 
MDB finance) 
vi) Leveraged ratio of UK public 
finance (including to private finance, 
and MDB finance) 
vii) Number of low carbon policy plans 
drawn up and implemented 


 

Forestry i) Percentage reduction in hectares 

deforested and degraded (percentage 
and number) 
ii)Percentage and number of people 
living on less than $1.25 a day who 
are dependent on forests for 
their livelihoods 
iii)Number of UK partner countries 
with costed REDD+ national plans 
iv)Scale and increase in private 
sector investment in REDD+ in UK 
partner countries 
v) Value of ecosystem services saved 


 

Adaptation I) Numbers of people, including 
women and girls, less vulnerable to 
the effects of climate change. 
ii) Value of assets protected/ losses 
avoided 
iii) Number of people receiving 
support through a mechanism with a 
private sector delivery partner. 
iv) Number of sector and national 
plans under implementation that 
mitigate risks and ensure 
adaptation to climate change by poor 
people. 


 

Cross-cutting i)Green Climate Fund meets DFID 
Multilateral Aid Review tests of 
relevance and effectiveness 


 

Cross-cutting ii)Number of DFID country offices 
who have completed climate change 
strategic programme reviews 
(SPRs) 


   

Low Carbon Development (LCD) 


 

17.  All countries will ultimately need to move to lower carbon pathways to 
meet a 2 degree goal. Public finance, and its ability to leverage private 
finance, is one of the key options available to us in closing the gap to 2 
degrees. 


 

18.  The ICF can be used to demonstrate a range of approaches to low 
carbon development in different geographical and economic contexts. We 
should test and scale-up low carbon efforts in countries with higher emissions 
and/or higher projected emissions in order to help reach a 2 degree goal. 
There is also value in demonstrating low carbon pathways in smaller, 
lower income countries who could demonstrate transformational change at 
pace and scale. This can help the energy poor living in countries with low 
emissions, whilst helping those countries avoid the potential for future high 
carbon lock-in. 


 

19.  Our preliminary analysis suggests three priority interventions to help 
shift a country onto a low carbon development pathway: 


 

i) building knowledge and innovation through research and 
development; 


 

ii) enhancing policy capabilities and capacity building for relevant 
stakeholders; 


 

iii) supporting implementation, either at a programmatic or project 
level. 


 

20.  Our analysis identified four priority sectors/themes for LCD investment 
through multilateral and bilateral engagement: 


 

i) the power and energy sector offers numerous opportunities for 
HMG finance, either through direct financing of renewable energies 
or tackling energy efficiency measures for households and 
businesses or addressing access to energy concerns. 


 

ii) there are a set of countries embarking on rapid urbanisation that 
need support to grow in a sustainable and climate resilient way 
including through more low carbon transportation. 


 

iii) a number of countries highlight agriculture as a main source of 
carbon emissions that could offer strong climate resilient and 
development co-benefits as well as broader linkages to REDD+. 


 

iv) Finally there are a number of measures that are cross-cutting 
such as economy wide low carbon transition plans. 


 


2 Investment in sectors that DFID traditionally does not engage in will be 
taken forward through multilateral channels e.g. transport, urban and 
agriculture. 


 

21.  Innovative and effective engagement with the private sector will be 
required across all these sectors/themes in order to leverage the level of 
investment required for low carbon development. 


 

22.  Given the untested nature of low carbon development, ICF investment 
will be used to help demonstrate a range of approaches, with a rigorous focus 
on lesson learning and learning by doing. 


 

Forestry 


 

23.  Tackling deforestation offers big opportunities to reduce poverty, 
reduce emissions and protect biodiversity. A cross Whitehall independent 
review was commissioned to identify opportunities for scaling up UK REDD+ 
finance. The review assessed the effectiveness of existing multilateral and 
bilateral engagement and identified a menu of options for potential scaled 
up HMG investments during the Spending Review period. 


 

24.  The review recommends that options for bilateral engagement are 
explored to build on our existing leadership in the sector. The review also 
recommends that the UK continues to invest in multilateral channels which 
have an important role to play – the UK’s current support to Forest 
Investment Programme and Forest Carbon Partnership Facility has helped 
to develop both institutions and will ensure that they have the capacity and 
resources to develop effective interventions in the next two years. 


 

25.  A number of options have been identified for engagement. They 
include: 


 

 REDD+ payment for results programmes, either working through 
 other donors (eg. Norway) or directly with partner governments; 
 Strengthening forest governance and building REDD+ capacity, 
 including in countries where REDD+ potential is high but 

capacity is 
 still weak; 
 Strengthening REDD+ planning; and 
 Supporting afforestation and reforestation. 


 

26.  Although the opportunity for the UK to lead and deliver results through 
bilateral partnerships is significant, it is not easy. Structured dialogue with 
countries and other donors will be needed to assess the political will, 
feasibility and risk-reward potential of interventions. Furthermore, dialogue 
will be needed to refine possible interventions and assess the most 
appropriate delivery mechanisms and HMG resource requirements. 
Detailed design of investments will follow as this dialogue develops. 


  

Adaptation 


 

27.  Three levels of interventions have been identified for adaptation 
support: 


 

i. Building knowledge, capacity, institutions and evidence. 


 

ii. Scaled up delivery of adaptation programmes in a range of 
iii. key vulnerable sectors that are critical to poor people’s livelihoods and 

growth. 


 

iv. Supporting effective national and international level climate architecture 
to deliver adaptation financing. 


 

28.  A number of priority sectors have been identified as highly vulnerable 
to climate change and critical to poor people’s livelihoods and growth. The 
ICF will prioritise investment for adaptation in the following sectors through 
multilateral and bilateral channels4: 


 

i) Agriculture investments such as new varieties and technologies to 
support smallholder farmers adapt and intensify production in 
increasingly uncertain climates and support to help food systems better 
respond to climate stress. 


 

ii) Disaster risk reduction (DRR) investments such as integrated 
DRR and adaptation planning, critical infrastructure, developing early 
warning systems, macro and micro insurance and addressing impacts 
on girls and women. 


 

iii) Water resources management. This can range from initiatives at 
international level (cooperation between neighbouring countries on 
a shared, but under threat, resource) to local initiatives such as river 
basin management, rainwater harvesting and irrigation. 


 

iv) Infrastructure and urban investments including better building 
codes, land use planning, population management, and economic 
development strategies to ensure that vulnerable urban 
communities are protected from the worst impacts. 


 

v) Coastal zone and ecosystems management investments: 
including better management of natural resources (e.g. floodplains, 
mangroves, forests) that help the vulnerable adapt to climate 
change. 


 

vi) Social protection measures for the vulnerable, from insurance to 
safety nets and integrated with DRR initiatives. 


 

vii) Support to health systems, addressing impacts of climate changes 
on health services, and deepening knowledge and action about specific 
impacts (e.g. vector-borne diseases, malnutrition). 


 

29.  The ICF will support a no/low regrets approach to support within these 
sectors. A no regrets approach supports options which are worthwhile 
doing (i.e. where benefits exceed costs) irrespective of the climate 
scenario. No/low regrets interventions may include: 


 

i) continued investment in knowledge and climate data – both globally 
and at country level; 


 

ii) integrating adaptation into national plans and budgets to strengthen 
climate monitoring; 


 

iii) strengthening global, regional and national disaster risk reduction 
strategies’; 


 

iv) improved water shed management; 


 

v) supporting sustainable agriculture approaches and improved 
pasture management. 


 

Cross cutting themes 


 

30.  Building Global Knowledge: The ICF will respond to global 
opportunities to tackle climate change. For example, support to global 
research initiatives e.g. the development of climate resilient crops or new 
emerging technologies. The ICF will also support global knowledge 
programmes such as the Climate and Development Knowledge Network 
which will provide advice and research support to up to 40 developing 
countries over the Spending Review period. 


 

31.  Private sector: The scale of finance required to address climate 
change is enormous compared with the amount of aid from the UK and other 
donors.  The ICF will maximise opportunities to leverage private finance to 
support ICF objectives. 


 

32.  Supporting the international climate change negotiations and 
building the international architecture: The ICF will support the 
Advocacy Fund which will help the poorest nations participate in the 
international negotiations through technical advice and training. The UK is 
also contributing to the design of the Green Climate Fund as one of 40 
countries represented in the Transitional Committee, which was 
established in Cancun. 


 

33.  Mainstreaming: The ICF will support efforts to mainstream climate 
change into all UK overseas development assistance, EU development 
assistance and MDB lending. For example, the ICF will be used to 
leverage UK influence to increase MDB clean energy lending. In DFID, 
every country office will undertake a strategic programme review by 2013 
to identify how the country programme should engage on climate change. 


 

34. Women and girls: All ICF programmes will be required to consider the 
impacts on women and girls to ensure appropriate design and this will be 
tracked during implementation wherever possible. 


 

35. Natural resources: All ICF programmes will be required to consider the 
impacts and maximise the benefits on biodiversity and the wider 
environment in all programmes to ensure appropriate design. For 
example, forestry can deliver significant biodiversity co-benefits and 
sustainable agriculture programmes can deliver water resource 
management, soil and biodiversity benefits. 


 

36. Fragile states: Climate change is a threat multiplier in fragile states. How 
to engage appropriately in these countries in order to contribute to building 
longer term stability will be considered through further dialogue with the 
cross Whitehall conflict pool. 


 

Monitoring and evaluation 


 

37. The Independent Commission on Aid Impact (ICAI) will play an important 
role in undertaking independent evaluations of ICF programmes at key 
points through the four year period. The tri-departmental climate change 
finance programme has been identified as an area of focus for the ICAI 
in the second year of its three year work plan.5 


 

38. Departments are working towards the alignment of monitoring and 
evaluation systems to ensure a coherent approach to monitoring and 
evaluating the impact of spend. 


 

