




Defra's Climate Change Plan 2010




Climate
Change Plan 


2010


Defra’s

Published by the Department for Environment, 
Food and Rural Affairs. 
Nobel House, 17 Smith Square 
London SW1P 3JR 
www.defra.gov.uk

© Crown Copyright 2010 
PB13358 March 2010

Copyright in the typographical arrangement and design rests with the Crown.

Printed on material that contains a minimum of 100% recycled fibre for uncoated paper 

The report can be viewed at: http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/index.htm




Contents

Ministerial Foreword .................................. 4

Introduction ................................................ 6

Executive Summary .................................. 15

Adapting to climate change .................... 20

1. Context ...........................................................21

2. Food, farming and land management ..............26

3. The natural environment ..................................43

4. Flooding and coastal erosion ............................60

5. Oceans and seas ..............................................65

6.  Sustainable consumption  
and production & waste ...................................69

7.  Embedding adaptation to  
climate change in Defra ...................................72

8. Summary of actions .........................................78

Reducing emissions .................................. 88

9. Farming and food ............................................89

10. Soils ...............................................................98

11. Forestry ........................................................101

12. Sustainable consumption and production .....104

13. Waste ..........................................................109

14.  Fluorinated gases and  
industrial process emissions ..........................118

15. Water availability and quality........................122

16. Marine and fisheries .....................................125

Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan ............ 128

17. What is Defra’s carbon budget? ...................130

18. Governance, roles and responsibilities ..........132

19. Delivery and milestones ................................139

20. Indicators .....................................................144

21. Evidence plans .............................................152

22. Defra Estates and Operations .......... 158

23. Abbreviations and acronyms  .......... 167

3Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Contents




Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Ministerial Foreword

Ministerial Foreword

The Earth’s climate is constantly changing. Human 
activity over the past 250 years – the burning of fossil 
fuels, land use change, and agriculture – has altered 
global average temperatures by increasing the 
concentration of greenhouse gases such as CO


2, 

methane and nitrous oxide.

Atmospheric concentrations of CO


2

 and methane 

have more than doubled since the industrial revolution 
and the acidity of the oceans has gone up by 30%. 
Arctic sea ice cover has decreased by over 30% since 
the 1970s; sea levels around the UK have increased 
by 10cm during the 20th Century; and in 160 years 
of records, the 10 hottest years have all been  
since 1997. 

So what should we do? While we don’t know the 
exact nature of future change, it is only responsible 
for us to do our best to prepare both by reducing the 
level of greenhouse gas emissions, and by planning 
for the different climate that will result from our  
past emissions.

Doing this is at the heart of Defra’s role. As a Department, 
Defra is responsible for agriculture, forestry and land 
management. These sectors will be among the first  
to feel the effects of climate change, and they have  

a crucial role to play in reducing the country’s 
greenhouse gas emissions. We also need to keep our 
natural environment healthy and resilient, so that we 
and the economy can continue to benefit from what 
it gives us. 

Defra is already preparing for the impact of climate 
change. Defra has invested more in new and improved 
flood defences: so providing better protection for 
hundreds of thousands of homes.

Defra is also working to reduce emissions; 
greenhouse gas emissions from the waste sector 
alone have fallen by 57% since 1990.

So we are making progress, but there is much  
more to do.

This Plan sets out how Defra will continue to deal with 
the challenges and opportunities of climate change. 
This includes adaptation – working in Whitehall, with 
partners in Natural England, the Forestry Commission 
and the Environment Agency, and through a range  
of policies and practical steps. It explains what Defra 
is doing to support the country’s transition to a 
low-carbon economy, develop stronger scientific 
evidence, and develop better skills. 


4


Responding to climate change requires leadership  
and action by us all, and this Plan will help move  
us forward. 

The Rt Hon Hilary Benn MP, 
Secretary of State for Environment,  
Food and Rural Affairs

5Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Ministerial Foreword




Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Introduction 6

Defra’s Climate Change Plan

Introduction




Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Introduction 7

The challenge
Climate change is a huge challenge. Our climate is 
already changing, in the UK and around the World. 
The last ten years were the hottest decade ever 
recorded. As well as reducing our greenhouse  
gas emissions to mitigate future climate change, 
we will have to adapt to the climate change that 
is now in train. Even if global greenhouse gas 
emissions stopped completely tomorrow, the global 
temperature rise would still reach an estimated 1.4°C 
(over pre-industrial levels) by 2100 because of our 
past and present emissions. The global consequences 
for water, ecosystems, food supply, coastal regions, 
and public health will become more severe if 
emissions continue and temperatures keep rising.

Climate change is one of a range of global pressures 
that our generation will need to respond to if we 
want to secure and enhance our prosperity and quality 
of life. These include rising populations, the depletion 
of natural resources, and the degradation of our 
environment. We should not underestimate the scale 
of the challenge this poses to all parts of society – 
individuals, communities, businesses and Government. 
For example, the agriculture and land use sector is 
already responsible for roughly a third of the World’s 
emissions, and global emissions must be reduced by 
at least half by 2050 if we are to have even a 50% 
chance of keeping temperature rise to 2°C. The sector 
needs to reduce emissions urgently and do so whilst 

at the same time safeguarding the environment 
(which underpins our capacity to adapt) and satisfying 
rising demands for food and bioenergy.

Adaptation means learning to live with some 
climate change. It means protecting ourselves 
against negative impacts, and taking advantage of 
more positive aspects of climate change for some 
sectors – for example, agriculture.

Mitigation means minimising the extent of 
future climate change, by reducing the amount 
of greenhouse gases being emitted, and by 
maximising our ability to remove CO


2

 from the 

atmosphere – for example, through growth of forests.

Adaptation and mitigation

Natural systems support our way of life in 
ways that are not always visible but are 
valuable to us all. This might take the form of 
financial value or of other less tangible benefits, 
for example to our health and well-being. We  
are already eroding the “infrastructure” of these 
systems; pressures which are forecast to intensify 
with climate change.

•  the value to flood risk management of wetlands 
has been estimated at £1,279 per hectare per year. 

•  pollination supports food production in the UK 
to the value of £1bn per year.

•  soil erosion in England alone is estimated to cost 
the agriculture sector around £45m a year.

•  properly managed, urban green spaces can help 
us manage surface water flooding, filter 
pollution and cool the city air by up to 2°C.

• in 2002, water customers paid over £90m to 
remove nitrates and pesticides from drinking 
water sources.

•  increasing physical activity through universal 
access to quality green spaces could save the 
NHS around £2.1bn every year.

•  air pollution reduces the average life expectancy 
of people living in the UK by 6 months, at an 
annual cost of £15 billion (in the range  
£8-17 billion). 

In planning our response to the social and economic 
challenges posed by climate change we need to 
understand and capitalise on the crucial role played 
by the natural environment. Defra is committed  
to securing a diverse, healthy and resilient natural 
environment, which provides the basis for everyone’s 
well-being, health and prosperity now and in the 
future; and where the value of the services provided 
by the natural environment are reflected in 
decision-making.

The Natural Environment




We can overcome these challenges, but it will involve 
changes in the way we live and the choices we make. 
Change is inevitable. The choice we face is whether 
to ignore it and carry on as we have been or to plan 
ahead and manage the risks. If we bury our heads in 
the sand we won’t avoid change, but we will miss the 
opportunity to protect and sustain the things we 
value most.

Meeting the challenge
Reducing our emissions, and learning to live with 
climate change, both involve making choices about how 
to change. We know we must do both, and research 
has shown that making these choices together brings 
greater benefits than making them separately1. Often, 
the actions needed to adapt will be independent from 
those needed to mitigate. But sometimes the changes 
needed to adapt and mitigate will support each other, 
and sometimes they will come into conflict. It will be 
important to recognise the “win-wins”, and recognise 
and manage the tensions.

Some choices need to be made now. We need to  
cut emissions urgently, and we are building some 
infrastructure now which will still be around when  
the climate has changed significantly. Trees take  
a long time to reach maturity, so if we want more 
woodlands we need to act soon. Other choices won’t 
need to be made until later – for example, decisions 
about which crops to plant can be changed from 
season to season. But it’s important to know that 
these decision points are coming, so we aren’t caught 
by surprise. All of us in Government, business and 
civil society will need to build greater flexibility into 
our decision-making processes to enable us to 
respond to the changing context around us.

There are great uncertainties. We know climate change 
is happening, and we know we are causing it. But we 
don’t know exactly how sensitive our climate is: how 
much the World will warm, and what the other effects 
will be, for example on weather patterns and the 
acidity of the oceans. We know livestock and fertilisers 
create greenhouse gas emissions, but don’t know 
precisely how much. We know natural ecosystems are 
fundamental to our economic and social well-being,  
but we can’t yet value that contribution precisely.

Trees and woodlands can help us mitigate and 
adapt at the same time. Trees take carbon out 
of the atmosphere as they grow, and can lessen  
the impacts of climate change by providing shade, 
absorbing flood waters, improving water quality, 
and fighting soil erosion.

The Read Report, published in November 2009, 
presents an authoritative assessment of the 
contribution that UK woodlands can make.  
Its five recommendations are:

•  a clear need for more woodland.

•  the status quo is not an option: we need to  
adapt now.

•  UK woodlands are a resource to be managed 
wisely – they are a large store of carbon, 
vulnerable to pest and disease outbreaks and  
the effects of climate change.

•  the harvesting and use of wood from UK 
woodlands increases forestry’s potential 
contribution to mitigation.

•  trees and woodlands can help society to adapt.

Defra is committed to creating more woodlands in 
England, and to maximising their contribution to 
adaptation. Pages 39 to 42 and 101 to 103 set out 
the actions Defra is taking. 

Forestry: a “win-win” option 

1  OECD (2009) Economic Aspects of Adaptation to Climate Change: Integrated Assessment Modelling of Adaptation Costs and Benefits.  
Available at: http://puck.sourceoecd.org/vl=1186975/cl=17/nw=1/rpsv/workingpapers/19970900/wp_5ksm3715ql23.htm

8Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Introduction




It’s important to address these uncertainties, and Defra 
is playing its part. For example, Defra is funding research 
into the impacts of climate change, better measurement 
of greenhouse gas emissions, and valuation of 
ecosystem services.

But we can’t wait for all these answers before we 
have to make some choices, and we do know enough 
to start taking positive action now. To find the right 
actions to take now, and to start taking them, Defra’s 
strategy is guided by three principles:

1. Sustainable Development:  
Looking at the whole picture
Natural and man-made systems are often large, 
complicated, and highly interconnected – for example 
global ecosystems, or supply chains stretching across 

the World. Developing our understanding of the 
bigger picture is central to Defra’s approach.

When looking at how to protect or improve these 
systems, we cannot consider only a single part of  
the equation. We must keep in mind the range of 
economic, social, and environmental objectives which 
will ensure we can develop sustainably.

Defra’s approach is to:

• use the best evidence we can get to understand the 
bigger picture.

• consider all our objectives together.

• find ways to act which maximise positive impacts 
and minimise negative ones.

Tackling climate change is crucial to protecting 
our natural environment. Action on climate 
change also provides a major opportunity to improve 
the environment more widely, making our cities 
healthier and quieter, cutting our resource use and 
significantly reducing damage to the natural 
environment. Wherever feasible, the Government 
will make the most of measures which bring such 
wider benefits. However, in some cases trade-offs 
will have to be made. That may mean, for example, 
taking higher-cost measures on climate change to 
avoid creating problems for air quality. At the same 
time, the pressing need to tackle climate change 
may mean some environmental impacts cannot 
reasonably be avoided. In those cases, steps will  
be taken to minimise the effects.

Putting this approach into practice means,  
for example, increasing the use of bioenergy, but in 
a way which does not cause significant environmental 
or social damage at home or abroad, including to 
food security. To achieve this, the Government:

•  has established a reporting system on the 
sustainability of biofuels.

•  is pursuing an ambitious research strategy to 
inform policy.

•  is supporting the development of sustainable 
advanced (or next generation) biofuel technologies.

•  is negotiating in the European Union for robust 
sustainability standards.

•  is working through the Global Bioenergy 
Partnership for sustainability criteria and indicators.

It also means ensuring that a large increase in  
low carbon energy infrastructure can be delivered, 
while minimising its effects on the local environment. 
To achieve this, Defra, the Department of Energy 
and Climate Change (DECC), and the Department for 
Communities and Local Government (CLG) are:

•  working with Natural England (NE), the Environment 
Agency (EA) and other bodies to ensure statutory 
obligations are met and adverse environmental 
impacts are minimised, while ensuring more 
consistent, evidence based, and timely consenting 
decisions on renewable energy projects.

•  continuing to apply higher planning tests in National 
Parks and Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty.

Reducing greenhouse gas emissions sustainably 

9Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Introduction




2. Working in partnership
Meeting these challenges will need everyone to play 
their part. If everyone can see the bigger picture, they 
can work out how to make a difference. And people 
understand their own situation better than anyone else 
– for example, there is no “one size fits all” answer to 
adaptation because it depends on where you are and 
what you’re doing. So one aspect of Defra’s work is 

enabling everyone to understand the picture and their 
part in it, and supporting individuals, communities, and 
businesses to take action themselves.

2  Available at: http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/programme/

Red Rose Forest is an environmental and 
regeneration initiative for Greater Manchester 
and Salford, developed by a partnership 
including: Natural England, the Forestry 
Commission, the metropolitan boroughs of 
Bolton, Bury, Trafford and Wigan and the 
cities of Manchester and Salford, as well as 
United Utilities, a water company.

The Red Rose Forest Partnership run a Green Streets 
project which works with local people on activities 
like planting street trees, providing hanging baskets 
and planters, and creating communal green 
alleyways and living green walls. The project brings 
together residents, businesses and the public sector 
to promote the value of “green infrastructure”  
as a way of tackling a range of social, health and 
economic issues.

By giving local people the opportunity to get involved 
in the design of their scheme and helping residents 
to lead the consultation process, the project supports 
local communities to develop a new sense of 
ownership, and confidence that they can change 
their neighbourhoods for the better. The project 
addresses many of the environmental issues 
associated with climate change such as the heat 
island effect and air pollution, as well as providing  
a range of benefits to health and well being. 

Working in partnership:  
Red Rose Forest

Defra’s Adapting to Climate Change in England: 
a Framework for Action2 explains how Defra’s 
approach to adaptation is governed by the 
five principles of sustainable development:

Living within environmental limits:
•  to ensure any actions taken consider natural 

resources, biodiversity and whole ecosystems, 
and improve or enhance them wherever possible.

•  adaptation measures must not be carbon or energy 
intensive, but rely on more low-carbon, energy 
efficient and resource efficient technologies.

Ensuring a strong, healthy and just society:
•  place the wellbeing and health of people at  

the centre of adapting to climate change.

•  make sure that adaptation measures do not 
disproportionately affect any particular group.

Achieving a sustainable economy:
•  give businesses and organisations the 

information they need to adapt effectively, 
maximising opportunities and reducing threats.

Promoting good governance:
•  including empowering communities to influence 

adaptation and take appropriate action  
for themselves.

Using sound science responsibly:
•  to allow for flexibility and reflect the inherent 

uncertainty in planning for future climate change 
– scenarios are not predictions, and they will be 
affected by other uncertain events.

Adapting to climate  
change sustainably

Urban trees – Salford Triangle  
© Red Rose Forest and Dave Borrows

10Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Introduction




Defra leads the Government’s work towards  
a sustainable, secure, and healthy food supply. This 
includes making the food chain more resilient to climate 
change, and recognising that the ecosystem services 
provided by agricultural land are likely to be increasingly 
important to help cushion society from the effects of 

climate change. At the same time, emissions must  
be reduced – the greenhouse gas footprint of the UK 
food chain was 160 MtCO


2

e in 2006, about 22% 

of the emissions associated with all UK economic 
activity. This diagram shows the actions the Government 
is taking at each point in the food chain. 

Figure 1: Looking at the whole picture: the food chain

3 Available at: www.eatwell.gov.uk

Agricultural production
Taking “win-win” actions for adaptation and mitigation:

• Better fertiliser management to reduce emissions and water pollution from nutrient 
leaching (which climate change will make more likely);

• Improved efficiency of livestock production, including improved animal health,  
to deliver lower emissions per product.

Achieving these changes through:

• Industry Greenhouse Gas Action Plan;

• Improved advice on low-carbon farming;

• Carbon benefits from agri-environment schemes such as Environmental Stewardship.

Consumers
Improving consumer knowledge of the 
impacts of food choices, particularly 
through integrated information on the 
Eatwell website.3 

Reducing consumer food waste:

• Love Food, Hate Waste campaign;

• Better food date labelling and 
storage guidance;

• Distribution of home composting 
bins;

• Gathering evidence on consumer 
behaviour towards food.

International production
Production of palm oil is expanding, 
usually at the expense of rainforests in 
South East Asia. Defra is: 

• Leading a research project into UK palm 
oil consumption and supply chains;

• Funding work to develop a greenhouse 
gas standard for palm oil production.

Supply chain
Reducing food and packaging waste:

• The Courtauld Commitment;

• Packaging waste regulations;

• Food roadmaps for milk, fish,  
and other products.

Addressing adaptation in the UK Food 
Security Assessment.

Improving sustainability in public food 
procurement.

Supporting industry to improve 
resource efficiency.

International consumption
Defra and DfID are co-sponsoring the 
Foresight Global Food and Farming 
Futures study.

Encouraging application of anaerobic digestate in 
place of manufactured fertiliser or manure.

Wet winters will limit opportunities to spread 
manure on fields.

Waste disposal
Diverting food waste from landfill and encouraging 
composting/anaerobic digestion:

• Landfill tax escalator;

• Capital grants scheme for organic waste;

• Anaerobic digestion demonstration programme, 
and the AD Implementation Plan;

• Market incentives for energy-from-waste.

Adapting the sector to climate change:

• Produced joint Defra/Commission for 
Architecture and the Built Environment guidance 
on the design of waste facilities;

• Developing joint Defra/Office for Government 
Commerce guidance on incorporating 
adaptation into procurement decisions. 

Waste collection
Encouraging separate collections of food waste:

• Encouraging local authorities to pilot/improve 
food waste collections;

• Considering a legal “requirement to sort”.

The Environment Agency has developed an 
adaptation plan for the waste sector.

11Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Introduction




3. Dealing with uncertainty by staying flexible
Taking action doesn’t have to mean closing off options. 
Because of all the uncertainties, we shouldn’t gamble 
on any one future coming to pass.

Keeping our options open can simply mean not taking 
decisions now if we can take them later, when we will 
have more information at our disposal. But sometimes 
it’s important to take a decision now – putting it off 
will just mean the problem gets worse or the decision 
is taken for us. When a decision has to be taken now, 
it can be better to choose a path forward which leaves 
some room for manoeuvre later. As well as acting where 
necessary, a crucial part of Defra’s strategy is deploying 
analysis to reduce uncertainty for the future.

Working through the EU  
and internationally 
Climate change is a global problem, and the UK plays  
a leading role in the EU and internationally. The focus 
of this Climate Change Plan is on Defra’s work to reduce 
emissions and adapt to climate change within the UK. 
But Defra also looks at the whole international picture, 
and works with partners across the World (including 
through the UN and the EU), to deliver environmental 
objectives at home and overseas.

Copenhagen and the road ahead
The talks at Copenhagen did not deliver everything 
the UK would have liked, but there was significant 
progress. Key developing countries such as Brazil and 
Indonesia put forward emissions reduction targets for 
the first time. Countries agreed to “fast start” finance 
of up to 30 billion US dollars to 2012, and to set up  
a High Level Panel on Finance to work towards a fund 
worth 100 billion US dollars per year by 2020.  
Six countries (the UK, Australia, France, Japan, the US, 
and Norway) announced that their “fast start” 
contribution would include 3.5 billion US dollars for 
REDD (Reduced Emissions through Deforestation and 
Forest Degradation). The Prime Minister set out the need 
for 25 billion US dollars by 2015 to secure a 25% 
reduction in the rate of deforestation.

Thames Estuary 2100 (TE2100) is an Environment 
Agency project to develop a tidal flood risk 
management plan for the Thames Estuary to 
the end of this century. Using the latest climate 
change scenarios and models, and taking 
account of future sea level rise, the final plan 
will recommend what flood risk management 
measures will be required in the Estuary, 
where they will be needed, and when they 
will need to be in place.

The final plan will be flexible to ensure that it can 
be adapted if sea levels rise faster, or storm surges 
become more intense than anticipated. Preliminary 
findings show that the Thames Barrier, with some 
adaptation, will continue to provide protection 
through to the end of the century. However, by 
2070 there may be a need to improve many of the 
flood defence walls and embankments, and create 
new inter-tidal habitats to offset the impact of 
rising sea levels before 2030.

Staying flexible: the Thames 
Estuary 2100 project 

Thames Barrier – Part of the flood defence system that protects 
London against rising water levels and tidal surges.

12Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Introduction




The talks in Mexico this year will be very important for 
Defra’s international environmental objectives. Working 
closely with DECC, Defra’s international work focuses 
on forestry, agriculture, fluorinated gases, consumption 
and production, and the marine environment.

Forestry
The REDD negotiations are particularly important for 
Defra. They will determine global action on forestry for 
the next decade, including whether deforestation will 
be slowed or halted, and how forests will be managed, 
including to protect biodiversity. They also link directly 
to efforts to tackle illegal logging and the trade in other 
unsustainably produced commodities such as palm oil.

Agriculture
To support the global agricultural sector in facing the 
challenge to reduce emissions and adapt to climate 
change sustainably, Defra is:

• leading for the UK on working with international 
partners (including France, Germany, the US, and 
New Zealand) to secure United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 
agreement to a work programme on agriculture.

• supporting the Global Research Alliance on agricultural 
emissions, launched by New Zealand at Copenhagen.

• taking forward commitments made at the L’Aquila 
Summit and the World Summit on Food Security to 
support countries in developing their own strategies, 
including through the sustainable use of genetic 
resources for food and agriculture. 

• increasing investment in research and development, 
including through the Consultative Group on 
International Agricultural Research, and a new 
innovation platform bringing together the 
Government, business, and researchers to stimulate 
new technologies to increase production efficiency 
while decreasing environmental impacts.

Fluorinated gases (F-gases)
Defra has been working with DECC to push for an 
international agreement to progressively reduce the 
production and consumption of hydrofluorocarbons 
(HFCs). The UK will also play an active role in discussions 
relating to the EU Review of F-gas regulations over 
the next 18 months. 

Consumption and production
As well as actively negotiating Europe-wide minimum 
energy efficiency standards for energy-using products, 
Defra works internationally within the G8, the G20, 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), and 
the International Energy Agency (IEA) on a number of 
projects to raise the importance of product standards. 
Defra’s aim is to share knowledge, best practice, and 
market information about product performance to 
achieve a greater degree of harmonisation of standards 
globally in order to generate a stronger push for 
market transformation towards more efficient and 
sustainable products.

Defra supports the Department for International 
Development (DfiD) in achieving the Millennium 
Development Goals (MDG). Defra leads on MDG 7 
(environmental sustainability) – which includes 
targets on protecting the environment, reducing 
biodiversity loss, and reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions – and contributes to MDG 1 (food security). 

One of Defra’s objectives is to support the major 
emerging economies of Brazil, China, India, South 
Africa, and Mexico to develop sustainably. Defra’s 
Sustainable Development Dialogues with these 
countries include projects, many of which deliver 
climate change objectives. For example:

• working with the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests in India on natural resource management.

• working with Brazilian industry to reduce  
their emissions.

• promoting co-operation between the UK and 
China through the Sustainable Agriculture 
Innovation Network.

• assisting South Africa to enhance environmental 
protection through the “Green Scorpions” 
project.

• helping Mexico to develop a sustainable urban 
plan for the State of Nuevo Leon.

Sustainable international 
development

13Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Introduction




The marine environment 
The UK is taking a lead role in developing carbon 
capture and storage, and the North Sea provides 
significant capacity to store carbon dioxide beneath 
the seabed. Defra has been working with international 
partners under the OSPAR Convention and the 
London Protocol on marine pollution to ensure that 
the legal framework is in place for this important 
technology, providing a future for the North Sea 
industry while protecting the marine environment. 

Adaptation in the EU
The Government welcomed the EU White Paper on 
adaptation, published in April 2009, and is working 
closely with the EU Commission and other member 
states to take forward the proposals including the 
setting up of an EU Clearing House Mechanism  
and an Impacts and Adaptation Steering Group for 
sharing information on climate change impacts, 
vulnerabilities and best practice.

The impacts of climate change will vary across 
Europe, so adaptation will need to be carried out 
nationally or regionally. But there is a role for the EU 
to support and complement the work of member 
states. For example, the future climate must be taken 
into account in the EU’s own policies and programmes, 
research and evidence should be shared across the 
EU, and member states should work together to 
support adaptation outside Europe.

The next round of reform of the Common 
Agricultural Policy (CAP) is due to be 
completed by 2013. Protection and enhancement 
of the rural environment should have a central, 
rather than a peripheral role under a future CAP.  
In ensuring that the CAP is used in future to deliver 
public goods of European relevance, the Government 
will work to ensure that the strategic importance 
of climate change is adequately reflected in rural 
development and agri-environment policy.

Currently, Pillar 1 consists of expensive and untargeted 
subsidies. Pillar 1 needs to phased out through  
a carefully managed transition. 

Pillar 2 currently provides funding to improve the 
competitiveness of agriculture and forestry, protect 
and enhance the natural environment, encourage 
the cultivation of energy crops, and support wider 
rural development. The UK has alreadydemonstrated 
that schemes funded through Pillar 2 rural 
development programmes, such as agri-environment 
schemes, can play a positive role in climate change 
mitigation and adaptation. For example, under 
Environmental Stewardship, part of the Rural 
Development Programme for England (RDPE),  
a number of land management options are available 
that can contribute to climate change mitigation  
by either reducing greenhouse gas emissions or 
increasing carbon storage. This is alongside a number 
of existing and newly developed options that  
could contribute towards a more resilient  
natural environment.

The Government will work to strengthen the 
positive impact of these sorts of schemes, both 
domestically and across the rest of the EU. 

Addressing climate change 
through the EU Common 
Agricultural Policy

White sandy beach and sea – West Cornwall coast.

14Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Introduction




Executive Summary

Adapting to a changing climate
Defra’s overall purpose is to secure a healthy 
environment where we and future generations can 
prosper. Due to climate change, the speed and scale 
of future changes to our environment will present 
both threats and opportunities that we as a society 
will need to adapt to. At the same time, we rely  
on a healthy natural environment and the services  
it provides to support our economy and society  
in adapting. Defra is working to address these 
challenges, by coordinating a national programme  
of action to support all parts of society – individuals, 
businesses, Government and public authorities –  
to respond to the impacts of climate change.

In responding to the challenge of a changing climate, 
Defra has three clear priorities:

• securing the basics for human well-being.

• enhancing the resilience of ecosystems.

• building adaptive capacity.

Pages 20-87, which form Defra’s Adaptation Plan,  
set out the actions Defra is taking to understand and 
deal with the risks and take up the opportunities of 
climate change. Key actions include:

• encouraging other Departments, public bodies and 
businesses to adapt to the effects of a changing 
climate through the Adapting to Climate Change 
Programme (ACC), which is run by Defra.

• reducing wastage through the Floods and Water 
Bill, which will allow water companies to control 
non-essential uses of water during droughts.

• investing in flood and coastal erosion risk management 
to help meet the challenge of higher winter rainfall, 
rising sea levels and more frequent storm surges.

• gathering evidence on how we can protect as well 
as benefit from the services provided by our natural 
environment to help respond to climate change, 
through major ongoing research initiatives such as 
the National Ecosystems Assessment.

This document, Defra’s Climate Change Plan, sets out the actions Defra  
is taking, in the policy areas where it has influence, to meet the challenges  
posed by climate change.

15Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Executive Summary




• providing information to farmers and land 
managers about the threats and opportunities that 
climate change brings. The Farming Futures project 
provides a range of guidance and case studies  
on adaptation.

• encouraging greater use of green infrastructure 
to cool urban temperatures, reduce flood risk and 
connect wildlife habitats, including by supporting 
CLG to develop a new integrated natural environment 
Planning Policy Statement. 

Pages 72 to 77 set out how Defra is working to 
improve its capacity to identify and manage climate 
change opportunities and risks. For example, by:

• embedding adaption in key business processes such 
as risk management, procurement, horizon scanning 
and investment appraisal.

• developing leadership, accountability and awareness 
of climate change adaptation at all levels across  
the Department.

• improving the way that climate risks are identified, 
managed and scrutinised in Defra.

• enhancing Defra’s research base and the way 
that the Department manages evidence on  
climate change. 

Reducing greenhouse gas emissions
The Climate Change Act 2008 set in law a long-term 
target to reduce the UK’s emissions to 80% below 
1990 levels by 2050, and established the system  
of UK carbon budgets. The first three UK carbon 
budgets, capping UK emissions until 2022, were set 
at Budget 2009.

In July 2009, the Government published the UK Low 
Carbon Transition Plan4, which explained how the 
Government plans to meet the first three UK carbon 
budgets. The Transition Plan introduced the system of 
Departmental carbon budgets, giving each Department 
its own carbon budget – a share of the UK carbon 
budget – based on the level of influence it has over 
the different emissions-producing sectors of the 
economy. It also announced that every Department 
would publish a Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan 
setting out how its carbon budget will be met.

Defra has direct influence over emissions from several 
sources, including agriculture, land use, waste, 
fluorinated gases, and industrial chemical processes 
such as acid manufacture. Together, these sources 
total roughly 15% of the UK’s greenhouse gas 
emissions. Defra also develops policies which cut 
emissions across virtually every sector of the economy. 
These policies, including Defra’s work on the food 
chain, the water system, and sustainable patterns  
of consumption and production, play a vital role in 
meeting emissions targets by making our economy 
more sustainable and less resource-intensive.

16Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Executive Summary

4  Available at: http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/publications/lc_trans_plan/lc_trans_plan.aspx




Pages 88 to 127 set out the actions Defra is taking 
to meet its carbon budget. The key actions include:

• supporting the agricultural industry’s first 
Greenhouse Gas Action Plan, which aims to save 
English farmers money and reduce greenhouse  
gas emissions. Defra will have the Action Plan 
independently assessed to help ensure it is fit for 
purpose, and will support its delivery through 
a joint board, advice to farmers, and investment  
in improving evidence.

• a new Peat Framework for Action, which Defra 
will consult on later this year.

• encouraging woodland creation, through a number 
of measures, including establishing a Woodland 
Carbon Task Force and consulting on the potential 
for company greenhouse gas reporting guidance  
to encourage new investment.


010020030040050060070080002004006008001000




1200-20020406080100120140160180

2008200720062005200420032002200120001999199819971996199519941993199219911990

Waste management

Agriculture

Industrial processes

F-gases

LULUCF

Total

• extra emissions savings from products, where 
Defra is negotiating in the EU for new energy 
efficiency standards which should double the 
savings already achieved.

• further reducing emissions from waste, through 
a comprehensive plan, including a recently-launched 
consultation on placing restrictions on certain 
wastes going to landfill.

Pages 128 to 157 form Defra’s Carbon Reduction 
Delivery Plan and explain how Defra’s carbon budget 
is constructed, how Defra works with others to reduce 
emissions, the indicators which will be used to track 
progress, and the milestones in the years ahead.

Figure 2: Greenhouse gas emissions in Defra’s key policy areas have fallen by around 46% since 1990.

17Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Executive Summary




18Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Executive Summary

Defra’s own estates and operations
Defra continues to strive to operate more sustainably 
– to make its own contribution to the national effort, 
to learn from its experiences, and to set an example 
for others.

To adapt Defra’s estate, the Department is:

• identifying risks to its existing buildings – 172 sites 
across the Defra estate have already been surveyed 
to identify climate vulnerabilities and prioritise the 
work that is needed to address these risks.

• formally considering climate risks at the start of all 
new building and major refurbishment projects. 

• making sure that key IT and communications systems 
are resilient to current and future climate risks.

• embedding adaptation in its procurement 
processes, especially for new construction projects.

Defra has reduced its estates’ emissions by 18% since 
2005, over-achieving its Sustainable Operations on 
the Government Estate (SOGE) targets. The Department 
is putting in place a number of measures (such as the 
installation of biomass boilers) which will deliver at 
least 12% further reductions in emissions over the 
next three years. This would mean the Department 
would meet its SOGE emissions reduction target for 
2020 seven years early, in 2013. 

Native woodland planting at Giggleswick in the 
Yorkshire Dales National Park. With funding from the 
Forestry Commission, Yorkshire Dales Millennium Trust, 
Yorkshire Dales National Park Authority ©, Natural 
England, and private landowners 240 hectares of 
broadleaf woodland has been planted in the Yorkshire 
Dales National Park in the last 3 years, with a further 
100 hectares approved for 2010 




In 2008, Defra opened Lion House, a new,  
ultra-low emissions office building in Alnwick. 
The building achieved an Energy Performance 
Certificate (EPC) rating of A+ and has also won  
a number of prestigious awards which include 
being the first building in the UK to be awarded 
a BREEAM ‘Outstanding’ certificate.

Built to replace an office building that had become 
economically unviable, Lion House was designed to 
minimise emissions and maximise resource efficiency: 
a biomass boiler is capable of meeting 90% of 
heating demand; three 15kW wind turbines and  
a 120m² array of photovoltaic cells generate an 
estimated 75,000kWh of renewable electricity per 
year; and highly efficient insulation and lighting 
minimise energy and heat demand.

The new Lion House now produces only six tons  
of waste per month, 90% of which is recycled.  
This is a reduction in waste of 77% compared to the 
previous building.

A rainwater harvesting tank has reduced water 
consumption within the new building to 1.5 cubic 
metres per person per year, 50% lower than the 
SOGE target for water usage. 

Lion House, Alnwick

Defra’s Lion House building, at Alnwick

19Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Executive Summary

Oil seed rape.




Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 1. Adaptation plan: context 20

Defra’s Climate Change Plan

Adapting to 
climate change




Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 1. Adaptation plan: context 21

Adapting to climate change

1.  Adaptation plan: 
context

This part of the Climate Change Plan sets out how Defra 
is responding to the challenges and opportunities 
presented by climate change and how we are working 
to embed adaptation into the Department’s policies, 
programmes and systems. It provides a valuable 
opportunity to develop a conversation with our many 
stakeholders on the issues that are facing our key 
policy areas and how we can work together to ensure 
successful adaptation. It shows how the Department 
is growing its awareness and understanding, as well 
as making progress in identifying and assessing risks. 
And it provides information on our individual  
policy responses. 

Adapting to the changing climate across society and the economy is essential so that 
we can deal with the impacts of climate change already in train and those we can 
expect in the future. There will also be opportunities to take advantage of some  
more positive aspects of climate change in some sectors, for example, agriculture.  
If the Government, the wider public sector, private organisations and individuals 
prepare for future climate change now, necessary adaptation can be identified early, 
planned for, and undertaken in the most cost-effective and sustainable way.

Children learning about pond wildlife.




Defra’s policy areas
It is clear that, due to past emissions, we are already 
committed to 30-40 years of temperature rise and over 
100 years of sea-level rise. We need to be prepared for 
these changes, so all of us – individuals, businesses, 
government and public authorities – will need to adapt 
our behaviour to respond to the challenges of climate 
change. The Government has therefore established the 
Adapting to Climate Change Programme, led by Defra, 
to bring together the work already being initiated by 
Government and the wider public sector on adapting 
to climate change, and to coordinate and drive 
forward future work.

Defra’s core mission is to secure a healthy environment 
in which we and future generations can prosper.  
The environment we see around us, in our towns and  
cities as well as in the countryside, is a result of the 
interactions between humans and nature and it is 
constantly changing. Because of climate change,  
we expect the speed and scale of future changes to  
be unprecedented. This will present both threats and 
opportunities to which we as a society will need to 
adapt. This places successful adaptation to climate 
change at the heart of the Department’s agenda. 

Defra considers climate change to be a significant 
threat to all of its Departmental objectives:

• food, farming, and land management: the 
agriculture and land management sector plays an 
important role in the country’s economy, and covers 
75% of our total land area. Climate change could 
have a major impact on domestic patterns of 
production, crop yields, and, depending on the 
impact globally, the level and volatility of food 
prices. This could have a significant economic 

The UK Climate Projections 20095 show what the 
major changes to the UK’s climate are likely to 
be on the basis of three different greenhouse 
gas emissions pathways. Whilst there is inherent 
uncertainty within the Projections, there is enough 
certainty that the climate is changing due to human 
emissions that we need to act now. 

Broadly speaking, we can characterise the projected 
changes as warmer and wetter winters, hotter and 
drier summers, sea level rise, and more extreme 
weather events. Based on a ‘medium emissions’ 
pathway, which according to the Climate Change 
Committee (CCC) is the one that the World is 
currently most closely following, we could see average 
summer temperature increases in the South East of 
England, of 3.9°C by the 2080s. At the same time we 
could see a 22% decrease in average summer rainfall 

in the South East and an increase of 16% in average 
winter rainfall in the North West by the 2080s, with 
increases in the amount of rain on the wettest days. 
These may turn out to be under-estimates: global 
emissions could be higher, with more severe 
consequences. Or, through concerted international 
action, we could put the World on a lower emissions 
pathway, resulting in less damaging change.

The potential impacts of these changes include 
increased water stress, increased risk of flooding 
and heat waves, and faster coastal erosion.  
These impacts could have consequences across  
the country; for example, by posing risks to the 
functioning of critical infrastructure such as energy, 
transport and water systems, or by posing risks to 
public health or the natural environment. 

Climate change impacts

5 Available at: http://www.ukcip.org.uk/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=163&Itemid=293

22Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 1. Adaptation plan: context




impact. Increases in pests and diseases may also 
threaten our woodlands, forestry production, crop 
and animal health.

• the natural environment: changes to our climate 
will impact on our wildlife and the habitats they  
rely on. Some of our cherished landscapes could 
change beyond recognition, and some species will 
face a struggle for survival. But a healthy natural 
environment is also key to climate change resilience 
and we have to ensure that natural processes within 
the environment can function effectively.

• the quality and supply of water: pressures such 
as demographic change, and climate change mean 
that we need to find ways of using water much more 
efficiently and sustainably if we are to continue to 
enjoy current levels of security and quality of supply. 
The South East and East of England already face 
increasing demand on finite water availability. 
Through climate change, droughts are likely to  
be more common.

• the marine environment: our understanding 
of the potential impacts of temperature changes 
and ocean acidification is still developing, but we 
recognise that the consequences for marine and 
coastal biodiversity could be significant.

• management of risks from flooding and coastal 
erosion: flood events are likely to become more 
severe and frequent with climate change. This will 
present greater risks to communities and infrastructure 
and higher costs of managing flood and coastal 
erosion risk.

These risks, and the policy and practical responses  
to them, are all interconnected and we need to 
ensure that we work in a way which reflects this.  
The resources and services that we receive from our 
environment cannot be adequately understood in 
isolation from one another. We will be able to find 
more efficient and effective solutions to the challenges 
posed by a changing climate if we consider individual 
parts of the system, such as water or biodiversity, 
agriculture and landscape as components of a greater 
whole (the ‘whole systems’ approach).

A robust and well-prioritised strategy is needed to 
understand these risks and deliver further progress. 
We are committed to research in many areas to  
learn more about the impacts of climate change on 
the natural environment and key sectors. We are 
assessing the risks to our objectives in all areas and 
looking at the action we can undertake with our 
partners to increase the long-term resilience to  
a changing climate of these vital resources.

The ACC Programme is currently undertaking  
the groundwork for a National Adaptation 
Programme to be put in place in 2012. 

This phase of work involves:

• developing a more robust and comprehensive 
evidence base about the impacts and 
consequences of climate change on the UK.

• raising awareness of the need to take action 
now and help others to take action.

• working across Government to embed 
adaptation into Government policies, 
programmes and systems.

• measuring success and taking steps to ensure 
effective delivery.

Further information is available at: http:// 
www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/index.htm

The Adapting to  
Climate Change Programme

23Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 1. Adaptation plan: context




Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 1. Adaptation plan: context

Defra’s priorities
In responding to the challenge of a changing climate, 
Defra has 3 clear priorities:

• securing the basics for human well-being: 
as a country, we have rightly come to expect some 
of the highest quality food and water in the World.  
We are working to provide cleaner, fresher air to 
breathe and a natural environment that everyone 
can thrive in. Climate change reinforces the 
importance of valuing our precious natural 
resources more effectively, using them wisely and 
taking responsibility for their protection.

• enhancing the resilience of ecosystems: climate 
change is the most serious long term threat to the 
natural environment and human well-being, but  
at the same time our natural environment is our 
greatest asset: the basis on which we can build  
a future in a rapidly changing climate. Ecosystems 
provide the services that clean our air and water, 
and give us food, medicines, energy, and raw 
materials. They regenerate soils and pollinate  
crops, regulate the climate, cool cities; and help  
to control floods. Defra recognises the importance  
of enhancing the resilience of ecosystems, and of 
working effectively with natural processes to offer 
protection from climate change to homes, 
infrastructure, livelihoods, and human life.

• building adaptive capacity: we are working to 
enhance capacity to assess and manage climate 
change risks – across the Department, with our  
key partners in Natural England, the Environment 
Agency and the Forestry Commission, and with 
those sectors of the economy (including water, 
food, farming and fisheries) that the Department  
is responsible for. In doing so, our focus is on 
providing leadership, raising awareness, building 
partnerships, enhancing the evidence base, and 
embedding adaptation within key decision-making 
processes and operations (such as estates 
management and procurement).

This adaptation plan sets out how the Department is 
working to implement these priorities in practice.Key adaptation principles

Many of our key operations, policies, 
investments and buildings will be directly  
or indirectly affected by a changing climate. 
Defra needs to consider the risks and opportunities 
involved and take account of good adaptation 
principles in developing its responses:

•  any adaptation action needs to be sustainable. 
This means that our responses should not add  
to climate change, or limit the ability of other 
parts of the natural environment, society or 
business to carry out adaptation elsewhere.  
Our responses must avoid any detrimental 
impacts on other parts of society, the economy 
or the natural environment.

•  action should be flexible. Although there is still 
uncertainty over the future climate, we need to 
consider options now and make decision that 
maximise future flexibility – in many cases it is 
failure to take decisions that locks us into 
inflexible pathways.

•  action should be evidence-based – making full 
use of the latest research, data and practical 
experience (including the UK Climate Projections 
2009) so that decision-making is well-supported 
and informed.

•  our response to climate impacts should be 
prioritised – for example, by focusing more 
attention on policies, programmes and activities 
that are most affected by the weather and 
climate, those which have long timescales for 
implementation or long-term implications, where 
significant investment is involved or high values 
are at stake, or where support for national 
infrastructure is involved. 

•  adaptation measures should be effective 
(reducing the risks from climate change without 
introducing perverse effects), efficient (the long-
term benefits of adaptation actions should 
outweigh the costs), and equitable (the effects 
of the activity on different groups should be taken 
into account and where the costs should fall).


24

Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 1. Adaptation plan: context

The rest of this part of the plan is structured  
as follows:

• sections 2-6 discuss why climate change is crucial 
to the key policies and programmes that Defra is 
responsible for, and highlights a range of short- to 
medium-term actions required for moving forward.

• sections 7 discusses how Defra is continuing 
to develop its capacity to assess and manage 
climate risks and. 

• sections 8 summarises our response and sets out 
an action plan.

Mountain bikers enjoying the open view of the countryside.


25

Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 2. Food, farming and land management

Adapting to climate change

2.  Food, farming and 
land management

Climate change is a new long-term challenge that 
farmers and land managers will need to respond to.  
It is one of a range of pressures which may require 
greater flexibility within the farming sector; for 
example, changes to global markets, technological 
development, new and more efficient farming 
practices, and different working practices. The sector 
must respond effectively to this range of economic, 
social and environmental pressures or face the risk 
that agricultural productivity and profitability could 
increasingly lag behind the rest of the economy and 
that of international competitors. 

2.1 The global food chain
It is vital to address the impacts of climate change on 
the food system, particularly as globally we will need to 
feed a growing population with diminishing resources. 

We need to adapt the food system to the unavoidable 
climatic changes that are already happening and to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions to avoid more 
dangerous environmental effects. The UK enjoys  
a relatively high level of food security today, but we 
cannot be complacent. We need a better understanding 
of the impacts of increasing demand, the effects of 
climate change, new pressures on land and high 
energy prices.

This chapter covers the interconnected subjects of food, agriculture, plant and animal 
health, soils and forestry. Agriculture and associated land uses cover around 75% of the 
UK and provide a wide range of environmental, social and economic benefits to society 
– with an influence that goes well beyond their primary purpose of producing food and 
non-food crops. These benefits include employment and other contributions to thriving 
rural communities; essential environmental processes such as water cycling and purification, 
maintaining air quality, reducing soil erosion and flooding, carbon storage and climate 
regulation; habitats for wild flora and fauna; and land for recreation. The adaptation 
strategies for these areas therefore need to be closely interconnected with the issues 
addressed in the other sections of this document, in line with the whole systems 
approach set out in the Context section above.


26

Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 2. Food, farming and land management 27

Food Chain: risks, opportunities and impacts 
of climate change

Hotter, drier 
summers 
and warmer, 
wetter 
winters

Longer growing seasons and less 
summer rainfall could lead to a 
change in what and how much,  
is produced and where.

Warmer climate may give rise to 
different levels of demand for types 
of food, which may affect either 
our trade in foods or UK food 
production/land use.

Drought Climate driven market pressures to 
increase production could lead to 
unsustainable farming practices.

Lower availability of water for 
intensive food processing.

May affect the level and volatility of 
food prices, both domestically and 
on global markets.

Increased 
incidence  
of extreme 
weather 
events

Short-term risks of disruption to 
food production and distribution 
from severe weather events may 
become more common.

Short-term impacts on the national 
infrastructure on which food chain 
relies i.e. energy and fuel, potable 
water service, transport, distribution 
and logistics networks, etc.

Policy and Practical Responses
The UK Food Security Assessment, updated in 
January 2010, is a mechanism for assessing the 
challenges and risks facing UK food security, our 
current understanding of the state of our food 
supplies, and how we plan to continue to deliver 
sufficient, safe and nutritious food for the UK.  
The impacts of climate change will be monitored 
under all of the Assessment’s theme areas:

• global availability: risks to harvests worldwide, 
e.g. from drought or pests, leading to potentially 
volatile supplies and prices. Increasing global 
temperatures are likely to result in complex  
changes to food production worldwide.

• global resource sustainability: increased stress 
on natural resources (particularly water) and 
biodiversity threatening productivity in various 
regions of the World.

• UK availability and access: UK food availability 
is driven by global supply chains and domestic 
agriculture.

• UK food chain resilience: more frequent extreme 
weather events testing business continuity planning 
and infrastructure resilience, including agricultural 
land availability and use. 

• household food security: climate change could 
lead to rising food prices.

• safety and confidence: in hotter weather we may 
need to increase refrigeration to keep food safe. 
Any failures to keep food sufficiently chilled could 
potentially increase cases of food poisoning.

The Government’s Food Strategy, Food 2030, 
sets out the future challenges for the food industry. 
The impacts of climate change on food production, 
globally and in the UK, could range from changes to 
and loss of farmland to opportunities to grow new 
crops. The food system and its supply chains will need 
to be ready for these changes, while meeting 
increasing demand.




A priority in Food 2030 is a resilient food system 
– one which can withstand, or recover quickly from, 
sudden shocks. These can be financial – such as 
commodity price spikes; caused by natural disasters 
such as floods; or caused by disruption to fuel supply. 
As outlined in the section on Agriculture below,  
an essential element of ‘food security’ will be to 
maintain the long term health of natural ecosystems 
that food production depends on despite the 
challenge of future climate change.

2.2 Agriculture
Climate change will affect, directly or indirectly, all of 
the important benefits that agricultural land provides 
to society. Agricultural systems and the ecosystem 
services they provide are very vulnerable to changes  
in climate and are among the first to feel the effects. 
Many of the likely pressures are not new but will  
be exacerbated and accelerated by climate change. 
The effects will be felt differently, and over different 
timescales, in different regions of the country and  
by different agricultural sectors. Therefore action to 
ensure agriculture can build resilience and adapt,  
now and in the future, is crucial, and sustainable 
adaptation by agricultural systems will be a key part 
of our overall national response to climate change.

Policy and Practical Responses
Our objective is to maintain, and enhance where 
possible, the wide range of social, environmental and 
economic benefits that agricultural systems provide to 
society. Defra’s departmental strategic objective –  
“to achieve ‘a thriving food and farming sector with 
an improving net environmental impact” – envisages 
by 2020 an English farming sector which is profitable 
in the marketplace; continuing to produce the majority 
of the food we consume; making a positive net 
environmental contribution; and managing the 
underlying landscape and natural assets. 

Farm businesses exist in a complicated and changing 
risk environment, including:

• production risks such as pests and diseases 
(animal and plant), and weather effects. 

• market risks such as volatility in the costs of inputs 
and the price of outputs. 

• finance risks such as variability of interest rate or 
value of financial assets and availability of credit. 

• institutional risks, including trade issues such 
as import bans/restrictions by other countries,  
or regulatory changes that can affect costs  
or returns.

1. Defra and DfID are jointly sponsoring a Foresight 
study on Global Food and Farming Futures, which 
will include consideration of key climate impacts 
on the global food system up to 2050. An action 
plan will be published, along with a detailed final 
report in Autumn 2010. We will review progress  
in 2011. 

2. Defra will make further information available 
through the UK Food Security Assessment, and 
review risks as new evidence becomes available. 
We will actively monitor the climate risks to harvests 
and the potential for more volatility in supplies and 
prices, as well as new animal disease and food 
safety risks. 

3. The Government will continue to work with  
the food industry to promote business continuity 
planning and resilience to flooding and other 
climate threats. Major food retailers and trade 
associations have been invited to report to the 
Government in 2011 on key climate risks affecting 
their operations and the steps they are taking to 
address them (under the statutory Adaptation 
Reporting Power).

D  THE GLOBAL FOOD 
CHAIN ACTIONS 

28Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 2. Food, farming and land management




Agriculture: risks, opportunities and impacts 
of climate change

Hotter, drier 
summers 
and warmer, 
wetter 
winters

Some increased yields and less 
frost; reduced quality and yield  
of some current crops.

Opportunity to grow new crops 
(e.g. olives and apricots) or existing 
crops further north (e.g. vines).

Heat stress of livestock and  
farm workers.

Increased losses to pests  
and disease.

Changes to wild plant and animal 
communities on farmland.

Drought Loss of pastures.

Lack of water for crops  
and livestock.

Decreased flow to rivers  
and groundwater.

Reduction in crop yield.

Increased risk of fire.

Increased 
incidence  
of extreme 
weather 
events

Increased soil erosion and  
water pollution.

Disruption of farming activities.

Increased recharge of water 
courses and stores.

Storm and flood damage.

Sea level 
rise 

Reduced water supply, salinisation 
of land.

Changes to coastal habitat and loss 
of land.

Climate change will exacerbate many of these risks and 
increase the probability and impacts of shocks to the 
industry which will challenge its resilience. It represents 
an additional important pressure – on top of ongoing 
pressure for farm size and structures to adjust in order 
to facilitate the move to a more efficient and productive 
farming sector. While there are likely to be opportunities 
offered by climate change, particularly in the short-
term, the negative impacts of climate change are likely 
to increasingly outweigh any benefits. For both these 
reasons, it will be in farmers’ own best interests to 
adapt in order to strengthen resilience and maintain  
a competitive industry. 

Change is inevitable and it is likely that landscapes  
will look different, ecosystems will change, and so will 
farming practices, along with what farmers produce, 
and where and when they produce it. Action to adapt 
will be essential – but such action (in agriculture, as in 
all sectors) must be sustainable. This means taking a 
‘whole systems’ approach and addressing agricultural 
production, conservation of the natural environment, 
and social and economic benefits in an integrated way.

The timing and consequences of climate change are 
hard to predict, so adaptation by the sector will need  
to follow a flexible pathway. The first steps to adapt  
are likely to be small and should benefit both farmers 
and society whatever the scale and type of future 
climate impacts. These will allow us to build resilience 
gradually; benefitting from lower costs and less 
disruption to business in the long run; and preparing 
for a range of possible future impacts which, over time, 
may require more significant transformational changes.

Hen houses to provide shade for free range birds in hotter summers

29Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 2. Food, farming and land management




Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 2. Food, farming and land management

Identifying priority actions
Implementing measures to build resilience and adapt 
to climate change will require action by individual 
farmers and agricultural organisations, by central and 
local Government, and by delivery bodies such as the 
Environment Agency and Natural England. Since 
2008, Defra has been working with Natural England, 
the Environment Agency and the Forestry Commission 
on a project to identify a range of priority adaptation 
actions that can reduce vulnerability to climate risks 
and have multiple benefits for agricultural production, 
ecosystems and mitigation. 

The priority actions that farmers and land managers 
should consider now, to manage risks and help plan 
for the future, are those:

• that will increase resilience to likely pressures, 
(actions such as improving water efficiency, or more 
careful use of fertiliser and pesticides).

• that also address climate change mitigation (actions 
such as reducing soil erosion, reducing fertiliser use, 
planting trees). 

• whose benefits require a long time to come to 
fruition (actions such as planting trees). 

• which are sustainable, and have significant multiple 
objectives, benefitting both agriculture and wider 
society (these include in particular a range of  
land management actions that create ‘green 
infrastructure’ that will provide important services 

such as alleviating flooding, maintaining carbon 
stores, and protecting water supplies (see pages 50 
to 53 on green infrastructure and the text box on 
page 44 on the role of land management in helping 
society and the environment to adapt). 

• that improve ability to cope with extreme events 
(such as flood management plans). 

• that will make their businesses more efficient 
and productive. 

Actions that are in response to more gradual changes 
in climate, such as changing or diversifying crop and 
livestock varieties, can be introduced over longer 
timescales. Action will be needed at different scales, 
for example: individual farms changing crops 
independently; farmers co-operating to share 
information and develop joint contingency plans for 
extreme events such as floods or fires; managing 
water resources at a catchment scale; and wider-scale 
monitoring and management of disease outbreaks. 

A recent survey by Farming Futures indicates  
a reasonably high level of awareness among farmers 
of the effects of climate change: over half of farmers 
believe that climate change is having an effect on 
their farm now; over 60% believe it will have an 
effect in the next decade; and nearly a third are 
already taking action to adapt to the impacts of 
climate change.

Lavender


30

Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 2. Food, farming and land management

Figure 3: Some adaptation actions that could be taken by agriculture. (To allow inclusion in 
the illustration some structures are shown closer together than they might ideally be situated.) 


31Changes to crops Diversification of crops grown (eg. olives, grapes) to make the most of longer growing seasons and reduced frost. Changes to existing varieties, planting and harvest times to cope with hotter, drier summers. Land management Improved land management to prevent soil erosion and ensure drainage can cope with increased rainfall eg. by planting trees and creating sustainable drainage such as porous surfaces and ponds. Livestock management Trees planted to provide shade for animals, act as a source of renewable fuel, windbreaks and provide woodland habitat. Improved livestock housing to cope with warmer summers (reducing heat stress in animals) and wetter winters (keeping livestock off wet soils to reduce erosion). River and flood plain Rivers given space in which to flood (at farm and catchment level), with buffer strips of grass, trees and/or shrubs created next to watercourses to reduce pollution during heavy rainfall and serve as habitats for wildlife. Crop and water storage Improved facilities for storing and drying crops to cope with increased or new pests and wet conditions. Rain water captured and stored for use around the farm. Farm shop/cafe Shop to sell home grown produce, raise public awareness of sustainable farming, and cafe to take advantage of increased domestic tourism. Combined heat and power plant Combined heat and power plant used to save money, reduce emissions and increase energy security. Powered by wood grown on the farm and used to heat neighbouring crop storage facility. FUTURE OPPORTUNITIES FOR FARMINGThe Adapting to Climate Change Programme has developed a series of images to show what a well-adapted world might look like by the 2030s. Developed with stakeholders, this illustration shows a range of priority adaptation measures which may help farm businesses to address some of the key risks and opportunities of climate change. These will not be relevant in all cases, and will depend on the location and circumstances of a particular farm. To allow inclusion in the illustration some features are shown closer together than they might ideally be situated. Improved  technology Advances in technology will enable farmers to apply pesticides and fertilisers only where needed, improving efficiency and reducing pollution from increased rainfall.

Working in partnership to provide advice  
and support
Defra works closely in partnership with delivery agencies, 
agricultural organisations such as the National Farmers 
Union (NFU) and Country Land and Business Association 
(CLA), and wider stakeholders through the Rural 
Climate Change Forum (RCCF), to address climate 
change. The Campaign for the Farmed 
Environment (CFE) is an example of a unique new 
partnership between industry, environmental groups 
and the Government, which aims to encourage farmers 
and land managers to voluntarily adopt important 
land management practices that will benefit the 
environment, such as joining the Entry-Level element 
of Environmental Stewardship. The CFE has agreed to 
meet a number of stretching national targets by 2012, 
to benefit biodiversity, farm wildlife and resource 
protection. Many of the measures – such as retaining 
un-cropped land, putting in buffer strips and using 
fewer inputs such as fertilisers – will help build 
resilience to climate change.

A key aspect of all these partnerships is the provision 
of information and advice to farmers, through a number 
of mechanisms some of which are funded by Defra. 
For example:

• advice and guidance is an integral part of cross 
compliance and agri-environment schemes  
(see page 34). 

• the industry-led initiative Farming Futures 
encourages action on adaptation as well as 
mitigation, while other bodies already offer 
information on adaptation, such as sectoral 
roadmaps for milk, beef and sheep.

• the Rural Climate Change Forum (RCCF) brings 
together industry, non-governmental organisations 
and Government bodies, to provide a forum for 
dialogue with, and advice to, Government. It also aims 
to provide advice, awareness raising and leadership for 
rural stakeholders, and identify research.6 A Defra – 
RCCF stakeholder workshop, Agricultural Adaptation 
to Climate Change – Meeting the Challenges to 2020 
and Beyond, was held in December 2009 to inform 
this section of the plan. 

Defra and its agencies are already working with the 
farming industry to ensure that targeted training, 
tools and advice reach farmers on how best to tackle 
the challenge of both mitigating and adapting to 
climate change – through existing mechanisms such as 
the Farm Advisory Systems, agri-environment schemes, 
Farming Futures, the Rural Climate Change Forum and 
the industry-led Agri-Skills Forum – and we will aim to 
enhance these services, including exploring the scope 
for demonstrating best practice to farmers. 

Many existing and planned Government policies and 
programmes already contribute to building resilience  
to climate change, even where adaptation is not the 
primary purpose. In particular, cross compliance 
standards, which farmers must meet to receive their 
Single Farm Payments (around £1.5 billion annually), 
and agri-environment schemes (£168m spent on  
Entry Level Stewardship (ELS)/Organic Entry Level 
Stewardship (OELS); and £54m spent on Higher Level 
Stewardship (HLS) in 2008/09) indirectly or directly  
help farmers and land managers to deal with climate 
change (see text box on the Rural Development 
Programme for England (RDPE) on page 34). Other 
supportive domestic legislation includes Animal 
Welfare legislation, Environmental Impact Assessment 
regulations, the England Catchment Sensitive Farming 
Initiative and the Flood and Water Management Bill 
currently before Parliament. At the EU level, legislation 
such as the Water Framework and Nitrates Directives 
also help with adaptation of agriculture.

6  Chaired by Dr John Gilliland (representing the Sustainable Development Commission): the other members of the Forum are Defra, the NFU, CLA, 
AIC, the Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board, Carbon Trust, Environment Agency, Forestry Commission, National Trust, Natural 
England, and RSPB.

32Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 2. Food, farming and land management




In 1998, Edward Thompson of Pixley Court Farm 
in Herefordshire realised that his blackcurrant 
crop was being affected by climate change. 
Soft fruit are particularly vulnerable to heat and rain, 
and berries rely on the “chill factor” in winter to 
produce a healthy crop. By researching varieties in 
other countries, he developed a breeding programme 
and the “Pixley Black” was born. This new blackcurrant 
variety can not only survive a longer growing season 
with warmer, wetter winters and hotter drier summers, 
it produces an intensely flavoured juice as well.  
He also made a range of other changes that will 
help increase the farm’s resilience to climate change. 
Winter water storage has been increased to allow 
for hot dry summers. Weather stations are used to 

monitor the onset of the growing season and of 
winter, which helps determine when to carry out 
activities such as harvesting. Low pressure vehicles 
have been brought in to protect the soil and plant 
roots during the expected warmer, wetter winters. 
Edward has also managed to reduce the amount of 
pesticides used, improving water quality, through 
promoting biodiversity in coppices, woodland and 
fields, which has led to an increase in pest-eating 
wildlife, from barn owls and woodpeckers, to bats, 
beetles and lacewings. Edward says that without 
adapting he would have been out of work due to 
crop failure, and his success has brought new 
business relationships, proving that ‘climate friendly’  
business is good business.

Pixley Berries

Pixley Berries © at Pixley Court, Herefordshire

33Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 2. Food, farming and land management




The RDPE is a wide-reaching programme 
providing funding for agriculture and forestry 
businesses, environmental land management, 
energy crops and wider rural development. It 
is funded jointly by Defra and the EU under Pillar 2 
of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP). Climate 
change is an EU-wide priority for Pillar 2 expenditure 
and the current programme makes a contribution  
to both mitigation and adaptation.

The majority of funds under the RDPE are spent  
on environmental land management through 
agri-environment schemes such as Environmental 
Stewardship. Climate change (mitigation and 
adaptation) is an overarching objective of 
Environmental Stewardship; this is one of our most 
important tools to increase the resilience of habitats, 
species and ecosystems. 

There are already over 58,000 agri-environment 
agreements in place with land managers (covering 
nearly 67% of agricultural land in England). Whilst 
many of the existing agreements contribute to 
mitigation and adaptation, the roll-out of the new 
round of agreements from July 2010 will offer the 
opportunity to expand the scope and extent of 
helpful measures. Encouraging farmers to join the 
scheme is a key part of the Campaign for the 
Farmed Environment. The Government along with 

agencies and farming groups, will develop training 
and information to further encourage farmers to 
take up measures which contribute to adaptation, 
alongside other objectives such as biodiversity and 
resource protection. 

In addition, adaptive actions, such as improved water 
efficiency, can be supported under other parts of 
the programme which provide funding to help the 
competitiveness of land management businesses 
and for wider rural development. These are 
administered by Regional Development Agencies 
(RDAs) which appraise all funding applications 
under the Programme using a nationally approved 
framework to ensure they promote sustainable 
development which is resilient to climate change.

The Leader Approach is implemented through Local 
Action Groups and focuses on small-scale projects, 
several of which are aimed at supporting adaptation, 
such as the Cheviot Futures project in Northumberland 
which aims to provide practical real-world solutions 
to the challenges our communities face due to the 
effects of climate change. For example, a training 
event was organised in November 2009 to provide 
farmers in Northumberland with the opportunity to 
see modern irrigation techniques and water storage 
reservoirs in action.

The Rural Development Programme for England (RDPE)  
contribution to Climate Change Adaptation

Research and Development
Defra will continue to undertake research and 
development through ongoing programmes In 
2009/10 Defra has committed £64m on agricultural 
R&D, including research on climate change mitigation 
and adaptation. Defra will contribute to the first 
Climate Change Risk Assessment, ensuring that  
it reflects the needs of the agricultural sector by 
considering how UKCP09 climate projections can be 
used alongside relevant research, and the work of 
partnerships such as Farming Futures and the Rural 
Climate Change Forum. 

In December 2009, the Secretary of State confirmed 
UK participation in the Global Research Alliance on 
agricultural greenhouse gas emissions, which will 
provide a mechanism for sharing research findings, 
including synergies between mitigation and 
adaptation, between participating countries.

2.3 Plant health and animal health  
and welfare
Climate change is likely to significantly change how 
agriculture in this country, both arable and livestock, 
will develop. There will be new impacts to manage for 
both plant health and for animal health and welfare.

34Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 2. Food, farming and land management




2.3.1 Animal Disease
Changes to ecosystems and habitats, trade, land use, 
how livestock are fed and reared, as well as factors 
such as changes in demand for, or availability of, 
food, feed availability, and prices for livestock, have 
the potential to rapidly change practices, as farmers 
respond to economic pressures and opportunities. 
This will affect the type and incidence of animal 
diseases. These need to be considered and anticipated, 
alongside longer term changes driven by climate 
change which will further complicate the rise of 
diseases in the UK.

Animal Health: risks, opportunities and 
impacts of climate change

Hotter, drier 
summers and 
warmer, 
wetter winters

New and different animal 
diseases; changes in incidence  
of existing diseases

2.3.2 Policy and Practical Responses
Our approach is to use the structures, ways of 
working and contingency plans already in place  
to deal with disease threats and outbreaks. We 
continuously review our contingency plans to make 
sure they remain as effective as possible and are 
preparing for every eventuality, so that we can 
anticipate likely changes in disease threats at an  
early stage and manage such risks proactively whilst 
encouraging livestock keepers to adapt and allow 
agriculture and food production to thrive. 

4. During 2010, Defra will build on existing project 
work with NE, EA and the Forestry Commission  
on priority adaptation measures for agriculture 
through further analysis of barriers to action, costs 
and benefits, and identification of research priorities 
and gaps.

5. During 2010, Defra will work with industry 
partners to explore the potential to support and 
encourage further voluntary adaptation action by 
farmers, including by enhancing existing advice 
and guidance arrangements.

6. From Spring 2010, 15 new or revised options 
are available under Environmental Stewardship that 
can help farmers to adapt to a changing climate. 
These include options that provide landscape 
benefits, make farming businesses more resilient, 
and that will enable habitats and species to adapt.

7. Protection and enhancement of the rural 
environment should have a central, rather than  
a peripheral role under a future Common 
Agricultural Policy (CAP). In ensuring that the CAP 
is used in future to deliver public goods of European 
relevance, we will work to ensure that the strategic 
importance of climate change is adequately 
reflected in rural development and agri-
environment policy.

D AGRICULTURE ACTIONS 

35Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 2. Food, farming and land management




Risk assessment is the basis for our response to 
mitigate disease threats. A horizon scanning team 
continually assesses disease threats to the UK and 
publishes qualitative risk assessments.7 As a result of 
such horizon-scanning, preparedness for bluetongue 
disease was ramped up before the disease arrived in 
the UK in 2007. We are enhancing the way we work 
to identify and assess disease threats (including those 

influenced by climate factors) and escalate more 
significant risks so that proactive action can be taken to 
manage them. A Veterinary Risk Group has been set 
up in Defra to consider information and intelligence 
about disease risks and ensure that they are addressed 
appropriately and quickly.

7  Available at: http://www.defra.gov.uk/foodfarm/farmanimal/diseases/monitoring/index.htm

Although there is currently insufficient evidence 
to say that bluetongue disease arrived in the 
UK in 2007 as a consequence of climate change, 
it was among a number of diseases that had 
been identified by horizon-scanning as a risk 
that may increase as the result of a changing 
climate. Our response to the threat of bluetongue 
shows how we would respond to future disease 
threats that may be a consequence of climate 

change. By investing in research and surveillance 
of exotic diseases before bluetongue arrived in 
the UK, in September 2007, Defra already had  
a higher level of policy preparedness. This was 
supported with work in partnership with 
industry and experts to ensure that a widely 
accepted control approach existed. Defra also 
used Met Office modelling and expert advice  
to predict likely incursion scenarios to prepare  
a control strategy in partnership with the 
livestock industry. The UK was the first EU 
member state to underwrite vaccine supply  
and this enabled us to successfully control 
bluetongue in 2008. The bluetongue threat 
remains and we continue to refine our modelling 
and risk assessment so we are prepared for this 
and other future threats that may occur as  
a consequence of climate change. 

Partly due to the experience of bluetongue, 
awareness of insect-borne diseases was raised and 
experience gained. We are now also working in 
partnership with the equine sector on a control 
strategy and legislation for dealing with African 
Horse Sickness, which is transmitted by the same 
kind of midges as bluetongue disease.

Bluetongue disease

Vaccinating sheep against Bluetongue

36Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 2. Food, farming and land management




2.3.3 Animal welfare
Changes to physical conditions and land availability, 
and increasing occurrence of extremes of weather, 
could also severely impact on animal welfare.

Animal Welfare: risks, opportunities and 
impacts of climate change

Hotter, drier 
summers 
and warmer, 
wetter 
winters

Increased heat stress leading to 
requirement for provision of shade 
and shelter for livestock outdoors.

Need consideration in design and 
operation of housing and transport 
for animals.

Opportunities to grow new crops 
and optimise sources of animal 
feed, as well as improving 
management of livestock and land 
use to become more flexible.

Drought Animal welfare issues.

Might affect availability of food  
and water.

Increased 
incidence  
of extreme 
weather 
events

Animal welfare issues.

Might affect availability of food  
and water.

2.3.4 Plant Health
The main risks to plants are likely to come from new 
pests, other organisms, or changes in weather 
threatening crops and other plant life. 

Plant Health: risks, opportunities and impacts 
of climate change

Hotter, drier 
summers 
and warmer, 
wetter 
winters

Indigenous pests, weeds and 
diseases becoming more prevalent 
(or changes in balance between 
predators and pests).

Change in temperature/
precipitation threatening crops.

New pests or other organisms 
threatening crops.

Current and approved pesticides 
not being suitable for dealing with 
new threats.

Increased 
incidence  
of extreme 
weather 
events

More difficult to apply pesticides 
effectively, particularly where 
drainflow is an issue.

2.3.5 Policy and Practical Responses
Defra has a number of Research and Development 
projects in plant health specifically related to climate 
change issues and we maintain contact with the 
Agricultural Observatory and other sources of 
information on the climate change implications for 
cropping patterns and pesticide use.

Field of ripening wheat

37Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 2. Food, farming and land management




2.4 Soils
Changes in temperature, rainfall patterns and 
increased frequency of extreme weather events are 
likely to lead to significant and complex changes  
in soil quality, composition, structure and biota 
(organisms living within the soil). In addition, it is 
likely that the indirect impacts of climate change 
resulting from changes in land use, land management 
and agricultural practices will be more significant than 
changes in temperature or rainfall, especially where 
these exacerbate the risk of erosion, organic matter 
decline and compaction of soils.

Although the focus of discussions is often on agricultural 
soils, climate change will also have important implications 
for soils in the built environment. The behaviour of soils, 

under different rainfall patterns, may therefore require 
changes in their management and potentially the need 
to repair and underpin the foundations of buildings and 
other infrastructure.

Soils: risks, opportunities and impacts of 
climate change

Hotter, drier 
summers 
and warmer, 
wetter 
winters

Hotter, drier conditions likely to 
speed up decomposition of organic 
matter, including the oxidation of 
peat soils.

Salinisation more common due to 
groundwater being drawn upwards 
and increased use of irrigation 
which causes the deposit of salts 
on the soil surface.

Drought Reduction in moisture content  
of clay soils, increasing risk of 
cracking, subsidence and 
groundwater contamination.

Loss of soil due to increased  
wind erosion.

Increased 
incidence  
of extreme 
weather 
events

Loss of soil due to increase in  
soil erosion.

Impacts on land stability e.g. 
incidence of landslips, subsidence 
events and problems with drainage 
and flooding.

Sea level 


rise


Loss of valuable soils and habitats.

Policy and Practical Responses
Soils Strategy
We published The Soil Strategy for England, 
Safeguarding our Soils, in September 2009 which sets 
out an ambitious vision to tackle the degradation of 
soils in England within the next 20 years. Building the 
resilience of our soils to a changing climate is a key 
priority, so we are developing the evidence base on 

8. Defra will review existing research and evidence 
on the likely impacts of climate change on animal 
health and welfare during 2010; and meet with 
key stakeholders to raise awareness and discuss the 
issues. We will use this information to identify and 
prioritise any evidence gaps to address in 2011/12.

9. Defra provides match-funding for the Pratique 
Project – an EU-wide initiative co-ordinated by the 
Food and Environment Research Agency (FERA). 
which is developing new Pest Risk Assessment tools 
and techniques which will help us assess risks to 
plant health in a changing environment. The project, 
which benefits from £50K of Defra funding, is due 
to report in June 2011.

10. Defra and the Forestry Commission will support 
an increased research effort into ways to deal with 
a number of new and emerging pests and diseases 
impacting on trees and associated ecosystems.  
We will work closely with key stakeholders in 
affected areas to address the threats from a number 
of recently established pests and diseases (see section 
below on Trees, Woods and Forests).

D PLANT HEALTH AND ANIMAL 
HEALTH AND WELFARE ACTIONS 

38Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 2. Food, farming and land management




the impact of climate change on soils and ensuring 
that farmers and other land managers have the 
information and guidance necessary to be able to 
secure the resilience of their soils.

Improving the Evidence Base
We are continuing our programme of research on 
climate change adaptation and soils in conjunction  
with delivery bodies (in particular the Environment 
Agency, Natural England and the Forestry Commission), 
the Devolved Administrations and other research 
organisations. To improve our understanding of the 
likely resilience of soils, we are using the latest Climate 
Projections to model the impact of climate change on 
soil threats. We have also commissioned new research 
projects which will report in the next year to explore the 
impacts of climate change on urban soils, soil biota and 
soil functionality and peat soils and habitats. 

Advice and Good Practice
We already have a large range of soil management best 
practices documents such as Protecting our Water, Soil 
and Air: A Code of Good Agricultural Practice for all 
Farmers, Growers and Land Managers and Soil Protection 
Review 2010. A joint Defra, Business Innovation and Skills 
(BIS) and WRAP Construction Code of Practice for the 
Sustainable Use of Soils on Construction Sites was 
published in September 2009. These should continue  
to be suitable in the future, although changes in climatic 
conditions will almost certainly prompt changes in how 
and where these are deployed. Similarly, if new crops are 
grown in the UK, we may need to develop new best 
practice techniques to deal with any degradation issues 
and risks to soil that they bring, which could include 
increases in greenhouse gas emissions. 

2.5 Trees, woods and forests
Climate change will have major impacts on woodlands 
and trees and on the forestry sector. These impacts will 
show large regional variation across England, with the 
North and West remaining highly productive. Without 
strategic adaptation responses the South and East are 
expected to be seriously affected towards the end of 
this century. The most significant impacts will be driven 
by changes in water availability. 

The forestry sector has to plan ahead (fifty years or 
more). Adaptive measures need to be appropriate  
to both current and future climatic conditions, reflect 
the needs of biodiversity and timber production and 
maintain the services provided by woodlands to society 
(including wood product and woodfuel production for 
carbon abatement). This can all be achieved through 
drawing on the principles of multi-purpose forestry  
and sustainable forest management. 

11. In Spring 2010 Defra will publish the results of 
modelling to illustrate the impact of climate change 
on soil properties. This will provide the foundation 
for developing further research in this area over 
the course of 2010/11.

12. Defra will work closely with Communities  
and Local Government (CLG) and the Department 
for Business, Innovation and Skills (BIS) to ensure 
that planning authorities, developers and the 
construction industry have the information and 
tools they need to take account of the impacts of 
climate change on soils, both in decision making 
and during the construction process. This will 
involve developing a new practical toolkit for 
planners to help them take account of soils in their 
decision-making processes.

D SOILS ACTIONS 

Peak District National Park Authority ©, 
Peat restoration in the Peak District

39Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 2. Food, farming and land management




Trees, woods and forests: risks, opportunities 
and impacts of climate change

Hotter, drier 
summers 
and warmer, 
wetter 
winters

Increased prevalence of existing 
and new pests and diseases.

Potential risks to native biodiversity 
associated with introducing non-
native tree species.

Helping to reduce the urban heat 
island effect through both 
evaporative cooling and the 
provision of shade.

Helping biodiversity to adapt to  
the impacts of climate change.

Providing shelter and relief  
for livestock.

Protecting freshwater habitats and 
fish populations from thermal stress.

Increasing timber production where 
water is not limiting.

Drought An increased frequency and 
severity of summer drought. 

By the end of the century, some 
native tree species are likely to lose 
‘climate space’, particularly in 
southern England.

Reduced timber production and 
changing suitability of individual 
tree species.

Drought stress placing trees at 
increased risk from pest and 
disease outbreaks.

Significant changes to the 
composition, structure and 
character of woodland ground flora.

Trees, woods and forests: risks, opportunities 
and impacts of climate change

Drought 
(cont.)

Increased risk, extent and severity 
of forest and heathland fire.

Increased 
incidence  
of extreme 
weather 
events

Contribution to sustainable 
drainage systems.

Reducing diffuse pollution and 
siltation of water courses by 
stabilising river banks.

Stabilising soil, reducing the risk  
of landslips.

Limiting wind-driven erosion and 
runoff of pollutants from 
contaminated sites.

Woodland creation upstream  
of towns and cities to delay and 
reduce peak flood flows.

Policy and Practical Responses
Management Approaches
Over time, the character and composition of our native 
woodlands will alter as species ranges change and the 
competitive balance between species starts to shift. 
Adaptation strategies for woodland biodiversity will 
increasingly need to focus on habitats rather than the 
current species-based approach to nature conservation 
(see pages 45 to 48 on Biodiversity policy).

The distribution of many components of ancient and 
semi-natural woodland ecosystems will change, but 
the current view is that there is no need to intervene 
beyond existing good woodland management practice. 
However, there is evidence8 that habitat quality is 
declining in a significant area of England’s woodlands, 
limiting the capacity for those woodlands to adapt. 
New pests and diseases may establish and existing 
ones become more aggressive. These climate-driven 
risks are compounded by global trade. 

8  Long term ecological change in British woodland (1971-2001) Available at: http://naturalengland.etraderstores.com/NaturalEnglandShop/R653

40Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 2. Food, farming and land management




Monitoring and contingency planning to cover wildfire, 
windstorm and pest and disease outbreaks, is essential 
to allow for prompt action in adaptation strategies,  
as highlighted in the draft Climate Change Guidelines 
that underpin the UK Forestry Standard. Many 
uncertainties remain both about the future climate 
and the response of trees and woodland ecosystems 
to climate change. Increasing the range of tree species 
to improve resilience – at stand or landscape scale – 
currently represents the most appropriate  
adaptation response.

Ongoing activity includes:

• the Delivery Plan for the Strategy for England’s 
Trees, Woods and Forests9: the Delivery Plan 

includes a broad range of actions to be delivered by 
woodland and forestry stakeholders across England.

• UK Forestry Standard and Climate Change 
Guidelines10: the UK Forestry Standard (UKFS) is 
currently being revised, including the drafting of 
new Forestry and Climate Change Guidelines that 
cover both mitigation and adaptation.

• climate change action plan for the Public 
Forest estate: the Forestry Commission is preparing 
a Climate Change Action Plan for the Public Forest 
Estate in England. The Plan benchmarks existing 
management practice and will initiate actions  
to enhance species diversity and genetic diversity  
of native species through appropriate  
provenance mixtures. 

9  Available at: http://www.defra.gov.uk/rural/forestry/strategy.htm
10 Available at: http://www.forestry.gov.uk/UKFS

Pickering in North Yorkshire is a market town 
with a population of 7,000 and a long history 
of flooding, most recently in 1999, 2000, 2002 
and 2007, largely due to intense summer rainfall. 
Defra have funded the Forestry Commission  
to lead a two year demonstration project in 
partnership with the Environment Agency,  
the North York Moors National Park Authority, 
Natural England and others on “soft-engineering” 
approaches to flood alleviation. 

Woodland creation is increasingly seen as having  
a significant contribution to make to flood risk 
management, as well as delivering other 
environmental benefits including carbon sequestration 
and reducing soil erosion and diffuse water pollution. 
The focus of this project is on engaging with the 
local community and landowners to explore how 
changes can be made to the way the land is managed, 
with the aim of slowing water in the upper catchment, 
storing water in the middle section and improving 
conveyance through the town.

All measures will be implemented between now  
and March 2011. Grant-aid for 85 hectares of 
woodland creation is being targeted through the 
RDPE co-financed English Woodland Grant Scheme, 
supported by top-up payments provided by Yorkshire 
Forward’s Regional Forestry and Flooding Initiative. 
This new woodland will create a physical barrier for 
floodwater, slowing the flow and creating temporary 
floodwater storage. It will reduce the risk of flooding 
in surrounding areas as well as producing wider 
environmental benefits.

Pickering Beck North Yorkshire – “Slowing the Flow”

An example of floodplain creation © the Forestry Commission.

41Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 2. Food, farming and land management




• the England Biodiversity Strategy (EBS)11: the 
EBS workstream on climate change adaptation is 
working with the England Woodland Biodiversity 
Group to consider how climate change adaptation 
should be incorporated within woodland 
biodiversity delivery. 

• forestry and adaptation in the urban 
environment: a recent assessment of trends in 
urban tree condition and cover, Trees in Towns II12, 
highlighted the decline in ‘large canopy trees’ in the 
urban environment. The trend runs counter to the 
future needs of society as there is clear evidence of 
the role of trees in adapting the urban environment. 
This decline is being addressed through initiatives 
including the London Street Tree Programme; the 
development of guidance for integrating trees into 
green infrastructure; the Joint Mitigation Protocol, 

which asks developers to consider and compensate 
for loss of trees in construction projects and the 
development of the CAVAT system for valuing the 
services that urban trees provide. See pages 50 to 
53 on Green infrastructure for Further detail.

• integration of adaptation into Forestry 
Commission policy: the Climate Change Strategy 
Group sets the Forestry Commission’s high level 
position on how it will address the challenge of 
climate change and also commissioned The Read 
Report13, which presents a coherent assessment of 
the contribution that UK woodlands can make to 
climate change adaptation and mitigation. The 
Forestry Commission commissioned approximately 
£10 million worth of research in 2008-09, and has 
increased the proportion devoted to climate change 
research over recent years.

11  Available at: http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/biodiversity/documents/biostrategy.pdf
12  Available at: http://www.communities.gov.uk/publications/planningandbuilding/treesintownsii
13 Available at: http://www.forestry.gov.uk/forestry/infd-7y4gn9

13. We will prioritise and implement research 
recommendations outlined in the Read Report over 
the next five years.

14. We will develop a new quantitative measure of 
adaptation for trees and woodlands in both urban 
and rural landscapes. 

15. By summer 2010, we will make a web-based 
resource on species choice and wider adaptation 
issues, available online.

16. In 2010, the Forestry Commission will provide 
training on climate change for all their public-facing 
staff, to assist understanding by woodland owners 
and managers and the general public.

17. The Forestry Commission will work with the UK 
Fire and Rescue Services, Communities and Local 
Government (CLG), Natural England and 
stakeholders to establish improved fire monitoring 
for forest and heathland fires and develop a risk 
assessment approach.

18. The Forestry Commission will complete a review 
of Grants and Regulations in the context of climate 
change in 2010 and feed into a wider review in 2011.

19. We will complete a climate change action plan 
for the public forest estate in 2010 and begin  
its implementation. 

20. Climate Change Guidelines to support the 
revised UK Forestry Standard in 2010 and implement 
the adaptation measures included as requirements 
for grants will be published by the Forestry 
Commission and the Northern Ireland Forest Service.

21. We will work with key stakeholders to develop 
landscape approaches for adaptation through 
targeting grants for woodland creation.

22. The Forestry Commission, in conjunction with 
Defra, FERA and the Scottish and Welsh Governments, 
will work through its Forest Biosecurity Programme 
Board to revise the strategy for dealing with pests  
and diseases and develop a new biosecurity code  
of practice (see section on Plant Health above).

D FORESTRY ACTIONS 

42Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 2. Food, farming and land management




Adapting to climate change

3.  The natural 
environment

In this context a range of key adaptation challenges 
may affect how we will manage competing pressures 
on land and sustain the vital ecosystem services on 
which we rely. These pressures include opportunities  
for expanding existing agricultural production, finding 
space for new bioenergy crops and woodlands, 
managing our water resources and providing for a 
growing population with aspirations for housing, space 
for outdoor recreation and other infrastructure. This 
issue is going to affect all sectors, and all places around 
the country, and there are real opportunities to get the 
most out of the land in our cities and the countryside 

that we must seize. We now understand more than 
ever before about how natural systems work over 
different land areas and the benefits they provide to us. 
We can use this knowledge in planning to meet the 
social, economic and environmental challenges posed 
by a changing climate. 

Over the past year we have been conducting a project 
focusing on the implications of a changing climate for 
our vision of a healthy and resilient natural environment. 
This project has identified that the short-term impacts 
of climate change will be seen most clearly in natural 

It is increasingly recognised that our quality of life – from the ‘liveability’ of our 
communities to the stability of our economy – is dependent on healthy natural 
systems. This section brings together the linked areas of biodiversity, landscape  
and land use, green infrastructure, air quality and water availability and quality – 
under the broad heading of the Natural Environment; recognising that all areas of 
Defra’s work are explicitly linked to this theme as the section above on Food, Farming 
and Forestry highlights. Healthy ecosystems are required to underpin sustainable 
adaptation strategies across all sectors and need to be addressed throughout our 
adaptive strategies. We know that, on key issues like access to clean water during 
hotter, drier summers or managing flood risk in the face of increased numbers of 
extreme weather events, we won’t be able to respond effectively without a healthy 
natural environment.

43Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 3. The natural environment




Appropriate land management can provide 
some of the most sustainable and cost-effective 
ways of helping to protect society from the 
effects of a changing climate, as well as 
benefiting agricultural production. For example:

• trees and other vegetation increase the 
sequestration and storage of carbon, thus helping 
to mitigate climate change; can provide shade  
and shelter for crops, buildings and livestock;  
can reduce runoff and soil erosion and slow  
the movement of floodwater; help to maintain 
water quality through shading and by filtering 
pollutants; support wild species including crop 
pollinators; as well as providing an alternative or 
additional crop to increase farm income and 
hedge bets against climate risks. Increasing 
woodland cover can also have recreation and 
cultural benefits.

• sustainable drainage systems – which include 
porous surfaces, infiltration trenches, filter drains, 
ponds and wetlands, and grass buffers – slow the 
flow of water and increase its infiltration into the  

soil. This can help to both capture and store  
water at wet times of year to reduce the risk of 
shortages during drier times, and reduce the risk 
of flood damage to areas downstream. It also 
benefits biodiversity.

• peat restoration, especially in upland blanket 
mires, helps maintain huge stores of carbon,  
and can help to improve water quality and supply 
and reduce flood risk in areas downstream. It also  
has significant benefits for the conservation of 
biodiversity, and helps to maintain a valued 
landscape that contributes to a well-developed 
and important tourist industry. 

Measures such as these can be seen as providing 
essential ‘green infrastructure’ that will help buffer 
the country as a whole from the effects of climate 
change, in many cases at less cost and more 
effectively than would be achieved by technological 
alternatives. The multiple benefits from good land 
management, and the role of farmers and land 
managers in adaptation, will become increasingly 
important as the climate continues to change.

The role of land management in helping society and the environment adapt

The UK National Ecosystem Assessment (NEA) is 
the first analysis of the UK’s natural environment 
in terms of the benefits it provides to society and 
continuing economic prosperity. Part of the Living 
With Environmental Change (LWEC) initiative the NEA 
is an inclusive process involving many government, 
academic, Non-Government Organisation (NGO)  
and private sector institutions. The NEA will create  
a compelling and easily understood explanation of the 
state and value of the UK’s natural ecosystem services. 
It will be useful to institutions and individuals to raise 
awareness of the importance of ecosystems and the 
services they provide to society, as well as assisting in 
strengthening policy-making to ensure effective 
management in future. 

Throughout 2009, the NEA has looked back 60 
years to understand how our ecosystems and the 
services they provide have arrived at their current 
state and value. This year the assessment will look 
forward 50 years, developing scenarios for how 
those ecosystems may change in future, including 
how climate change is likely to affect them. It will 
then consider how society might respond to these 
changes to maintain and enhance the benefits, 
including adaptation benefits, that we all will 
continue to get from our natural environment in  
a changing climate.

National Ecosystem Assessment

44Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 3. The natural environment




systems and that healthy natural systems are required 
to underpin the adaptive capability of the economy 
and society. Working with key partners in the 
conservation sector and across the Defra network we 
will publish a discussion document designed to take  
a lead in setting out our vision of a whole systems 
approach to policy and delivery in this area.

3.1 Biodiversity
Biodiversity is important both for its intrinsic value 
and because of the key role it plays in providing the 
ecosystem services upon which we all ultimately 
depend and which form the foundation of our adaptive 
capacity. Changes in climate, together with increased 
levels of CO


2

 and other greenhouse gases, have 

already had detectable impacts on species and 
ecosystems. At a global scale approximately 10%  
of species are projected to be at an increasingly  
high risk of extinction for every 1°C rise in global 
mean temperature. 

In the short term, some of the more significant threats 
to biodiversity may result from unintended consequences 
of societal responses to climate change rather than the 
direct impacts themselves. Key sectors include the 

major land uses – agriculture and forestry; those 
responsible for planning, water and coastal management; 
and managers of major infrastructure investments. 
Well planned, sustainable strategies for adaptation  
and mitigation offer scope for enhancing biodiversity, 
whilst contributing to the protection of society’s assets. 
However, where these issues are not thought through, 
some actions could limit the options

Biodiversity: risks, opportunities and impacts 
of climate change

Hotter, drier 
summers 
and warmer, 
wetter 
winters

Shifts in abundance and range of 
individual species and a loss of 
‘space’ for species and their 
characteristic habitat.

Changes to the composition of 
plant and animal communities.

Changes in the timings of seasonal 
events such as spring leaf growth, 
flowering, and breeding.

A potential mismatch in the timing 
of important events such as 
breeding and food availability.

Modified species behaviour  
e.g. bird migration or shifting 
habitat preferences of butterflies.

Impacts on ecosystem function, 
such as the ability of habitats to 
sequester carbon due to changes 
in temperature and rainfall.

Changes in the chemical 
environment, such as the levels  
of carbon or deposition of 
atmospheric nitrogen that may 
favour fast growing species at the 
expense of others.

Drought Increased likelihood and impact of 
natural fires.

Significant impacts on some 
species during very hot periods.

In February 2010, Foresight published its 
report on the Future of Land Use. This highlights 
a number of pressures on England and the UK’s 
land system and explores how these pressures 
could be handled to 2050. In particular, it explores 
the role a more strategic framework to land use 
could have in better aligning governance and 
incentives to maximise the value that can be gained 
from land. It makes particular reference to adaptation, 
highlighting the need to have settlement patterns 
that reflect the impacts of climate change, joined 
up habitats that allow wildlife to migrate 
domestically in response to changing conditions, 
and measures to deal with rising sea levels and 
adaptive agriculture. The Government is carefully 
considering the implications of this report for 
climate change adaptation.

Land Use Foresight Project 

45Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 3. The natural environment




Biodiversity: risks, opportunities and impacts 
of climate change

Sea level 


rise


Squeezing the available habitat for 
some species.

for safeguarding and enhancing biodiversity and risk 
reducing the capacity of the natural environment to 
provide a range of essential ecosystem services. The 
inevitability of climate-driven impacts on biodiversity 
and ecosystems means we need to adopt an increasingly 
dynamic approach to managing these systems and 
conserving our biodiversity. The challenge is to take 
timely action to minimise losses, facilitate change and 
take advantage of new opportunities.

Policy and practical responses
Biodiversity Targets and Objectives
The EU has a target to halt the decline in biodiversity 
by 2010; at an international level, a global target 
exists to reduce the rate of biodiversity loss by 2010.14 

New targets at both the European and global level are 
expected to be negotiated in 2010, showing an ongoing 
commitment to biodiversity conservation and enhancement. 

One of the key challenges we have to face is setting 
conservation targets and objectives for the future that 
are demanding but sufficiently flexible to cope with the 
unpredictable nature of climate change and society’s 
response to it. Rather than taking an historical 
perspective our targets may need to focus more on 
managing habitat condition so that sites are better able 
to withstand stresses, encourage the movement of 
species and provide vital ecosystem services.

Biodiversity Adaptation Principles
Defra plays a key role in developing and disseminating 
information about the observed and projected impacts 
of climate change on biodiversity and ecosystems 
more widely. This evidence has been used to project 
potential effects in the future on selected species (see 
box to left on MONARCH). However, it is not realistic 
to extend this approach to all species and therefore  
a principles-based approach that enables us to deal 
with uncertainty is required. In December 2008, The 
England Biodiversity Group published the ‘England 
Biodiversity Strategy Climate Change Adaptation 
Principles: conserving biodiversity in a changing 
climate.15 The principles are:

• take practical action now.

• maintain and increase ecological resilience.

• accommodate change.

• integrate action across all partners and sectors.

• develop knowledge and plan strategically.

The England Biodiversity Group climate change 
adaptation workstream is working to integrate climate 
change adaptation into conservation practice by 2011.  

14 Available at: http://www.cbd.int/2010-target/
15  Available at: http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/biodiversity/documents/ebs-ccap.pdf

MONARCH (Modelling Natural Resource 
Responses to Climate Change) was a seven-
year programme designed to assess impacts of 
projected climate change on wildlife in Britain 
and Ireland. MONARCH modelled the potential 
for changes in the ranges of 120 species and 
undertook a more detailed analysis of 32  
of those species. The UK Climate Impacts 
Programme’s 2002 (UKCIP02) climate scenarios 
for the 2020s, 2050s and 2080s were used to 
project future potential climate space for each 
species. The findings indicated:

• of the 32 species modelled in detail, 15 are 
projected to gain substantial potential climate 
space and eight are projected to lose significant 
potential climate space. 

• over 90% of the species modelled show  
a substantial change in climate space over the 
timescale, underlining the need for adaptation 
measures – to help species disperse and establish 
in new locations as the climate changes.

• any loss or shift in suitable climate space for 
British and Irish wildlife will be more severe 
unless greenhouse gas emissions are cut.

Projecting Future Possible Impacts

46Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 3. The natural environment




In May 2007 Defra published Conserving Biodiversity
in a Changing Climate: guidance on building capacity  
to adapt16 on behalf of the UK Biodiversity Partnership. 
This guidance has been influential domestically and on 
the international stage.

Supporting Networks of Species and Habitats
We know that under climate change, sites that were 
designated for one set of species may no longer retain 
them either at all or at the previous levels of abundance, 
regardless of conservation effort. Iconic species or those 
that currently characterise a particular habitat may also 
change their distribution or frequency. In future, the 
emphasis is likely to be on improving and buffering the 
capacity of existing sites to cater for a wider range of 
species and to facilitate the movement of species. This 
implies providing structural variety, habitat mosaics and 
other ways of providing suitable microclimate or habitat 
‘stepping stones’ between sites, rather than designating 
additional sites and de-designating others, on a species-
by-species basis.

Taking a more strategic ‘landscape scale’ approach 
allows us to protect the best sites, ensure that they are 
connected to other similar sites and occur in a resilient 
patchwork of other habitats. Natural England has  
a number of projects under way, including developing 
resilience indicators for the natural environment.  
As part of the implementation of their new Notification 
Strategy on SSSIs, NE is actively considering how well 
the existing network of SSSIs will be able to respond 
dynamically to natural processes and the predicted 
effects of climate change.

To help us consider these challenges Defra has 
commissioned Professor Sir John Lawton to lead a review 
of England’s wildlife and ecological network, including its 
links with our National Parks and its ability to adapt to 
climate change and other pressures. The review will 
examine evidence on the extent to which the collection of 
sites represents a coherent and resilient ecological network 
capable of adapting to the challenge of climate change 
and other pressures. It will also examine the evidence base 
to assess whether a more inter-connected network would 

16  Available at: http://www.ukbap.org.uk/Library/BRIG/CBCCGuidance.pdf

Reedbed is a valuable wetland habitat for  
a wide range of species, and in the UK is under 
direct threat from the increased storminess and 
sea level rise associated with climate change. 
The bittern is a species of heron that depends 
on reedbed habitat in suitable condition.  
Once a common sight throughout the UK,  
the species became extinct here in 1886, but 
recolonised in the early 20th century, before 
dropping to a low of 11 booming males in 
1997. At that time, the population of bitterns 
in the UK was highly restricted in range to just 
a few sites, predominantly on the Norfolk and 
Suffolk coast, where the freshwater sites are at 
increasing risk of saline incursion. 

The RSPB and Natural England have developed a 
four point plan to support the adaptation of bittern 
and other reedbed species: 1. Audit & Restore 
existing reedbed sites; 2. Create new reedbed to 
compensate for anticipated losses at the coast;  
3. Protect the existing sites on the Suffolk coast 
in line with strategies for sustainable flood-risk 
management; 4. Manage new and existing 
reedbeds to maintain the right mix of wet reed 
and open water.

The response is already encouraging. The RSPB’s 
Lakenheath Fen reserve, a key new inland mosaic 
of wetland habitats re-created from an area of 
arable farmland, saw two booming bitterns in 
2008. Across the UK that year, 75 booming males 
at 41 sites were recorded.

Lakenheath Fen – restoring habitat 
to support booming bitterns

Bittern wading in reedbed © Andy Hay (rspb-images.com)

47Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 3. The natural environment




be more effective today and in the future and, if so, how 
this could be delivered; making costed and prioritised 
recommendations on any measures that should be taken 
including how Government and other organisations can 
work together to deliver the recommended model. The 
review will report to Defra by end the of June 2010. 

It is important that we advance the science in this 
area and take an adaptive management approach 
– meaning that we should be prepared to try 
interventions, monitor their success and adjust our 
actions according to the response.

23. In 2010, Defra will publish a discussion document 
on the natural environment and adaptation. This will 
build on the work we have done with partners to 
consider the role of the natural environment in 
supporting adaptation; and the need for a whole 
systems approach to adaptation in this area.

24. Prof Sir John Lawton will conclude his group’s 
review of England’s wildlife and ecological network, 
including its links with our National Parks and its 
ability to adapt to climate change and other pressures. 
The review will make costed and prioritised 
recommendations on any measures that should be 
taken and will report to Defra by June 2010. We 
intend to respond to the report by end of 2010.

25. In 2010 Defra will encourage closer working 
between the Convention on Biological Diversity 
(CBD) and the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) to 
enhance synergies between climate change and 
biodiversity issues, particularly on ensuring delivery 
of biodiversity safeguards in finance mechanisms, 
and the incorporation of ecosystem-based 
approaches into adaptation strategies.

26. UK Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP) targets will be 
reviewed after the October 2010 conference of the 
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) in Nagoya, 
to update them where necessary and fully factor in 
climate change impacts.

27. By mid 2010 case studies of practical 
implementation of the England Biodiversity Strategy 
adaptation principles at a landscape scale will be 
published together with policy guidance and best 
practice notes. Defra will continue to work with 
partners to extend this best practice guidance.

28. By early 2011, a Defra funded research project 
will publish guidance on adaptation of biodiversity  
to climate change including the implications for 
protected sites, monitoring and setting of objectives, 
and contributions of Priority Habitats to mitigation of 
climate change. In parallel, Natural England initiated 
a project in 2009, which is considering how well the 
existing network of SSSIs will be able to respond to 
natural processes and climate change. It will be 
developed into a full regional review in 2011/12.

29. Natural England has committed £6m over three 
years concluding in 2011 to undertaking work at a 
landscape scale designed to support biodiversity to 
adapt to a changing climate focusing on wetlands 
such as the Great Fens.

30. In March 2009 Natural England published a 
detailed assessment of the impact of climate change 
on four “character areas” (Norfolk Broads, Dorset 
Downs, Shropshire Hills, Cumbria High Fells).  
The findings and lessons from these are now being 
implemented and the process will be rolled out to 
five new areas across the country, with results 
expected in 2010. 

D BIODIVERSITY ACTIONS 

Jon Bowers © Bee collecting pollen

48Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 3. The natural environment




3.2 Landscapes
Our landscape has continually changed because of 
industrialisation, urbanisation, changing farming 
practices and an improved transport infrastructure.  
In the long term climate change, and the actions we 
take to mitigate and adapt to it, could significantly 
affect landscape by influencing the natural flora, fauna 
and farming practices that shape the land. Because of 
this combination of direct and indirect impacts, it is 
difficult to predict what will happen to our landscapes 
– the one or two degree temperature increases 
projected by 2050 could have a dramatic impact, 
particularly on some of our protected landscapes. 

Landscapes: risks, opportunities and impacts 
of climate change

Hotter, drier 
summers 
and warmer, 
wetter 
winters

Changes to the plant species  
that characterise a landscape, 
including AONBs. 

Changes to farming practices, 
crops and livestock.

Loss of mature trees in the landscape.

Increased likelihood and impact of 
natural fires.

Increased visitor numbers and 
growth in visitor numbers.

Increased 
incidence  
of extreme 
weather 
events

Closure of footpaths and rights of 
way; increased maintenance costs 
of the rights of way network.

Damage to historic buildings, 
caused by an increase in soil erosion.

Falling visitor numbers in certain 
places and at certain times.

Trees felled by storm.

Rising sea 
levels

Inundation and increased rate of 
coastal erosion leading to significant 
landscape change and land loss.

Policy and Practical Responses
Engagement
A key component of adaptation will be to aid  
people’s understanding of the drivers of change and 
to manage their expectations of the nature of the 
future landscape. We will need to enable people to 
think about the opportunities as well as the threats. 
The management decisions we take in response to 
climate change will need to reflect a range of factors 
– important amongst these are the views of the 
communities of place and interest that value different 
aspects of our natural environment.

Landscape Character
Natural England’s developing Future Landscapes17 
policy will help us to identify the likely impacts  
of climate change on landscape character to aid 
adaptation. Future landscapes should emerge as  
a result of planned interventions using a landscape 
character approach. It’s not just about how land looks 
but maintaining and increasing the ecosystem services 
provided by particular landscapes. Natural England 
will develop a vision for future landscapes that will 
take account of change and challenge traditional 
approaches to landscape conservation. 

Defra is co-funding Natural England’s Character and 
Quality of England’s Landscapes (CQuEL) Project. 
CQuEL will measure changes in landscape character 
and assess the quality of these places, as understood 
by the ecosystem service approach. The project will 
also, in part, fulfil the UK’s commitment under the 
European Landscape Convention to monitor change 
in landscape character. The evidence from CQuEL will 
enable us to assess the changes in landscape character 
that are likely to occur as a result of climate change 
and how this may affect landscape quality, in terms of 
the ecosystem services these places provide. This should 
better inform all those who make decisions affecting 
landscape; in particular, the findings of CQuEL should 
help deliver better planning policies and aid 
development control.  

17  Available at: http://www.naturalengland.org.uk/Images/futurelandscapes_tcm6-8638.pdf

49Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 3. The natural environment




By linking ecosystem service delivery to landscape 
character and landscape features, we will be better 
equipped to communicate the likely impacts of 
climate change to the public. 

Flexibility in Policy and Practice
The Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009 includes 
provision for access to move with eroding coastlines. 
The Natural England audit showed that some 13%  
of existing public rights of way around the coast will 
be lost to erosion over the next 20 years. The new 
coastal trail will be able to adjust to respond to such 
situations as they arise. Some sections of coastline  
are eroding rapidly, year on year. It would often be 
impracticable for the trail to follow a fixed route in 
these places. The Marine and Coastal Access Act 
2009 will allow us for the first time to identify 
relevant sections of trail – and the associated access 
rights – as automatically “rolling back” with any 
future erosion.

The National Parks
Defra funds National Park Authorities and the Broads 
Authority to manage the nine English National Parks 
and the Broads. Through the English National Parks 
Authorities Association (ENPAA), they have set out 
how the management of National Parks has a major 
contribution to make in mitigating the effects of 
climate change and adapting to the inevitable 
changes ahead18. 

3.3 Green infrastructure
Green Infrastructure is a strategically planned and 
delivered network of high quality green spaces and 
other environmental features. Well-designed and 
managed Green Infrastructure can deliver a wide range 
of environmental and quality of life benefits for local 
communities. Trees, parks and other green spaces, green 
roofs and walls and water – rivers and waterways, lakes 

18  Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation in National Parks ENPAA 2009

31. In Spring 2010, the Government will publish 
its vision and priorities for the English National 
Parks and Broads which will highlight climate 
change as a key priority.

32. National Parks Authorities will report on the 
risks from climate change and how they plan to 
adapt under the Adaptation Reporting Power 
introduced by the Climate Change Act 2008,  
with the first reports due in 2010-2011.

33. With the ongoing funding provided by Defra, 
the National Park Authorities and the Broads 
Authority will: 

• engage with residents and visitors on the future 
of our National Parks to ensure we all plan for 
the inevitable changes ahead and to promote 
understanding of the adaptation work planned 
and underway.

• protect and develop resilient habitat networks 
that allow natural environmental adaptation.

• maintain good public access across National 
Parks by repairing eroded footpaths and 
bridleways and flood-proofing bridges (ongoing).

34. Natural England’s Character and Quality of 
England’s Landscapes (CQuEL) Project will assess 
what changes in landscape character have and  
are likely to occur and how this affects landscape 
quality. Using this evidence we will develop 
landscape policies to help combat climate change 
and better communicate the likely impacts of 
climate change to the public.

D LANDSCAPES ACTIONS 

Wooded valley with far reaching views.

50Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 3. The natural environment




and ponds – can all help to cool urban areas, counter 
the urban heat island effect, and help to address urban 
flood risk. Green infrastructure can make the places we 
live in more resilient to the impacts of climate change. 
Green spaces play a key role in sustainable drainage 
systems. The rate of run-off for surfaces with trees and 
grass is estimated to be 10 to 20%, compared with 60 
to 70% for ‘hard’ urban areas.19

Green Infrastructure: risks, opportunities and 
impacts of climate change

Hotter, drier 
summers 
and warmer, 
wetter 
winters

Providing natural air conditioning  
in urban areas – a cooling effect  
of 1–2˚C.

Providing cleaner air by filtering dust 
and harmful chemicals; roadside 
trees can trap up to 90% of traffic-
related airborne dust particles.

Changes in water availability will 
pose a threat to the viability of 
trees, grass and other green cover.

Increased levels of pest and 
diseases pose a threat to trees and 
green space.

Increases in algae blooms could affect 
canals and other standing water and 
reduce their capacity as providers of 
recreation and biodiversity.

A trend of outdoor lifestyles, 
putting pressure on existing green 
spaces and increasing the demand 
for new green infrastructure.

Increased 
incidence  
of extreme 
weather 
events

Increased levels of damage to 
community woodlands and  
street trees.

Policy and Practical Responses
Delivering a “step change”
World Class Places20 – the Government’s strategy for 
improving the quality of place (May 2009) identified 
green infrastructure as one of the four elements of 
quality places. The report identified the need for a 
step-change in the provision of green infrastructure  
to help meet the challenges of climate change.

In Grey to Green21, the Commission for Architecture 
and the Built Environment (CABE) has called for  
a shift in funding and skills to green our cities to help 
adapt to climate change and improve people’s quality 
of life. Evidence from local authorities suggests they 
may lack the key skills to deliver effective green 
infrastructure. Other evidence highlights labour 
shortages of over 90% in the landscape architecture 
and urban design sectors. Adapting green infrastructure 
to the impacts of climate change will also need new 
skills in planning, design and management as well as 
more community involvement and empowerment. 

Evidence and Guidance
The Department for Communities and Local 
Government (CLG) has lead responsibility for cities 
and regions, planning and urban green space and  
is considering how best to respond to increasing 
urban temperatures. Defra is supporting CLG in 
revising and consolidating the existing planning 
guidance on landscape, open space and biodiversity. 
This will recognise the increasing importance of green 
infrastructure and provide local authorities with clearer 
information on the role that it can play, particularly in 
terms of climate change mitigation and adaptation in 
both rural and urban areas.

19  Urban Green Space Task Force (2006) Green Spaces, Better Places – Final Report.  
Available at: http://www.communities.gov.uk/documents/communities/pdf/131015.pdf

20  World class places: The Government’s strategy for improving quality of place, HMG 2009  
(available at:http://www.communities.gov.uk/publications/planningandbuilding/worldclassplaces) 

21  Grey to green: How we shift funding and skills to green our cities, CABE, 2009. Available at: http://www.cabe.org.uk/grey-to-green

51Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 3. The natural environment




The Defra Network
Defra’s delivery partners are actively engaged in 
promoting and providing green infrastructure 
throughout England. For example:

• the Forestry Commission is establishing an Urban 
Regeneration and Greenspace Partnership (URGP) 
to bring together a range of Government 
Departments and agencies, local authorities and 
community and environmental groups to work in 
partnership to create, manage and promote 
sustainable green infrastructure in towns and cities.

• Forestry Commission North-West is actively creating 
green infrastructure through the Newlands project22.

• Natural England has produced green infrastructure 
guidance23 to support frontline staff in their work 
with local authorities and green infrastructure 
partnerships. Natural England is working with 
developers to demonstrate the contribution  
that green infrastructure can make to  
urban regeneration24. 

22  Newlands website (available at: http://www.forestry.gov.uk/newlands) 
23  Natural England’s Green Infrastructure Guidance.  

Available at: http://naturalengland.etraderstores.com/NaturalEnglandShop/Product.aspx?ProductID=cda68051-1381-452f-8e5b-8d7297783bbd
24  A Natural Development. Available at: http://www.naturalengland.org.uk/about_us/news/2009/031109.aspx 

The Thames Gateway, one of the largest 
developments in Europe, involves large-scale 
housing development to the east of London. 
The Green Grid will help to regenerate areas 
including Barking and Lea Valley. The Green 
Grid initiative is developing a network of open 
spaces and river corridors, which will connect 
urban and residential areas of east London to 
the River Thames, the Green Belt and beyond. 
It will enhance existing wildlife sites on Sites 
of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs), including 
Rainham and Walthamstow Marshes, as well 
as creating new wildlife habitats and improving 
biodiversity. It will improve the quality of life 
for residents by opening up the landscape  
to recreational and leisure uses as well as 
promoting healthy living. 

The initiative is responding directly to the issues  
of climate change and environmental risks such as 
flooding and air pollution. An important element of 
the Green Grid project is improved management of 
water – reducing the risk of flooding, as well as 
water collection, storage and cleaning. The Green 
Grid initiative will help east London adapt to climate 
change and provide a beautiful, diverse and 
managed green infrastructure to be enjoyed by 
both people and wildlife.

East London Green Grid

Docks in east London © Peter Lovás (Dreamstime)

New Oasis building in York with green roof.

52Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 3. The natural environment




3.4 Air quality
It is well established that exposure to air pollutants 
has a detrimental impact on health. Air pollutants can 
also have wide-ranging environmental impacts, from 
localised effects including loss of biodiversity and 
reduced crop yields, to a potential contribution to 
future climate change. 

Air quality in the UK and across the EU has improved 
significantly in the last two decades but annual health 
costs alone are still estimated at some £15 billion, and 
there remains evidence of environmental damage.  
Air pollutants of greatest concern in the UK now  
are particulate matter (PM), ground-level ozone (O


3) 

oxides of nitrogen (NO


x

) and ammonia (NH


3

). Ground 

level ozone (also a powerful greenhouse gas) has 
been shown to cause loss of EU arable crop 
production worth an estimated €6.7 billion in 200025.

Actions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions are likely 
to bring large-scale emissions reductions for other air 
quality pollutants as they often have similar sources. 
For example, action to decrease energy demand and, 
in the longer-term, to decarbonise the economy, is 
expected to lead to very large reductions in the 
emission of pollutants from key sources such as 
power generation and transport. Efforts are therefore 
focussed on getting the best outcomes from climate 
change mitigation. The public health and ecosystem 
benefits from that are expected to outweigh any 
negative effects arising from a changing climate, 
where there is emerging evidence of both positive 
and negative impacts.

Adaptation actions in other sectors may also affect air 
quality. For example, changes to forestry practices 
may impact on emissions of volatile organic compounds 
(VOCs). In addition, changes in socio-economic 
behaviour may result in altered patterns of emissions 
and people’s exposure to air pollution. Currently these 
interactions are not well understood. 

35. Existing planning guidance on the natural 
environment will be revised and consolidated in 
2010 as a new Planning Policy Statement. This will 
serve to minimise vulnerability of places, people, 
and wildlife to the impacts of climate change and 
contribute to effective climate change adaptation 
measures by maintaining, creating and improving 
networks of green infrastructure within both 
urban and rural areas.

36. Defra and CLG have jointly commissioned 
work to synthesise the available evidence on the 
benefits, costs and status of green infrastructure, 
which is due to be published by April 2010. This 
will help to show local authorities how green 
infrastructure can help to deliver local, regional 
and national policy objectives.

37. Defra will contribute to a new built environment 
project under the cross-Government ACC 
Programme, which has identified that the urban 
heat island effect is a key challenge that needs 
addressing. A priority for the project in 2010 will 
be to explore the policy levers and delivery options 
which can increase the level of green infrastructure 
in our towns and cities.

38. We are currently consulting on our proposed 
strategy for the inland waterways of England and 
Wales – Waterways for Everyone. This includes 
examples of how we believe the waterways can 
help us mitigate and adapt to the effects of 
climate change.

39. The Forestry Commission will publish guidance 
for planners to support the role of trees and 
woodlands in green infrastructure in 2010.

D GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE ACTIONS 

25  Royal Society, 2008. Ground level ozone in the 21st century: future trends, impacts and policy implications.  
Available at: http://royalsociety.org/Ground-level-ozone-in-the-21st-century-future-trends-impacts-and-policy-implications-/

53Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 3. The natural environment




Air Quality: risks, opportunities and impacts 
of climate change

Hotter, drier 
summers 
and warmer, 
wetter 
winters

Hotter and sunnier weather, 
particularly in southern England,  
is likely to promote photochemical 
smog with high ozone concentrations 
and reduce the capacity of plants 
to take up ozone thereby 
increasing ambient concentrations. 

Changes in global emission patterns 
are already leading to a small but 
steady increase in hemispheric 
levels of ozone. A warmer climate 
could accelerate this process with 
implications for human health, 
ecosystems, and crops.

Increased 
incidence  
of extreme 
weather 
events

Pollutants may be washed out  
of the atmosphere more quickly 
which will reduce ambient air 
concentrations (and therefore 
health risks). 

However, it will increase  
deposition to land (and increase 
environmental damage).

Policy and practical responses
In March 2010, Defra and the Devolved Administrations 
published Air pollution: Action in a Changing Climate. 
This examines the links between air quality and climate 
change policies and sets out the short-term challenges 
and longer term opportunities for improving human 
health and the environment, looking ahead to 2050. 
In the short term, meeting outstanding air quality and 
emission reduction targets for PM10 and NO


2

/NOx as 

soon as possible is a priority. As these pollutants are 
also ozone precursors this should help to reduce the 
incidence of summer smog during heat waves. 

Complexities of atmospheric chemistry and climate 
modelling mean that there is much we have yet to 
understand about the impacts of a changing climate 
on UK air quality and the associated health and 
environmental costs. Improving our evidence base will 
be important in shaping future actions in relation to 
climate change adaptation. 

3.5 Water: availability and quality
Water is essential for life, and is a central issue 
influencing almost all the sections of this plan. 
Climate change, and other pressures such as 
demographic change, all mean that we need to find 
ways of using water much more efficiently and 
sustainably if we are to continue to enjoy high 

40. In March 2010, Defra and the Devolved 
Administrations published Air pollution: 
Action in a Changing Climate.

41. By 2011, we will use the UK Climate Projections 
to carry out air quality modelling studies to evaluate 
the impacts of future climate on air pollutant 
concentrations.

42. Over the next 2 years we will carry out a review 
of the available evidence on how climate change 
will alter both social and environmental responses 
to air pollution to inform future research and 
policy development.

D AIR QUALITY ACTIONS 

54Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 3. The natural environment




standards and current levels of security of supply. 
Climate change is already a major pressure. With 
projections for the UK of rising temperatures, wetter 
winters, drier summers, more intense rainfall events 
and greater climate variability, we can expect to 
experience higher water demand, more widespread 
water stress with increased risk of drought, more 
water quality problems, as well as more extreme 
downpours with a higher risk of flooding.

For all these reasons, finding ways to use water  
more sustainably is essential from an adaptation 
perspective. But it also matters for our mitigation 
efforts. Water usage has a significant carbon 
footprint, due to the energy intensive processes we 
rely on to supply us with clean water. So using water 
more efficiently will help us cut emissions, as well as 
ensuring we adapt to the warming climate. Pages 
122 to 124 explain what Defra is doing to cut 
emissions in the water sector.

In England, our public water supply systems take 
advantage of rainfall from October to March to 
replenish reservoirs and aquifers, with relatively little 
dependence on summer rainfall. However, climate 
change will affect the spatial and temporal distribution 
of rainfall in this country. Summer rainfall is expected 
to reduce, particularly in southern England, and less 
water may be available for abstraction, such as from 
rivers for irrigation. Climate projections suggest that 
winter rainfall will increase in some regions by as 
much as 30% by the 2080s, while rainfall intensity 
could increase. Recent work26 by the Environment 
Agency suggests that the net effects of changing 
rainfall patterns could reduce river flows by 15% by 
the 2050s. These changes to the overall pattern of 
rainfall arising from climate change represent a major 
challenge to the water sector.

Water: risks, opportunities and impacts of 
climate change

Drought Less water for crop irrigation.

Impacts on trees, grass and other 
green cover.

Low flows on waterways  
affecting tourism.

Increased stress for fragile habitats 
and species.

Low flows in sewers increasing  
risk of blockage and premature 
operation of overflows, or 
surcharge and flooding when 
rainfall occurs.

Possible restriction of supply for 
non-essential uses.

Increased 
incidence  
of extreme 
weather 
events


 

Increased surface water run-off 
affects water and soil quality:

•  Transporting pollutants from 
houses, roads and parks into 
sewers.

•  Removing nutrients and soil from 
agricultural land to watercourses.

Overflowing sewers, washing foul 
sewerage into rivers, watercourses 
and the ocean.

Sea level 
rise 

Saline intrusion affecting fresh 
water sources.


 

26  Reported in Water for People and the Environment, Environment Agency 2009 water resources strategy

55Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 3. The natural environment




Policy and practical responses
Future Water,27 the Government’s water strategy for 
England, set out how we want the water sector to look 
by 2030, and some of the steps we will need to take  
to get there. It is a vision where rivers, canals, lakes  
and seas have improved for people and wildlife, with 
benefits for angling, boating and other recreational 
activities, and where we continue to provide excellent 
quality drinking water. It is a vision of a sector that 
values and protects its water resources; that delivers 
water to customers through fair, affordable and 
cost-reflective charges; where flood risk is addressed 
with markedly greater understanding and use of good 
surface water management; and where the water 
industry has cut its greenhouse gas emissions. 

The vision shows a sector that is resilient to climate 
change, with its likelihood of more frequent droughts 
as well as floods, and to population growth, with 
forward planning fully in tune with these adaptation 
challenges. To achieve this vision, our water 
requirements must be assessed over the long-term,  
as well-managed changes take time to put in place.  
In recent years, regular planning processes have been 
introduced, such as Water Resources Management 
Plans and River Basin Management Plans. The use of 
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SUDS), which manage 
surface water more effectively by replicating natural 
systems, is being encouraged. These processes 
provide mechanisms to embed adaptation into the 
way we manage water.

The new Adaptation Reporting Power established under 
the Climate Change Act 2008 allows Government to 
require public authorities and ‘statutory undertakers’ 
(including the economic regulator, Ofwat, and individual 
water companies) to report to Government on their 
assessment of current and future predicted impacts of 
climate change on their functions; their proposals and 
policies for adapting to climate change; and their 
assessment of their progress. The first reports are 
expected to be returned in 2011. The reports will be 
looked at by the Adapting to Climate Change 

Programme and water policy leads within Defra. This 
way, key risks, barriers to or gaps in adaptation will be 
picked up and will feed into the Government’s National 
Adaptation Programme. The reports may also highlight 
areas for Government intervention.

Defra will continue to participate in the new Climate 
Change Water Resources Forum, with the EA, Met 
Office, Defra, Ofwat, WaterUK and UK Water Industry 
Research (UKWIR). This aims to identify the main 
strategic and policy challenges which climate change 
introduces to the management of water resources, and 
to identify, prioritise, and address the evidence gaps.

Managing demand for water 
The Environment Agency’s abstraction licensing 
regime is the primary mechanism for achieving 
sustainable management of water resources and 
avoiding excess claims on available water. We will be 
changing the scope of the licensing regime to bring 
all significant abstractions under control. This means 
that all sectors could have their allocations of water 
changed, if necessary, to respond to climate impacts. 

Water Resource Management Plans (WRMPs) look 
ahead 25 years to secure a sustainable balance between 
supply and demand for water, taking account of the 
impact of climate change. These plans are reviewed 
annually and revised every five years. Ministers have 
agreed that 18 of the first cycle of WRMPs (covering the 
period from 2010 to 2035) can now be published by 
water companies in their final form. Further work by 
Defra and the Environment Agency on the impacts of 
climate change on rivers flows and groundwater will 
inform our guidance to the water industry for the next 
cycle of plans (from 2015 onwards). 

Improving water efficiency
Climate change and a growing population mean that 
the way we currently use water is damaging our 
natural environment and is not sustainable. More 
efficient use of water is a key adaptation and 
mitigation issue: 

27 Available at: http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/quality/water/strategy/pdf/future-water.pdf

56Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 3. The natural environment




• leakage from the water supply system has reduced 
by around 37% since 1994-95 Government  
is working with water companies to increase  
operational efficiency.

• in 2008, the Government published its water 
strategy for England, Future Water, which set out 
a vision for water by 2030 and the framework for 
water management in England. Future Water outlined 
an ambition to reduce a person’s average daily  
water consumption from 150 litres to 130 litres. 
Communities and Local Government (CLG) are 
introducing a new minimum water efficiency 
standard of 125 litres per person per day for all new 
homes from April 2010. New publicly-funded social 
housing is already being built to Code Level 3 which 
includes a water efficiency standard of 105 litres per 
person per day.

• an Act on CO


2

 publicity campaign was launched in 

September 2009 to highlight the importance of 
saving water, and to provide tips to help households 
waste less water.

• metering can reduce average household water use 
by about 10%. Currently 37% of households in 
England and Wales have water meters. Under the 
Ofwat Price Review of water charges in 2009 
(PR09), the rate of water metering for households 
in England and Wales is planned to increase to 50% 
by 2014-15. This will encourage improved water 
efficiency in the home. The Government is 
considering metering policy in light of the Walker 
review which was published in December 2009.

• Defra and Communities and Local Government 
(CLG) are working with the Department of Energy 
and Climate Change (DECC) to provide incentives for 
water and energy companies to work co-operatively 
with local authorities to retrofit existing homes with 
energy and water efficiency measures through 
schemes including CERT (the Carbon Emissions 
Reduction Target), CESP (Community Energy Saving 
Programme) and HEMS (Household and Energy 
Management Strategy). With cross-Whitehall 
support, CLG has also launched a series of “local 
carbon framework” pilots to explore how much 
more authorities can do to mitigate climate change. 

Maintaining water quality
Climate change is a growing pressure which could 
have serious impacts for water quality: low flowing 
rivers will have reduced capacity to dilute pollutants, 
and extreme weather events capable of producing 
problems such as sudden surface water run-off which 
washes pollutants into rivers, watercourses and 
sewers will occur more frequently.

SUDS can help to slow the volume and flow  
of water in peak rainfall as well as improving 
the quality of water flowing to sewers and 
watercourses. SUDS can also tackle water 
scarcity by preventing surface water run-off 
simply flowing to sewers, instead enabling the 
water to attenuate and infiltrate. 

Lamb Drove is a ground-breaking project which 
demonstrates sustainable water management 
techniques. Through the management of water 
and reducing the impact of urbanisation on 
flooding, Cambridge City Council and their 
partners have shown that Sustainable Drainage 
Systems (SUDS) are a practical alternative to 
traditional approaches.

Retro-fitting the Lamb Drove development site  
with SUDS and other flood proofing and water 
management measures, including swales, filter 
strips, wetland basins, green roofs, water butts and 
permeable paving has significantly reduced the 
impact of development on flooding and on new 
housing development. Additional benefits include 
improved water quality and the creation of new 
habitats in urban watercourses and open spaces. 

Lamb Drove – Sustainable 
Drainage Systems (SUDS)

An attenuation pond in Bicester 
© Environment Agency

57Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 3. The natural environment




The Water Framework Directive established a 
catchment-based approach to water management, 
which is now being implemented through River Basin 
Management Plans. The first of these plans, covering 
the period from 2010 to 2015, were published in 
December 2009. They will be updated every five years. 
The Environment Agency has carried out ‘climate 
proofing’ assessments to ensure that measures set out 
in the plans take account of the latest climate evidence. 

£2.5 billion is being invested in the Thames Tideway 
Scheme, to reduce the level of untreated sewage 
overflowing from London’s sewers into the River Thames 
and the River Lee. This will significantly boost the capacity 
of the sewerage system, so that it is better able to cope 
with changes in precipitation patterns and to protect 
water quality in the Thames for decades to come.

Future investment
Ofwat is the economic regulator for the water 
industry and has a key role to play in encouraging the 
regulated water and sewerage companies to adapt to 
climate change and share best practice across the 

sector. Ofwat published its “PR09” Price Review  
of water charges for the period 2010-15 on 26 
November 2009. Investment levels for the water 
industry were set at £22 billion for the next five years, 
including £4.6 billion worth of investment to improve 
drinking water and the environment.

Adaptation had a high priority in PR09. Ofwat scrutinised 
all proposals to ensure the case for investment was 
backed by clear evidence. Significant adaptation 
investments were allowed; for example, to increase the 
resilience of water supplies to extreme weather events. 
Recognising that new evidence on climate change (such 
as from the UKCP09 projections) will emerge between 
Price Review periods, Ofwat has enabled companies 
through the change protocol process to come forward 
with proposals before the next price review in 2014 to 
fund investment to meet climate change impacts.

Agriculture
In general, climate change – in particular higher 
temperatures and drier summers – is likely to increase 
the demand for agricultural irrigation in the summer. 

Water resources are already a big issue for 
farmers and land managers, and hotter, drier 
summers and a growing population will place 
greater pressure on supplies. Nearly a third of 
UK water catchments are already over-abstracted, 

and the Environment Agency predict that water 
demand could increase by 25% by 2020. 

In 1997 a group of farmers in the East of England 
set up the Broadland Agricultural Water Abstractors 
Group after farmers felt growing pressure to protect 
water supplies. Andrew Alston, a local farmer and 
Chief Executive of the Group, says there used to be 
no support on water resources for farmers in the 
area. The Group were awarded the Environment 
Agency’s Water Efficiency Award in 2007. Today  
the Group includes breweries, glasshouses, and 
processors amongst its 180 members, covering 22 
water catchments and surrounded by 28 Broadland 
Sites of Special Scientific Interest. They work 
together to use their supplies efficiently, share 
knowledge and resources, while sub-groups target 
particular locations or issues. More efficient 
irrigation systems and five reservoirs are currently 
being developed.

Broadland Agricultural Water Abstractors Group – Andrew Alston

Lake on farm – created for storage of water for use on farm

58Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 3. The natural environment




43. The Flood and Water Management Bill, currently 
making its way through Parliament, will improve the 
process for temporary bans on water use during 
droughts, strengthen mandatory building standards 
for sewers, and make more robust arrangements for 
the approval, adoption and maintenance of SUDS.

44. Defra will consult on national standards for 
sustainable drainage systems (SUDS), and on SUDS 
regulations under the Floods and Water 
Management Bill, in 2010.

45. Private sewers and lateral drains connecting  
to the public network will be transferred into the 
ownership of water and sewerage companies in 
England from 2011. This will improve and better 
integrate the management of our domestic 
sewerage system.

46. Defra has recently consulted on new proposals 
to time limit existing abstraction licences, providing 
a further way to manage the impacts of climate 
change on catchment areas. A revised approach will 
be announced this year.

47. New research to improve our understanding of 
home owner perceptions, attitudes and behaviours 
towards adopting water related efficiency 
retrofitting measures in their properties will become 
available in 2010 to inform future policy- and 
decision-making.

48. The Government is considering metering  
policy as part of its wider consideration of 
recommendations from the independent Walker 
Review of Charging for Household Water and 
Sewerage Services (December 2009). Ministers  
are considering the recommendations ahead of  
a public consultation.

49. The Water Supply (Water Fittings) Regulations 
are being reviewed to explore the scope of setting 
new performance standards for key water-using 
fittings to complement whole house performance 
standards to be set in Building Regulations.

D WATER AVAILABILITY AND QUALITY ACTIONS 

However, changes to farming practice, crop type  
or variety, can reduce the demand for water from 
agriculture, and research and knowledge transfer can 
also help address water use. 

Nearly £13 million a year is being invested in the England 
Catchment Sensitive Farming Delivery Initiative which 
provides farmers in priority areas with capital grants and 
tailored advice to develop more water-friendly farming 
practice and also establishes strategic partnerships, 
workshops and events to improve farmer awareness and 
reduce the impact of agriculture on the environment. 
Catchment Sensitive Farming techniques are increasingly 
recognised as an important way to deal with diffuse 
water pollution, soil protection, reductions in greenhouse 
gas emissions, flood management and pesticide control. 

Defra is currently developing an inventory of methods 
and their effects on diffuse water pollution, 
greenhouse gas emissions and ammonia emissions 

from agriculture. This guidance will encourage 
improved environmental management practices on 
agricultural land to reduce the likelihood of pollutants 
being released into water courses and the loss of soils.

Rural Park – children kayaking.

59Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 3. The natural environment




Flooding: risks, opportunities and impacts of 
climate change

Increased 
incidence  
of extreme 
weather 
events

Increased frequency and intensity 
of all types of flooding and  
coastal erosion. 

Risks to life and limb, critical 
infrastructure, the economy, the 
natural environment and health and 
wellbeing of individuals will increase. 

Not economically, technically or 
environmentally sustainable to 
maintain all our current defences in 
the future.

Adapting to climate change

4.  Flooding and  
coastal erosion 

Flooding and coastal erosion cause significant damage and disruption in England,  
as events in Cumbria in November 2009 showed. Across the country, around 5.2 
million properties are currently at risk of flooding; climate change will increase both 
the level of risk and the damage it can cause. The Environment Agency estimates that 
investment in flood and coastal risk management assets needs to almost double by 
2035 (not taking into account inflation) to maintain current levels of protection against 
river and sea flooding, due to a combination of deterioration of existing defences and 
the impacts of climate change (based on the “medium” emissions scenario in UKCP09). 

Flooding in Cockermouth, Cumbria (November 2009); 
900 homes and businesses were inundated.

60Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 4. Flooding and coastal erosion




Policy and practical responses
Future Investment
Future investment is guided by Shoreline Management 
Plans (SMPs) and Catchment Flood Management 
Plans (CFMPs), which give an overview of the flood 
and erosion risk over a given area and consider how it 
should be managed over a period of up to 100 years.

The Environment Agency’s Long Term Investment 
Strategy sets out the scale of investment needed in 
flood and coastal defences over the next 25 years, 
taking account of climate impacts. Spending on flood 
and coastal erosion risk management would need to 
increase from £570m in 2010-2011 to around £1 
billion by 2035 to protect roughly the same number 
of properties that can be protected today from river 
and coastal flooding. However, the benefits of doing 
this outweigh the costs many times over. Private as 
well as public benefits are involved, and therefore we 
should not assume all costs should be met by central 
Government. Defra is working with the Environment 
Agency and HM Treasury to review how investments 
are prioritised and how costs might be shared in 
future, recognising that budgets beyond the current 
spending period have not yet been agreed.

Investments in flood and coastal erosion risk 
management may have a lifetime of 100 years, so it  
is vital when building and maintaining defences, or 
developing wider plans for managing flood and 

Car stranded in floodwater – the cleanup 
from floods is expensive and takes time.

Coastal flooding in Newquay © Environment Agency

61Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 4. Flooding and coastal erosion




erosion risk, to consider how they will cope in a 
changed climate. Defra has already issued guidance 
on this; for example, operating authorities are advised 
to allow for a 20% increase in peak river flows by 
2080. Defra is reviewing the latest evidence to 
establish if this guidance needs to be updated. 

New and alternative approaches to adapt to flood 
and coastal erosion risk 
In the future, we need to make use of a wider range 
of approaches for managing the risks of flooding  
and coastal erosion. The Department is working to 
develop alternative approaches for adapting to flood 
and coastal erosion risk that work better with natural 
processes, are more cost effective and deliver multiple 
benefits. For example:

• a £5.5 million local authority grant scheme to 
fund property level defences (like flood boards) to 
householders at high risk of flooding where large 
scale defences are unlikely to be built in the near 
future. This scheme helped a number of properties 
in Appleby to avoid damage during the recent 
flooding in Cumbria.

• an £11 million Coastal Pathfinder Programme 
to road-test new and innovative approaches for 
adapting to coastal change. The lessons learned by 
the pathfinders will inform development of future 
policy and/or guidance.

Defra is working with the Environment Agency and 
other delivery bodies to ensure that the Government’s 
investment in flood and erosion risk management 
contributes to wider objectives to sustain and improve 
the natural environment. For example: restoring 
wildlife rich wetlands and natural flood retention 
areas could reduce flood risk downstream; and 
restoring habitats such as woodland in catchments 
and improving land and soil management could 
reduce run-off and local flood damages as well as 
sustaining the capacity of land to support agriculture 
in the long term.

Significant action has already been taken to protect 
communities from the risk of flooding: 

•  the Government has doubled its overall 
investment in flood and coastal erosion risk 
management in the last ten years to a record 
£2.15 billion over the current 3-year spending 
period.

•  through the Environment Agency, 106 flood 
defence schemes have been delivered since the 
2007 summer floods. These are protecting over 
63,800 additional homes in England.

•  a new £7.7m Flood Forecasting Centre, jointly run 
by the Environment Agency and the Met Office,  
is already providing important services to local 
authorities and emergency responders, helping 
them to be better prepared for potential flooding. 

•  Government is implementing all the 
recommendations of the Pitt Review to improve 
the management of flood and coastal erosion risk 
in England – the Floods and Water Management 
Bill is an important element of this.

Action on flooding 

62Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 4. Flooding and coastal erosion




The “Wild Coast” project at Wallasea is 
restoring distinctive landscape and reducing 
long-term flood risks by returning arable 
farmland to salt marsh and recreating the 
transition zone that existed centuries ago 
between land and sea. 

A process of “managed realignment” has allowed 
the tide back onto its old flood plain. The risk of 
flooding has been reduced and the newly created 
wetlands are providing opportunities for recreation 
and leisure, with a series of open spaces and 4km 
of footpaths. They also provide a habitat for brent 
geese, oystercatchers, grey plovers, dunlins, 
shelducks, curlews, avocets, little terns, and otters. 

50. Defra has an extensive joint research 
programme with the Environment Agency, 
including a number of current projects to inform 
policy on climate change adaptation: building on 
UKCP09 for example, making properties more 
resilient to flooding and understanding how the 
development of “blue corridors” could help make 
space for water in urban areas.

51. The Flood and Water Management Bill is 
currently before Parliament. This will put us in  
a better position to cope with the additional 
challenges posed by climate change, including 
through the creation of a new lead role for local 
authorities in tackling local flooding.

52. In 2010-11, Defra will continue to work with 
the Environment Agency and HM Treasury to 
review how investments in flood and coastal risk 
management are prioritised and how the costs 
might be shared in future.

53. Shoreline Management Plans outlining the 
management policies for each section of the coast 
and taking account of climate change will all be 
published by the end of 2011.

54. Defra will review latest scientific evidence  
and take a view as to whether further guidance  
is needed on allowing for climate change  
impacts when building and maintaining defences, 
or developing wider plans for managing flood and 
erosion risk. An announcement will be made later 
this year.

55. A new supplement to Planning Policy Statement 
25 on coastal flooding will be published by CLG in 
2010. Defra is working to support this process.

D FLOODS ACTIONS Wallasea Island, Essex

A Shelduck in flight © ukjesters (Dreamstime)

63Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 4. Flooding and coastal erosion




The Flood and Water Management Bill aims 
to provide better, more sustainable management 
of flood risk for people, homes and businesses, 
help safeguard community groups from 
unaffordable rises in surface water drainage 
charges and protect water supplies to the 
consumer. The Bill currently before Parliament 
will put us in a better position to cope with the 
additional challenges posed by climate change: 

•  the Bill will implement Sir Michael Pitt’s 
recommendations needing legislation following 
his review of the 2007 floods.

•  responsibilities for managing all flood risks are 
clearly defined; Local Authorities will have 
responsibility for surface water flooding –  
the first time this has been assigned in law.

•  local people will have greater input to shaping 
local flood and coastal erosion risk management 
strategies.

•  sustainable drainage systems must be considered 
for new developments and re-developments to 
help prevent surface run-off overloading the 
sewer system.

•  new powers will help water companies better 
control non-essential domestic uses of water 
during periods of water shortage.

The Flood and Water  
Management Bill 

Erosion defences © Environment Agency

64Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 4. Flooding and coastal erosion




Adapting to climate change

5. Oceans and seas

Climate change: likely impacts on oceans and seas

Ocean 
acidification

Affects the ability of certain organisms to form shells and skeletons, which in turn could 
impact on food webs and ecosystems. This may have implications for aquaculture and 
commercial fisheries, although the social and economic impacts of ocean acidification are 
not yet well understood.

Increasing  
sea surface 
temperatures

Implications for marine ecosystems, with plankton and fish populations shifting distribution 
and some bird and marine mammal species having to adapt to changing prey. Also greater 
numbers of invasive species may become established, and perhaps more shellfish- borne 
pathogens and harmful algal blooms posing risks to human health. New opportunities 
might include fisheries or aquaculture for warm-water species, better conditions for 
tourism, and melting of Arctic sea ice may offer savings through shorter shipping routes. 

Changes to 
ocean currents 
and circulation

Impacts on fish production. Invasive species could be carried into new areas. 

Seas and oceans cover around 70% of the Earth’s surface. The ecosystem services 
they provide include gas regulation, nutrient cycling, food production, raw materials 
and recreation, and they are criss-crossed with infrastructure, much of which is critical 
to the national economy. Key pressures and potential implications for the UK marine 
environment include: 

65Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 5. Oceans and seas




Climate change: likely impacts on oceans and seas

Changes in 
storm intensity

Increased or reduced storminess may have implications for infrastructure (such as ports, 
offshore wind turbines and oil and gas rigs) and coastal habitats. New opportunities might 
include enhanced conditions for offshore wind and wave-based power generation, 
however flash-flooding and intense precipitation events may lead to release of nutrients 
and contaminants with consequences for marine life and human health.

Relative 
sea-level rise

Potential increase in the frequency of extreme high-water level events, coastal erosion, 
flooding and inundation of aquifers and infrastructure. Sea level rise will be less severe in 
Scotland where the land is rising, compared to SE England which is subsiding.

Policy and practical responses
We are already working with a range of organisations 
to improve our understanding of the impacts of climate 
change on the marine environment. Defra is one of 
several partners in the Marine Climate Change Impacts 
Partnership (MCCIP), which was set up to fulfil a 
recommendation in Charting Progress: An Integrated 
Assessment of the State of the UK Seas28, which 
identified climate change and unsustainable fishing as 
the two main threats to our marine environment (and 
the benefits that we draw from it). The aim of MCCIP29 
is to provide a co-ordinating framework for the UK  

to transfer evidence on climate change impacts on 
the marine environment to policy advisors and 
decision makers. 

We are also working with the Natural Environment 
Research Council (NERC) and DECC on the UK Ocean 
Acidification Programme, a 5 year £12m research 
programme launched last year that will improve our 
understanding of ocean acidification, its impacts on 
biodiversity and on the Whole Earth System including 
commercial fisheries. 

28  Available at: www.defra.gov.uk/environment/marine/science/stateofsea.htm
29  www.mccip.org.uk

Seal swimming in water at a seal sanctuary in Gweek Creek, Cornwall.

66Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 5. Oceans and seas




Lundy is an island off the north Devon coast.  
Its surrounding waters became England’s first 
Marine Conservation Zone (MCZ) on 12 January 
2010, under the Marine and Coastal Access Act 
2009. The healthy marine habitats of natural 
reefs, sandbanks and sea caves host a wide 
variety of wildlife including grey seals and 
many different species of coral.

The Marine and Coastal Access Act allows local 
byelaws to be put in place to protect the marine life 
within these MCZs from potentially damaging human 
activities. MCZs, which will include existing Marine 
Protected Areas, will aim to support the resilience  
of marine biodiversity against various pressures, 
including climate change. The provisions of the 
Marine and Coastal Access Act enable MCZs to be 
changed or moved, which will help us to respond if, 
for example, climate change alters species distribution. 
The potential impact of climate change on species 
distribution is currently being researched on behalf 
of Defra.

Lundy – Marine Conservation Zone

Defra provides support for the Cefas Coastal 
Temperature Network, a series of 39 coastal monitoring 
sites around England and Wales, some of which have 
been recording sea surface temperature continuously 
since the early 1900s. Defra, in association with the 
Met Office and Environment Agency, also support the 
Wavenet monitoring network of offshore buoys. These 
buoys provide near real-time information on incoming 
wave heights as well as sea temperature, that are used 
by flood managers, local authorities and stakeholders to 
assess flood risk and provide an early warning capability.

We are taking forward research to help us to 
understand what changing sea surface temperature 
and circulation might mean for the movement of 
species and for the new Marine Conservation Zones 
(MCZs) that will be established under the Marine and 
Coastal Access Act 2009. The Marine and Coastal 

Access Act 2009, the first of its kind anywhere in the 
World, introduced a single piece of legislation for the 
protection of the marine environment. Through a new 
marine planning system we are able to manage our 
environmental, social and economic needs together, 
and there will be a new ecologically coherent network 
of Marine Conservation Zones by 2012. The new 
Marine Management Organisation (MMO) will be  
a centre of marine expertise, as well as licensing 
authority for various activities.

Jewel Anemones, Lundy © Sally Sharrock

67Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 5. Oceans and seas




Adaptation action in the marine environment is 
still at a relatively early stage. In many areas, 
we are still working on improving our understanding 
of how climate change will affect UK and global seas. 
However, there are still actions that can be taken 
now to ensure that adaptation is built into longer 
term planning, to ensure other pressures on the 
marine environment are reduced so that it becomes 
more resilient to change, and to strengthen co-
operation with stakeholders and the general public 
to prepare for change.

Defra is improving its evidence and understanding 
of climate change impacts and adaptation 
requirements by:

56. Commissioning research into new or emerging 
adaptation issues. In March 2009, a joint Natural 
Environment Research Council, Defra and DECC 
Ocean Acidification Research Programme, worth 
£12 million, was launched. The programme will run 
over 5 years, and outputs will support our work  
on adaptation.

57. Supporting the Marine Climate Change Impacts 
Partnership from 2010 to 2015.

58. Ensuring effective management and use of 
marine climate data through the Marine Science 
Coordination Committee, which published the first 
UK Marine Science Strategy in February 2010. 

59. Ensuring that new domestic and EU strategies 
and guidelines take account of climate impacts for 
example, the UK Marine Planning Statement, which 
will be issued for consultation during 2010 and the 
Marine Management Organisation which will be 
preparing marine plans from 2011.

60. Developing a programme of measures designed 
to achieve or maintain good environmental status, 
which will be put into practice by 2016; ensuring 
that adaptation is factored into implementation of 
the Marine Strategy Framework Directive by 2015.

61. Introducing a network of Marine Protected Areas, 
including new Marine Conservation Zones in our own 
waters by 2012, which will improve resilience.

62. Seeking reform to the EU Common Fisheries 
Policy that will achieve sustainable fish stocks, 
reduce discards, and provide increased certainty  
and flexibility over access to fisheries for the 
industry. We expect the European Commission to 
submit a formal proposal to the European Parliament 
in early 2011 and will seek to ensure that adaptation 
is embedded in any reforms.

63. Publishing the findings of the Environmentally 
Responsible Fishing Scheme in 2010.

64. Supporting a pilot for ‘climate smart’ working  
in 2011, which will be co-ordinated by MCCIP, 
helping sectors and communities using the marine 
environment to adapt to climate change. The 2010 
annual report card will draw on the UK Climate 
Projections 2009, helping us to build a better 
understanding of potential impacts on the  
marine environment. 

D OCEANS AND SEAS ACTIONS 

68Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 5. Oceans and seas




Adapting to climate change

6.  Sustainable 
consumption and 
production & waste

Defra leads for Government as champion of sustainable 
development (SD) to ensure it is delivered nationally, 
regionally and locally and sees sustainable development 
as the solution to many of the challenges identified in 
this plan. In many ways, adapting to climate change 
can be seen as a specific sub-section of sustainable 
development. The objective is to enable sustainable 
development in all areas of society, economy and 
environment, in the light of a particular risk to 
achieving that – the risk of a changing climate.

Defra’s Adapting to Climate Change Programme 
contributes to our activity on sustainable development, 
and Defra’s Sustainable Development Action Plan30 
contains a section on adapting to climate change 
which describes the relationship between these two 
areas and how the Adapting to Climate Change 
Programme is helping to deliver sustainable 
development principles.

Section 6.1 looks at the impacts of climate change  
on waste and waste management, in particular  
waste infrastructure.

30 Available at:  http://www.defra.gov.uk/sustainable/defra/action-plan.htm 

Defra’s strategic objectives include a vision of sustainable, low carbon and resource 
efficient patterns of consumption and production. We are working towards an economy 
where products and services are designed, produced, used and disposed of in ways 
that minimise carbon emissions, waste and the use of non-renewable resource.  
Our approach is to work with business to improve their understanding of the impacts 
of the products and services they provide, and to reduce the use of all forms of 
natural resources in their production processes. As the climate changes, citizens’ 
understanding of the links between resource use and climate change is likely to 
stimulate greater demand for ‘greener’ products, services and the skills to deliver 
them. This will provide economic opportunities across many sectors. 

69Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 6. Sustainable consumption and production & waste




6.1 The waste sector
The impacts of climate change in the waste sector  
will vary depending on the characteristics of the waste 
management activity concerned. Landfill sites are 
likely to experience a distinct set of impacts. Other than 
landfill, the impacts are largely dependent on whether 
the waste management activity (e.g. recovering energy-
from-waste, recycling, waste treatment and sorting) 
takes place in the open air or within a building. 
Climate change may also impact on the supporting 
waste collection systems and the composition, 
quantity and nature of waste arisings.

Based on research commissioned by the Environment 
Agency31 the most important risks and impacts to 
waste and waste management relate to:

Waste: risks, opportunities and impacts of 
climate change

Hotter, drier 
summers 
and warmer, 
wetter 
winters

Open air waste activities 
particularly affected by: 

• increased disease transmission, 

• increased nuisance from pests, 
odour and dust 

• increased bioaerosol release.

At landfill sites:

• reduced methane gas production

• Impacts on gas management.

Wetter 
winters

Impacts on landfill site hydrology. 

Increased run-off and pollution 
from sites.

Increased 
incidence  
of extreme 
weather 
events

Impacts on the stability of land, 
particularly at landfill sites including:

• reduced slope stability 

• increased risk of subterranean 
subsistance and heave.

Impacts of flooding especially:

• increased pollution of the 
environment and consequent 
impacts on human health 

• impacts on site infrastructure and 
waste collection.

Sea level rise Flooding of coastal facilities.

Policy and practical responses
Defra is working closely with the EA, the Waste and 
Resources Action Programme (WRAP) and others to 
improve our understanding of the potential impacts of 
climate change and to ensure that advice on action to 
address these impacts is promulgated as part of our 
respective roles in engaging with the waste sector. 

31  Potential Impacts of Climate Change on Waste Management (2003).  
Available at: http://publications.environment-agency.gov.uk/pdf/SX1-042-TR-e-p.pdf?lang=_e  
The impact of Climate Change on waste Regulation (2008) http://publications.environment-agency.gov.uk/pdf/SCHO0508BODA-e-e.pdf

70Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 6. Sustainable consumption and production & waste

Bottle bank © WRAP




32  Available at: http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/waste/localauth/facilities.htm

Understanding the impacts of climate change
Our knowledge is not complete and climate change 
projections are improving all the time. We will keep 
under review the need to update our assessment of 
impacts on waste and waste management in light of:

• the most recent climate change projections 
(e.g. UKCP09).

• the continuing shift in waste management 
infrastructure away from landfills towards  
other types of waste management facilities  
(e.g. anaerobic digestion, energy-from-waste). 
These new technologies need to be resilient to 
climate change so our understanding of the impacts 
must account for the likely shape of the waste 
management sector in 20-30 years.

Ensuring the waste sector is resilient  
to climate change
Defra, the Environment Agency, WRAP and others are 
working to embed, where appropriate, messages on 
climate change adaptation within the range of guidance 
and regulatory and advisory services they collectively 
provide to the waste sector. This will help individuals and 
organisations involved in making decisions about how to 
manage waste at the local and regional level to account 
for the effect that climate change may have on their 
strategies, plans and waste management operations. 

Examples of where climate change adaptation 
messages have already been successfully  
embedded include:

• the Planning Policy Statement on Climate Change 
(published by CLG in December 2007), underlines that 
tackling climate change should sit at the centre of all 
planning considerations. At the heart of the PPS is the 
principle of ensuring that the nature and location of 
development – which includes waste management 
facilities minimises vulnerability, and provides 
resilience, to the impacts of a changing climate. 

• the Environment Agency is continuing to work with 
planning authorities and regional partners to ensure 
that local and regional plans such as regional 
strategies and municipal waste management 

strategies contain appropriate measures and 
strategies to adapt to a changing climate. 

• Environment Agency staff, when undertaking their 
regulatory duties at waste management facilities, 
consider whether the facilities are resilient to the risks 
posed by climate change and provide advice and 
guidance as appropriate. To help inform their activities, 
the Environment Agency have, for example, developed 
a list of landfill sites that may be affected by coastal 
and river flooding.

• Defra, in partnership with the Commission for 
Architecture and the Built Environment (CABE), has 
produced guidance on the design of waste facilities: 
Designing Waste Facilities, a key guide to modern 
design in waste32. The guide contains best practice 
advice on climate change mitigation and adaptation, 
including how to make new waste infrastructure 
resilient to unavoidable climate change. 

65. During 2010, Defra and the Environment 
Agency will review international approaches to the 
management of waste in countries that are already 
coping with vulnerability (e.g. flooding in the 
Netherlands) or are currently experiencing climatic 
conditions consistent with those that we anticipate 
for the UK in decades to come (e.g. US, Europe).

66. Defra is working with WRAP to identify how they 
can play a greater role in helping the waste sector 
adapt to climate change, for example, embedding 
adaptation messages within its advice to local 
authorities on household collections. We will ensure 
that WRAP’s new remit is appropriately reflected 
within its corporate business plan for 2010/11.

67. Defra will consider how to embed adaptation  
in guidance on procurement, particularly in relation 
to waste infrastructure by September 2010. This 
includes making use of the proposed joint OGC/
ACC guide, due to be published in Spring 2010,  
on how to incorporate climate change adaptation 
within procurement decisions in the public sector. 

D WASTE ACTIONS 

71Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 6. Sustainable consumption and production & waste




Adapting to climate change

7.  Embedding adaptation 
to climate change  
in Defra 

The national programme of action on adaptation in 
England is being taken forward by the Adapting to 
Climate Change Programme, which is a cross-
Government programme led by Defra. 

This DSO shapes the delivery of all of our departmental 
priorities (for example, our approach to flood defences) 
as well as the delivery of cross-government objectives.

Leadership
Climate change adaptation cuts across virtually all of 
Defra’s policy responsibilities, including farming and 
food, animal and plant diseases, ecosystems, water 
management, floods, and conservation. Reflecting 
this, Defra places a high priority on effective senior-
level involvement with adaptation issues. 

The Department’s Ministerial champion for adaptation 
is responsible for encouraging action and engagement 
within Defra and with stakeholders. In the next 12 
months, the Ministerial champion will:

• meet key Non-Government Organisations (NGOs) 
and Defra delivery partners, for example by chairing 

meetings of the existing Adaptation Partnership 
Board which meets quarterly to bring in stakeholder 
perspectives on the ACC Programme.

• set out the importance of adaptation in terms of 
Defra’s policy interests and how the Department is 
responding, at a number of events involving Defra 
stakeholders and other people and organisations 
that we need to influence.

• commission and scrutinise the results of an annual 
report on progress in implementing Defra’s 
Adaptation Plan.

• speak at a staff event in Spring 2010, following the 
publication of Defra’s Climate Change Plan, on the 
crucial importance of addressing climate change in 
order to meet our key Departmental objectives.

• with the Minister for the Natural Environment, 
launch a discussion document focused on the role 
of the natural environment in underpinning our 
adaptive capacity.

• chair at least one Ministerial-level meeting on 
adaptation to further encourage coherence and 
co-ordination of work across central Government.

Defra has a Departmental Strategic Objective (DSO1) which focuses the Department 
on delivering: a society that is adapting to the effects of climate change, through 
a national programme of action and a contribution to international action. 

72Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 7. Embedding adaptation to climate change in Defra




Defra’s Management Board carries out a quarterly 
review of the Department’s DSOs, including DSO 1  
on adaptation. The ACC Programme is also one of  
12 priority Board Programmes for the Department 
which means that it is also scrutinised in greater  
detail by the Management Board. Ministers and the 
Management Board receive regular face-to-face 
briefings on climate issues – most recently in the 
context of publishing the Department’s new Evidence 
Investment Strategy, which positions climate change 
as one of the three main policy and evidence 
challenges that the Department faces. 

The Director of Climate Change Adaptation,  
Air Quality, Landscape, and Rural Affairs (CALR) is the 
Senior Responsible Owner (SRO) for the Adapting to 
Climate Change Programme and chairs the Adapting 
to Climate Change Programme Board, which brings 
together and co-ordinates action in partnership with 
all the main Government Departments. The CALR 
Director is also the “Senior Owner” for adaptation 
within Defra, providing leadership and ensuring  
a clear focus on identifying and responding to  
climate risks across the full range of Defra policy 
responsibilities and our estate. A standing Defra 
Adaptation Group, chaired by the SRO, brings 
together policy-makers at Director level to encourage 
engagement and action across the full range of  
issues that Defra is responsible for. The Group has 
played an important role in supporting the 
development of Defra’s Departmental Adaptation 
Plan and will continue to monitor progress and 
maintain momentum.

Over the past year we have been conducting a project 
focusing on the implications of a changing climate  
for our vision of a healthy and resilient natural 
environment. This project has identified that the short 
term impacts of climate change will be seen most 
clearly in natural systems and that healthy natural 
systems are required to underpin the adaptive capability 
of the economy and society. Working with key partners 
in the conservation sector and across the Defra network 
we will publish a discussion document designed to take 
a lead in setting out our vision of a whole systems 
approach to policy and delivery in this area. 

Adaptation is increasingly being embedded within 
Defra policy units. In many cases (such as the Farming 
for the Future Programme and all policy divisions 
contributing to the Natural Environment PSA) officials 
are now in place with specific responsibility for 
considering climate change impacts and how these 
may affect policy decisions or how such decisions can 
support effective adaptation. These officials have 
been closely involved in the development of Defra’s 
Climate Change Plan and represent a growing 
community of understanding across the Department. 
We will continue to use this network as a valuable 
way to discuss the latest evidence on climate impacts, 
and to share information and best practice.

Building awareness and understanding
To support the successful launch of the UK Climate 
Projections 2009, the ACC Programme and the UK 
Climate Impacts Programme (UKCIP) held a major 
series of ‘Projections in Practice’ (PiP) events from May 
to December 2009. These events were attended by 
more than 150 Defra staff, who have also benefitted 
from attending UKCIP’s classroom-based User 
Interface training to help them engage with the 
Projections at a practical level.

The Department makes full use of a range of internal 
communications tools to ensure that climate risks and 
the need for effective adaptation are maintained as 
‘here and now’ and ‘front of mind’ issues for Defra 
staff. For example, at the launch of the latest UK 
Climate Projections:

• many of our staff attended presentations on the 
science and the future that we need to plan for by 
the Secretary of State and the Department’s Chief 
Scientific Adviser.

• all staff received a tailored ‘Defra Briefing’ on the 
Projections, their significance, and the underlying 
science.

• most staff participated in the Department’s summer 
‘Discuss Defra’ briefings, which provided people 
with an opportunity to discuss the Projections in 
more detail in their policy and operational teams.

73Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 7. Embedding adaptation to climate change in Defra




Articles and information on climate change feature 
regularly in the Department’s ‘Landscape’ newsletter 
and on our internal website. Last autumn, as part  
of the preparations for Copenhagen, staff received 
briefings on the importance of adaptation as part of 
the global response to climate change.

As part of the process of developing Defra’s 
Departmental Adaptation Plan, staff from the ACC 
Programme have sponsored or participated in a range 
of workshops and ‘challenge sessions’ with policy 
colleagues across the Department. This has helped 
further to raise the profile of adaptation in Defra. 
Work has also been done with key operational teams 
in Defra; for example, Defra’s procurement team have 
provided opportunities to discuss adaptation with the 
Department’s suppliers and other procurement 
partners through a standing Suppliers Forum.

Corporate processes
Defra is working to make sure that climate change 
adaptation is fully embedded in key appraisal and 
decision-making processes. Some progress has already 
been made, but we recognise that there is still much 
more to do.

To-date, progress has been achieved in the  
following areas:

• investment appraisal: work is being done to 
ensure that supplementary guidance on adaptation 
for the HM Treasury’s Green Book: Appraisal and 
evaluation in central government (which was 
published alongside the launch of the Projections in 
June 2009) has a high profile and is being used to 
inform decision-making in Defra. In 2010, Defra will 
review take-up and impact of the guidance and 
take steps to ensure that usage is maintained.

• procurement: the ACC Programme is developing 
guidance setting out why and how climate change 
adaptation should be incorporated within public 
procurement, which will be published in 2010.  

Defra will set out a plan for implementing the 
guidance with the Department’s central procurement 
team, so that climate change risks are increasingly 
built into our specific contractual arrangements with 
suppliers. Defra is also working with Buying Solutions 
(the national procurement partner for UK public 
services) to develop a new framework agreement for 
environmental services, which will provide Defra with 
quicker access to private sector expertise on climate 
change adaptation.

• horizon-scanning: Defra has a programme of 
futures analysis and horizon scanning. This is 
designed to analyse technological, environmental, 
economic and political trends which might present 
threats and opportunities to the Department and 
help to improve the evidence or to challenge the 
assumptions that underpin policy-making. Climate 
change is already one of the principal areas of 
attention for the Defra Evidence Programme, which 
provides the Department’s centre of expertise on 
horizon scanning. Defra’s animal health team also 
maintains a strong horizon scanning facility to 
assess disease threats to the UK, which can be 
influenced by climate factors.

• risk management: the Defra Management 
Board annually reviews the key concerns and 
themes emerging from the long-term horizon 
scanning programme. In addition, the Board carries 
out a formal, quarterly review of progress with 
DSOs, including delivery of DSO 1 (on climate 
change adaptation).

Again, a lot more needs to be done to ensure that 
climate risks are fully embedded within Defra’s key 
decision-making processes. In 2010, the Department 
will set out a plan of action to strengthen the 
incorporation of climate change risks within core 
processes such as the Defra policy cycle, impact 
assessment, and business planning.

74Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 7. Embedding adaptation to climate change in Defra




Evidence
The Department needs to be able to make sustainable 
adaptation decisions, at the right time to maximise 
the benefits and minimise the costs. To make these 
decisions and to be able to influence others we need 
good quality evidence. Defra’s new Evidence and 
Innovation Strategy (January 2010) recognises climate 
change as one of the major interlinked evidence 
challenges facing the Department. It also stresses  
the growing challenge in providing more specific 
knowledge of climate drivers and impacts; in particular, 
to support long-term procurement, estates management 
and policy decisions. 

Defra’s total expenditure on research related to 
adaptation was approximately £9.2m in 2009-10. 
However, the evidence contributing to climate change 
is spread across the Department; for example, 
relevant research is partly funded under the ACC 
Programme (£6.8m of the 2009-10 total), but also 
through parts of the farming and water programmes 
and elsewhere. (Relevant research activity is highlighted 
and discussed as part of the coverage of individual 
policy areas elsewhere in this document.) The new 
Strategy recognises the need to foster better 
communication and coordination across current 
boundaries so that gaps can be plugged and 
synergies exploited.

Policy actions around the challenges of climate 
change, sustainable food supply, and protecting 
ecosystem services all rely on an interdisciplinary 
approach to gathering evidence. Social research is 
recognised as a critical part of this disciplinary mix as 
it is people upon whom these policy actions will both 
impact and rely – people as individuals, households, 
organisations, communities and society. Defra’s 
Strategy commits the Department to enhancing  
social research capability in the period from 2010-13 
and beyond.

Within the ACC Programme, a dedicated evidence 
team is in place to identify and prioritise the most 
pressing gaps in the existing knowledge base for 
addressing climate change adaptation. Defra is well 
placed to use the UK Climate Projections to assess  
the climate change adaptation needs of all Defra 
policy areas, including farming and food, animal  
and plant disease, water management, floods, and 
conservation. The Adaptation Evidence Team consists 
of natural scientists, social researchers, operational 
researchers and economists. It supports the ACC 
Programme and other policy and research programmes 
across the Department in producing robust responses 
to climate risks by synthesising and deploying evidence 
from a range of different sources and disciplines.

Defra staff conservation volunteering.

75Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 7. Embedding adaptation to climate change in Defra




The Environment Agency 
Climate change is a corporate priority for the 
Environment Agency. All major delivery functions 
have undertaken a climate change risk assessment 
and considerable progress is being made. The Agency’s 
Long Term Investment Strategy for Flood and 
Coastal Risk Management, which sets out the 
investment priorities for the next 25 years, is based 
on modelling using the UK Climate Change 
Projections 2009 (UKCP09). The Thames Estuary 
2100 project has developed a tidal flood risk 
management plan to protect London from sea level 
rise, which is at the leading edge of adaptation 
policy. It is a strong example of how to implement 
the Green Book’s Supplementary Guidance on 
Adaptation. The Agency has a Climate Change 
Training Programme being rolled out to all staff, 
with specific modules in development to increase 
knowledge and skills for particular roles, such as 
engineers, environment protection, flood risk,  
and water resources.

Natural England
Since its inception in October 2006 Natural England 
has placed sustainable adaptation at the heart of its 
operational policy, decision making and advice.  
In March 2009, Natural England published landscape 
scale climate change adaptation strategies for the 
Norfolk Broads, Cumbria High Fells, Shropshire Hills 
and Dorset Downs. The project has now been 
extended across England into five more study areas: 
London, South East Northumberland Coastal Plain, 
Humberhead Levels, Sherwood, and a regional scale 

study in the South East of England. Natural England 
also administers approximately £0.5 billion a year  
of agri-environment monies and has integrated 
climate change considerations into Environmental 
Stewardship schemes so that adaptation is increasingly 
well delivered by private land managers and 
landowners. Natural England is working to develop 
a coordinated embedding programme to assess 
threats and opportunities from climate change across 
all its areas of work, and to identify opportunities to 
contribute to wider adaptation and mitigation goals.

Forestry Commission
The Forestry Commission has already established a 
comprehensive climate change research programme 
(largely undertaken by its research Agency, Forest 
Research) and a climate change communications 
initiative. The Forestry Commission has also set up a 
new Centre on Forests and Climate Change to study 
the effects of environmental and climate change on 
forestry, and how the sector can play its part in 
adaptation and mitigation of climate change. Key 
adaptation objectives for the Forestry Commission 
are: to increase the resilience of trees, woods and 
forests to climate change; to increase the role of 
trees and woodland in adapting the rural landscape 
to climate change; to enhance the role of street 
trees and urban woodland in minimising the impacts 
of climate change on our towns and cities; and, to 
use trees, woods and forests to help communicate 
and improve understanding of climate change issues 
and bring about behavioural change.

Key Defra delivery partners

Partnership working 
Close working with a range of delivery partners,  
other Government Departments, local and regional 
government, and NGOs is essential for Defra to 
achieve its key climate adaptation goals.

The Climate Change Act 2008 gives the Secretary of 
State a power to direct certain organisations to 
produce reports on how they are adapting to climate 

change. The Environment Agency is one of around 90 
organisations which has been issued with a direction 
and will be submitting its adaptation report in 
September 2010. A number of other Defra delivery 
partners have also been invited to report voluntarily. 
These include: the National Park Authorities and the 
Broads Authority; Natural England; the Forestry 
Commission; and British Waterways. Each of these 
organisations has expressed its willingness to be 

76Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 7. Embedding adaptation to climate change in Defra




involved. For example, Natural England have agreed 
to be amongst the first to report, by the end of 
September 2010. Its report will provide an excellent 
example of how climate risks to the natural 
environment might be managed. The National Park 
Authorities have agreed that they will embed 
adaptation into their long term National Park 
Management Plans and aim to be exemplars of 
landscape scale adaptation. 

Scrutiny
There are a number of mechanisms that will ensure 
continued scrutiny and constructive challenge of 
Defra’s adaptation planning:

• the independent Adaptation Sub-Committee of the 
Committee on Climate Change intends to review  
a strategic selection of Departmental Adaptation 
Plans post-publication.

• the progress made by Defra and other Departments 
to improve the preparedness of their estates to the 
impacts of climate change will be monitored 
formally through the new framework for 
sustainable development in Government. Reporting 
against this target is expected to begin in 2011-12.

• by end-March 2011, Defra will carry out a full 
review of progress in implementing its Adaptation 
Plan. Key findings will be reported on the 
Department’s website. To ensure that the review  
is as objective and meaningful as possible, we will 
consider the possibility of involving Defra’s Internal 
Audit team to support or lead this process.

• through the Department’s formal DSO reporting 
framework and priority Board reporting, the 
Management Board will continue to receive 
quarterly updates on how effectively Defra  
is adapting.

• Defra’s Sustainable Development Action Plan (SDAP) 
includes important commitments by March 2011  
to develop a more resilient Departmental estate  
and to further develop and encourage the use of 
‘sustainable adaptation’ as a key principle, both 
internally and at all levels across Government.  
The Department’s progress in meeting these 
commitments will be audited by the Sustainable 
Development Commission as part of its normal 
watchdog function.

68. In 2010 Defra will appoint a new Ministerial 
Champion for adaptation responsible for 
encouraging action and engagement within Defra 
and amongst our stakeholders.

69. Lead officials for adaptation have been 
identified across Defra’s policy areas. In 2010 we will 
establish a new information sharing network to 
exchange evidence and best practice approaches.

70. In 2010 Defra will set out a plan of action  
to incorporate climate change risks within core 
processes such as the Defra policy cycle, impact 
assessment and business planning processes.

71. By the end of March 2011 Defra will carry  
out a full review of progress in implementing its 
adaptation plan. Key findings will be published on 
the Defra website.

D CAPACITY BUILDING ACTIONS 

77Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 7. Embedding adaptation to climate change in Defra




Adapting to climate change

8. Summary of actions

Food, Farming and Land Management

The Global Food Chain

The UK enjoys a relatively high level of food security today, but we cannot be complacent. We need 
a better understanding of the impacts of climate change.

1. Defra and DfID are jointly sponsoring a Foresight study on Global Food and Farming Futures, which will 
include consideration of key climate impacts on the global food system out to 2050. An action plan will 
be published, along with a detailed final report in Autumn 2010. We will review progress in 2011.

2. Defra will make further information available through the UK Food Security Assessment, and review 
risks as new evidence becomes available. We will actively monitor the climate risks to harvests and the 
potential for more volatility in supplies and prices, as well as new animal disease and food safety risks. 

3. The Government will continue to work with the food industry to promote business continuity planning 
and resilience to flooding and other climate threats. Major food retailers and trade associations have 
been invited to report to Government in 2011 on key climate risks affecting their operations and the 
steps they are taking to address them (under the statutory Adaptation Reporting Power).

Agriculture

It is in farmers’ own best interests to adapt in order to strengthen resilience, seize opportunities 
and maintain a competitive industry. The first steps to adapt are likely to be small, allowing us to 
build resilience gradually; benefitting from lower costs and less disruption in the long run.

4. During 2010, Defra will build on existing project work with NE, EA and the Forestry Commission on 
priority adaptation measures for agriculture through further analysis of barriers to action, costs and 
benefits, and identification of research priorities and gaps. 

78Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 8. Summary of actions




5. During 2010 Defra will work with industry partners to explore the potential to support and  
encourage further voluntary adaptation action by farmers, including by enhancing existing advice  
and guidance arrangements.

6. From spring 2010, 15 new or revised options are available under Environmental Stewardship that can help 
farmers to adapt to a changing climate. These include options that provide landscape benefits, make 
farming businesses more resilient, and that will enable habitats and species to adapt.

7. Protection and enhancement of the rural environment should have a central, rather than a peripheral 
role under a future Common Agricultural Policy (CAP). In ensuring that the CAP is used in future to 
deliver public goods of European relevance, we will work to ensure that the strategic importance of 
climate change is adequately reflected in rural development and agri-environment policy.

Plant Health and Animal Health and Welfare

Climate change is likely to have impacts for both plant health and for animal health and welfare.  
A significant body of research already exists and we need to identify and prioritise our evidence 
needs and build on what has already been done. 

8. Defra will review existing research and evidence on the likely impacts of climate change on animal 
health and welfare during 2010; and meet with key stakeholders to raise awareness and discuss the 
issues. We will use this information to identify and prioritise any evidence gaps to address in 2011/12.

9. Defra provides match funding for the Pratique Project – an EU-wide initiative co-ordinated by the Food 
and Environment Research Agency (FERA), which is developing new Pest Risk Assessment tools and 
techniques which will help us assess risks to plant health in a changing environment. The project, which 
benefits from £50K of Defra funding is due to report in June 2011.

10. Defra and the Forestry Commission will support an increased research effort into ways to deal with  
a number of new and emerging pests and diseases impacting on trees and associated ecosystems.  
We will work closely with key stakeholders in affected areas to address the threats from a number of 
recently established pests and diseases.

Soils

We are developing the evidence base on the impact of climate change on soils and ensuring that 
farmers and other land managers have the information and guidance necessary to be able to 
secure the resilience of their soils.

11. In Spring 2010 Defra will publish the results of modelling to illustrate the impact of climate change on 
soil properties. This will provide the foundation for developing further research in this area over the 
course of 2010/11.

12. Defra will work closely with Communities and Local Government (CLG) and the Department for 
Business, Innovation and Skills (BIS) to ensure that planning authorities, developers and the construction 
industry have the information and tools they need to take account of the impacts of climate change on 
soils, both in decision making and during the construction process. This will involve developing a new 
practical toolkit for planners to help them take account of soils in their decision-making processes.

79Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 8. Summary of actions




Forestry

The forestry sector has to plan ahead (fifty years or more). Adaptive measures need to be appropriate 
to both current and future climatic conditions so detailed planning and capacity building is required 
now. The Forestry Commission and Defra will work in partnership in order to build adaptive capacity 
and implement adaptive actions.

13. We will prioritise and implement research recommendations outlined in the Read Report over the next 
5 years.

14. We will develop a new quantitative measure of adaptation for trees and woodlands in both urban and 
rural landscapes. 

15. By summer 2010 we will make a web-based resource on species choice and wider adaptation issues, 
available online.

16. In 2010 the Forestry Commission will provide training on climate change for all their public-facing staff, 
to assist understanding by woodland owners and managers and the general public.

17. The Forestry Commission will work with the UK Fire and Rescue Services, Communities and Local 
Government (CLG), Natural England and stakeholders to establish improved fire monitoring for forest 
and heathland fires and develop a risk assessment approach.

18. The Forestry Commission will complete a review of Grants and Regulations in the context of climate 
change in 2010 and feed into a wider review in 2011.

19. We will complete a climate change action plan for the public forest estate in 2010 and begin  
its implementation. 

20. Climate Change Guidelines to support the revised UK Forestry Standard in 2010 and implement the 
adaptation measures included as requirements for grants will be published by the Forestry Commission 
and the Northern Ireland Forest Service.

21. We will work with key stakeholders to develop landscape approaches for adaptation through targeting 
grants for woodland creation.

22. The Forestry Commission, in conjunction with Defra, FERA and the Scottish and Welsh Governments, 
will work through its Forest Biosecurity Programme Board to revise the strategy for dealing with pests 
and diseases and develop a new biosecurity code of practice. 

80Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 8. Summary of actions




The Natural Environment

Our natural environment is our greatest asset: the basis on which we can build a future in a rapidly 
changing climate. Ecosystems provide the services that clean our air and water, and give us food, 
medicines, energy, and raw materials. They regenerate soils and pollinate crops, regulate the 
climate, cool cities, and help to control floods.

Biodiversity

Changes in climate have already had a detectable impact on species and ecosystems, we need to 
build flexibility into both policy and practice.

23. In 2010, Defra will publish a discussion document on the natural environment and adaptation. This will 
build on the work we have done with partners to consider the role of the natural environment in 
supporting adaptation; and the need for a whole systems approach to adaptation in this area.

24. Prof Sir John Lawton will conclude his group’s review of England’s wildlife and ecological network, 
including its links with our National Parks and its ability to adapt to climate change and other pressures. 
The review will make costed and prioritised recommendations on any measures that should be taken 
and will report to Defra by June 2010. We intend to respond to the report by end of 2010.

25. In 2010 Defra will encourage closer working between the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)  
and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) to enhance synergies 
between climate change and biodiversity issues, particularly on ensuring delivery of biodiversity 
safeguards in finance mechanisms, and the incorporation of ecosystem-based approaches into 
adaptation strategies.

26. UK Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP) targets will be reviewed after the October 2010 conference of the 
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) in Nagoya, to update them where necessary and fully factor in 
climate change impacts.

27. By mid 2010 case studies of practical implementation of the England Biodiversity Strategy adaptation 
principles at a landscape scale will be published together with policy guidance and best practice notes. 
Defra will continue to work with partners to extend this best practice guidance.

28. By early 2011, a Defra funded research project will publish guidance on adaptation of biodiversity to 
climate change including the implications for protected sites, monitoring and setting of objectives, and 
contributions of Priority Habitats to mitigation of climate change. In parallel, Natural England initiated  
a project in 2009, which is considering how well the existing network of SSSIs will be able to respond 
to natural processes and climate change. It will be developed into a full regional review in 2011/12.

29. Natural England has committed £6m over three years concluding in 2011 to undertake work at  
a landscape scale designed to support biodiversity to adapt to a changing climate focusing on wetlands 
such as the Great Fens.

81Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 8. Summary of actions




30. In March 2009 Natural England published a detailed assessment of the impact of climate change  
on four “character areas” (Norfolk Broads, Dorset Downs, Shropshire Hills, Cumbria High Fells).  
The findings and lessons from these are now being implemented and the process will be rolled out  
to five new areas across the country, with results expected in 2010. 

Landscapes

A key component of adaptation will be to aid people’s understanding of the drivers of change and 
to manage their expectations of the nature of the future landscape.

31. In Spring 2010 the Government will publish its vision and priorities for the English National Parks and 
Broads which will highlight climate change as a key priority.

32. National Parks Authorities will report on the risks from climate change and how they plan to adapt 
under the Adaptation Reporting Power introduced by the Climate Change Act 2008, with the first 
reports due in 2010-2011.

33. With the ongoing funding provided by Defra, the National Park Authorities and the Broads Authority will: 

•  engage with residents and visitors on the future of our National Parks to ensure we all plan for the 
inevitable changes ahead and to promote understanding of the adaptation work planned and underway;

•  protect and develop resilient habitat networks that allow natural environmental adaptation;

•  maintain good public access across National Parks by repairing eroded footpaths and bridleways and 
flood-proofing bridges (ongoing).

34. Natural England’s Character and Quality of England’s Landscapes (CQuEL) Project will assess what 
changes in landscape character have and are likely to occur and how this affects landscape quality. 
Using this evidence we will develop landscape policies to help combat climate change and better 
communicate the likely impacts of climate change to the public.

Green Infrastructure

Green infrastructure can make the places we live in more resilient to the impacts of climate change. 
We need to work with partners across Government to embed awareness of its potential and 
influence future policy and delivery.

35. Existing planning guidance on the natural environment will be revised and consolidated in 2010 as  
a new Planning Policy Statement. This will serve to minimise vulnerability of places, people, and wildlife 
to the impacts of climate change and contribute to effective climate change adaptation measures by 
maintaining, creating and improving networks of green infrastructure within both urban and rural areas.

36. Defra and CLG have jointly commissioned work to synthesise the available evidence on the benefits, 
costs and status of green infrastructure, which is due to be published by April 2010. This will help  
to show local authorities how green infrastructure can help to deliver local, regional and national  
policy objectives.

82Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 8. Summary of actions




37. Defra will contribute to a new built environment project under the cross-Government ACC Programme, 
which has identified that the urban heat island is a key challenge that needs addressing. A priority for 
the project in 2010 will be to explore the policy levers and delivery options which can increase the level 
of green infrastructure in our towns and cities.

38. We are currently consulting on our proposed strategy for the inland waterways of England and Wales 
– Waterways for Everyone. This includes examples of how we believe the waterways can help us 
mitigate and adapt to the effects of climate change.

39. The Forestry Commission will publish guidance for planners to support the role of trees and woodlands 
in green infrastructure in 2010.

Air quality

Complexities of atmospheric chemistry and climate modelling mean improving our evidence base 
will be important in shaping future actions in relation to climate change adaptation 39

40. In March 2010, Defra and the Devolved Administrations published Air pollution: Action in 
a Changing Climate.

41. By 2011, we will use the UK Climate Projections to carry out air quality modelling studies to evaluate 
the impacts of future climate on air pollutant concentrations.

42. Over the next 2 years we will carry out a review of the available evidence on how climate change  
will alter both social and environmental responses to air pollution to inform future research and  
policy development.

Water Availability and Quality

Water is essential for life, and is a central issue influencing all sections of this plan. We need to find 
ways of using water much more efficiently and sustainably if we are to continue to enjoy high 
standards and constant supply.

43. the Flood and Water Management Bill, currently making its way through Parliament, will improve the 
process for temporary bans on water use during droughts, strengthen mandatory building standards for 
sewers, and make more robust arrangements for the approval, adoption and maintenance of SUDS.

44. Defra will consult on national standards for sustainable drainage systems (SUDS), and on SUDS 
regulations under the Floods and Water Management Bill, in 2010.

45. Private sewers and lateral drains connecting to the public network will be transferred into the 
ownership of water and sewerage companies in England from 2011. This will improve and better 
integrate the management of our domestic sewerage system.

46. Defra has recently consulted on new proposals to time limit existing abstraction licences, providing  
a further way to manage the impacts of climate change on catchment areas. A revised approach will  
be announced this year.

83Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 8. Summary of actions




47. New research to improve our understanding of home owner perceptions, attitudes and behaviours 
towards adopting water related efficiency retrofitting measures in their properties will become available 
in 2010 to inform future policy- and decision-making.

48. The Government is considering metering policy as part of its wider consideration of recommendations 
from the independent Walker Review of Charging for Household Water and Sewerage Services 
(December 2009). Ministers are considering the recommendations ahead of a public consultation.

49. The Water Supply (Water Fittings) Regulations are being reviewed to explore the scope of setting new 
performance standards for key water-using fittings to complement whole house performance standards 
to be set in Building Regulations.

Floods

Climate change is set to increase the frequency and severity of flooding and coastal erosion, and it 
is vital that we prepare for the impacts of climate change in the way we manage the risks.

50. Defra has an extensive joint research programme with the Environment Agency, including a number  
of current projects to inform policy on climate change adaptation: building on UKCP09 for example, 
making properties more resilient to flooding and understanding how the development of “blue corridors” 
could help make space for water in urban areas.

51. The Flood and Water Management Bill is currently before Parliament. This will put us in a better 
position to cope with the additional challenges posed by climate change, including through the 
creation of a new lead role for local authorities in tackling local flooding.

52. In 2010-11, Defra will continue to work with the Environment Agency and HM Treasury to review how 
investments in flood and coastal risk management are prioritised and how the costs might be shared  
in future.

53. Shoreline Management Plans outlining the management policies for each section of the coast and 
taking account of climate change will all be published by the end of 2011.

54. Defra will review latest scientific evidence and take a view as to whether further guidance is needed on 
allowing for climate change impacts when building and maintaining defences, or developing wider 
plans for managing flood and erosion risk. An announcement will be made later this year.

55. A new supplement to Planning Policy Statement 25 on coastal flooding will be published by CLG in 
2010. Defra is working to support this process.

84Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 8. Summary of actions




Oceans and seas

Whilst the main focus is on improving our understanding of how climate change will affect UK and 
global seas there are actions that can be taken now to ensure that adaptation is built into longer 
term planning, to ensure other pressures on the marine environment are reduced so that it 
becomes more resilient to change, and to strengthen cooperation with stakeholders and the 
general public to prepare for change.

56. Commissioning research into new or emerging adaptation issues. In March 2009, a joint Natural 
Environment Research Council, Defra and DECC Ocean Acidification Research Programme, worth  
£12 million, was launched. The programme will run over 5 years, and outputs will support our work  
on adaptation.

57. Supporting the Marine Climate Change Impacts Partnership from 2010 to 2015.

58. Ensuring effective management and use of marine climate data through the Marine Science 
Coordination Committee, which published the first UK Marine Science Strategy in February 2010. 

59. Ensuring that new domestic and EU strategies and guidelines take account of climate impacts for 
example, the UK Marine Planning Statement, which will be issued for consultation during 2010 and the 
Marine Management Organisation which will be preparing marine plans from 2011.

60. Developing a programme of measures designed to achieve or maintain good environmental status, 
which will be put into practice by 2016; ensuring that adaptation is factored into implementation of 
the Marine Strategy Framework Directive by 2015.

61. Introducing a network of Marine Protected Areas, including new Marine Conservation Zones in our 
own waters by 2012, which will improve resilience.

62. Seeking reform to the EU Common Fisheries Policy that will achieve sustainable fish stocks,  
reduce discards, and provide increased certainty and flexibility over access to fisheries for the industry. 
We expect the European Commission to submit a formal proposal to the European Parliament in early 
2011 and will seek to ensure that adaptation is embedded in any reforms.

63. Publishing the findings of the Environmentally Responsible Fishing Scheme in 2010.

64. Supporting a pilot for ‘climate smart’ working in 2011, which will be co-ordinated by MCCIP, helping 
sectors and communities using the marine environment to adapt to climate change. The 2010 annual 
report card will draw on the UK Climate Protections 2009, helping us to build a better understanding  
of potential impacts on the marine environment. 

85Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 8. Summary of actions




Waste

We are working towards an economy where products and services are designed, produced,  
used and disposed of in ways that minimise carbon emissions, waste and the use of non- 
renewable resource.

65. During 2010, Defra and the Environment Agency will review international approaches to the 
management of waste in countries that are already coping with vulnerability (e.g. flooding in the 
Netherlands) or are currently experiencing climatic conditions consistent with those that we anticipate 
for the UK in decades to come (e.g. US, Europe).

66. Defra is working with WRAP to identify how they can play a greater role in helping the waste sector 
adapt to climate change, for example, embedding adaptation messages within its advice to local 
authorities on household collections. We will ensure that WRAP’s new remit is appropriately reflected 
within its corporate business plan for 2010/11.

67. Defra will consider how to embed adaptation in guidance on procurement, particularly in relation to 
waste infrastructure by September 2010. This includes making use of the proposed joint OGC/ACC 
guide, due to be published in Spring 2010, on how to incorporate climate change adaptation within 
procurement decisions in the public sector. 

Capacity Building

68. In 2010 Defra will appoint a new Ministerial Champion for adaptation responsible for encouraging 
action and engagement within Defra and amongst our stakeholders.

69. Lead officials for adaptation have been identified across Defra’s policy areas. In 2010 we will establish  
a new information sharing network to exchange evidence and best practice approaches.

70. In 2010 Defra will set out a plan of action to incorporate climate change risks within core processes 
such as the Defra policy cycle, impact assessment and business planning processes.

71. By the end of March 2011 Defra will carry out a full review of progress in implementing its adaptation 
plan. Key findings will be published on the Defra website.

86Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 8. Summary of actions




87Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Adapting to climate change | 8. Summary of actions

The Defra Estate

72. Defra is planning a number of major new build and significant refurbishment projects over the next  
five years. These projects will each incorporate a formal adaptation assessment at the design stage.

73. We are working with our suppliers to raise their awareness of the need to implement adaptation 
measures, through:

•  Defra’s Supplier Engagement Programme – through which we are encouraging suppliers to carry out 
reviews of their business models, check that their processes are ‘fit for purpose’ and climate-proof.

 • provision of adaptation advice via our suppliers web site which contains advice to suppliers on what 
they can do to adapt, and links to tools such as Defra’s “adaptation wizard”, a “business assessment 
tool” and a risk framework. 

74. We will be implementing the joint Defra/OGC guidance on how to embed adaptation within the public 
procurement process (due to be published in 2010). Defra will look to be an exemplar organisation in 
its adoption and use of the new guidance.

75. Defra is supporting the introduction of a process for sharing best procurement practice on adaptation 
at the corporate level across Defra.

76. The Government is currently finalising the review of the SOGE targets. The new framework is expected 
to include a new adaptation target to improve the preparedness of departmental estates to the impacts 
of climate change by 2015 and ensure that progress is reviewed on an annual basis. In 2010, Defra will 
set out a plan of action to deliver early progress for our own estate.




Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions 88

Defra’s Climate Change Plan

Reducing 
emissions




Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 9. Farming and food 89

Reducing emissions

9.  Farming  
and food

The challenge
Farming and land use were together responsible for 
emissions of 46.4 MtCO


2

e in 2008, or about 7.4% 

of total UK greenhouse gas emissions. Most of these 
emissions are caused by livestock, fertilisers, and fuel 
use in farming. The remainder are from changes in 
natural carbon balances caused by the way land is 
used and managed.

Summary
•  The Government favours an industry-led 

approach to reducing emissions from 
farming, and supports the industry’s 
Greenhouse Gas Action Plan.

•  Defra will work with the industry to 
ensure that the Action Plan is robust, 
and will support its delivery.

•  The Government is considering its options 
if the industry-led approach is not 
successful, including regulation and 
economic incentives. 

The Government and the farming industry agree  
that the challenge is to reduce agricultural emissions 
at the same time as safeguarding the environment, 
improving food production sustainably and competitively, 
and coping with a changing climate. 

Cattle at Bakewell Livestock Market.




There are unique challenges to reducing agricultural 
emissions:

• there are large scientific uncertainties in estimating 
agricultural emissions and predicting the effects of 
changing practices. For example, the amount of 
nitrous oxide released from spreading fertiliser can 
depend on the soil type, the weather conditions, 
when and how the spreading was done, and many 
other factors.

• there are physical limits to how far emissions from 
agriculture can currently be reduced, because 
farming involves complex biological cycles.

• the UK imports and exports food and agricultural 
products, and this will continue in the future.  
We need to make sure, however, that our pursuit  
of domestic emissions reductions doesn’t simply 
transfer the emissions from our food overseas. 

In the UK Low Carbon Transition Plan33, 
the Government called on the industry to take action, 
so that in the third carbon budget period (2018 
– 2022) annual agricultural emissions in England will  
be 3 MtCO


2

e lower than they would be if current 

practices continued. A 3 MtCO


2

e saving is equivalent 

to 11% of emissions from English farming in 2007. 
The industry and the Government agree that action 
needs to start now if we are to achieve the 3 MtCO


2e 

target, and to prepare for future carbon budgets.

33  http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/publications/lc_trans_plan/lc_trans_plan.aspx 

2008200720062005200420032002200120001999199819971996199519941993199219911990


-30-20-100102030405060708090

Land Use and Land Use Change

Agriculture Carbon Dioxide

Agriculture Methane

Agriculture Nitrous Oxide

Forestry

Total Sector Emissions


Mt CO2e

Figure 4: UK emissions and removals from agriculture, forestry, and land management, 1990 to 2008

Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 9. Farming and food 90




Achieving this requires a concerted effort by the 
entire industry, sector by sector, across all regions, 
supported by the Government. The UK Low Carbon 
Transition Plan called for the industry to produce an 
action plan to set out how English farmers will make 
the required emissions reductions – most of which will 
save money or boost productivity. The Government 
believes that this approach is likely to be the most 
effective in achieving emissions reductions in a way 
which delivers business benefits for farms. 

In parallel with reducing emissions from livestock  
and fertilisers, farmers can make important wider 
contributions to tackling climate change, through 
improving energy efficiency, helping to reduce the 
carbon intensity of the energy sector through the 
development of renewable power, providing the 
feedstocks for the production of low carbon materials 
for use by industry and wider society, and protecting 
and enhancing our natural stores of carbon in soils 
and trees.

Meeting the challenge
The industry’s Greenhouse Gas Action Plan
The agricultural industry’s Climate Change Task Force 
(a partnership between the National Farmers’ Union 
(NFU), Country Land and Business Association (CLA), 
and the Agriculture Industries Confederation (AIC)) 
has produced a Greenhouse Gas Action Plan34. 
The Government supports the positive response and 
commitment demonstrated by the Action Plan, which 
is a good first step on the path to reducing emissions 
cost-effectively.

The Action Plan recognises the need to deliver a 
measurable, reportable, and verifiable contribution  
to meeting the UK’s carbon budgets to 2020 and 
beyond. It details, sector by sector, how the wider 
adoption of resource-efficient farming and land 
management can reduce emissions and improve 
competitiveness, without compromising levels of 
productivity. The Action Plan focuses on using 
resources more efficiently through:

200720062005200420032002200120001999199819951990


0510152025303540Mt CO2e

Figure 5: English emissions from agriculture, 1990 to 2007. Agricultural emissions have fallen since 1990, 
primarily because of animal disease outbreaks, the decoupling of subsidies from production, increased fertiliser 
prices, and improved nitrogen use efficiency in crop production. Future agricultural emissions are very uncertain 
but are likely to be influenced by the continued decrease in agricultural subsidies from the European Common 
Agricultural Policy (CAP), the future level of biofuels and biomass production, and possible European regulation,  
for example to improve water and air quality. Defra has commissioned research to improve the projections  
(see Chapter 21).

Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 9. Farming and food 91

34  http://www.nfuonline.com/Our-work/Environment/Climate-change/GHG-emissions---reducing-agricultural-emissions/




• better use of nitrogen in animal and crop nutrition, 
where improvements in use of feed, manures and 
fertilisers reduce nitrous oxide emissions and help to 
reduce agriculture’s contribution to diffuse pollution 
in water and air.

• better management systems for livestock, where 
production efficiencies can reduce methane and 
nitrous oxide emissions.

• better use of on-farm energy and fuel, which can 
achieve reductions in carbon dioxide emissions.

It is a living document which will be responsive to 
new evidence and policy development.

At Bostock Hall Farm in Cheshire, Andy Green 
has saved money and emissions by careful use 
of muck from his calf rearing unit, which 
provides up to 250kg nitrogen per hectare for 
his farm and helps him meet the requirements 
of his Higher Level Stewardship environmental 
scheme agreement. 

At peak time he will have up to 600 cattle in the 
sheds, which are fed mostly grass silage plus about 
0.5kg per head of a 15% protein blend. Andy says 
that “if the silage is excellent we will feed nothing 
else, but if the muck becomes loose we will add a 
little good barley straw or dry haylage to the diet. 
Everything is kept as simple as possible. The pens 
are cleaned out about every four to six weeks and 
the muck mostly spread at the optimal time in 
January and February. We work our way across the 
farm, spreading on the drier land first leaving the 
wetter ground until it starts to dry out in spring.”

Andy uses soil analysis to monitor the nutrients  
in the soil and to decide application rates for the 
muck. By managing the applications, he has not 
used any artificial fertiliser on the farm for the past 
four years and spot sprays to control weeds.

Bostock Hall Farm

© Andy Green – The owner of Bostock Hall Farm.

Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 9. Farming and food 92

Field of potato crop in flower in Yorkshire Dales.




Livestock Dietary Modification

Nutrient Management

Optimal Livestock Feeding

Anaerobic Digestion

Low N Crop Varieties

Manure Management

36.7%
(1.1MtCO2e)


!

16.7%
(0.5MtCO2e)


20%

(0.6MtCO2e)


20%

(0.6MtCO2e)



3.3%

(0.1MtCO2e)



3.3%

(0.1MtCO2e)

Relative Abatement Contributions (% and Mt) to 3MtCO2e

Figure 6: Emissions savings from the Greenhouse Gas 
Action Plan

The Action Plan sets out a framework for action in 
England. The Government and the Climate Change 
Task Force will work together, and with other industry 
stakeholders and delivery bodies, to take the Action 
Plan forward. The next phase will involve identifying 
specific targets for the uptake of best practice by 
farm business sectors, agreeing how that uptake will  
be monitored and reported, and promoting and 
expanding the industry’s existing channels for 
knowledge transfer and advisory services, so  
that change is delivered on the ground.

The Government also welcomes the progress being 
made across different industry sectors in developing 
guidance for farmers on practical steps to reduce 
emissions and other environmental best practice.  
The Dairy Roadmap is a good example of world-
leading best practice in this area, and the sector is 
well on its way to meeting its initial benchmarks. 
Similar work is also underway in the beef, sheep 
meat, and pig meat sectors.

The role of the Government
Supporting the industry-led approach
To help ensure the industry’s Action Plan is robust and 
is implemented successfully, Defra will:

• have the Action Plan independently assessed 
to ensure it is fit for purpose.

• support the establishment of a joint Defra-
industry delivery board to ensure successful 
implementation of the Action Plan, through 
collaborative support from a range of  
delivery organisations.

• work with the industry to measure progress on 
actions to reduce emissions. Alongside Defra’s work 
to develop indicators to measure progress (set out 
in Chapter 20), this will include agreeing which 
indicators to use to assess the impact of the Action 
Plan on emissions in key farming sectors.

Defra will also directly support the industry’s efforts by:

• promoting advice on cutting emissions, 
by coordinating and building on existing advisory 
services. Defra aims to launch improved low-carbon 
advice in early 2011. 

• investing in the evidence base 
(see Chapter 21) to: 

– better understand and measure emissions from 
biological systems.

– develop a more accurate emissions inventory that 
can reflect mitigation activities initially through  
a recently established Government-funded 
research programme.

– explore what further potential there is to reduce 
emissions, and at what cost. 

– foster innovation and the development of  
new technology.

• continuing to work closely with the Welsh 
Assembly Government, the Scottish Executive, 
and the Northern Ireland Executive to develop 
a coordinated approach across the UK, including by 
setting up a coordinated research platform.  
(See pages 136 to 138.)

93Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 9. Farming and food




Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 9. Farming and food 94

35  http://www.defra.gov.uk/foodfarm/food/strategy/

• working with all the parts of the food supply 
chain to support the reduction of emissions from 
the food system from primary production through 
to final consumption. Food production is the  
UK’s biggest manufacturing sector and employs  
3.6 million people in businesses from farms to  
retail. The Food 2030 Strategy35 sets out the 
Government’s aim for the UK to have an efficient, 
low-carbon food system. Achieving this aim will 
require harnessing the full potential of a food 
supply chain approach, encouraging all parts of  
the sector to: 

– share information, including with consumers. 

– disseminate best practice up and down the chain.

– take a holistic approach to research and 
development to improve efficiency.

Developing alternative options
Government and industry have been working together 
in many areas to prepare the farming industry for the 
future. The progress we have made in agreeing on 
the Campaign for the Farmed Environment (CFE) – 
the voluntary agreement to recapture the 
environmental benefits of set-aside – shows what we 
can achieve when Government and industry work 
closely together. 

A successful voluntary approach makes sense both  
for the industry and for the Government. However, 
achieving the emissions targets required under the 
Climate Change Act is a legal requirement, and a full 
contribution from the farming sector is needed.  
If progress is insufficient, and the industry-led 
approach is not working well enough, the 
Government will need to intervene more directly.

There are two possible broad approaches which the 
Government is considering using, if the voluntary 
approach does not deliver, and intervention  
is required:

• Regulation. There are two main regulatory options, 
which could be implemented separately or in 
combination. The first would be to build on 
existing regulation, such as the Nitrates Action 
Programme. Additional measures to achieve water 
quality improvements under the Water Framework 
Directive, for example through improved nutrient 
management, could also help deliver greenhouse 
gas emissions reductions. But it would be difficult  
to use existing regulation to achieve some of the 
changes needed: for example, farmers need to 
improve the way that manures and slurry are stored, 
and adopt new animal feeding and husbandry 
practices, in addition to improving crop nutrient 
management. The second regulatory option 

Three sows (gilts) in field.




Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 9. Farming and food 95

D GOVERNMENT ACTION

The Government is already helping farmers to 
improve their practices:

• Legislation to protect water quality requires 
farmers in 70% of England to plan and limit their 
nitrogen inputs, install manure storage facilities, 
and avoid spreading at times when crops cannot 
take up the nutrients – all of which can reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions; 

• Through the England Catchment Sensitive 
Farming Delivery Initiative that is helping to reduce 
the impact of agriculture on water quality as part 
of the Water Framework Directive, farmers in 
some areas can access free advice on nutrient use 
and soil management, capital grants for targeted 
low-cost infrastructure investments to tackle 
pollution, and free soil nutrient testing;

• Through agri-environment schemes under the 
Rural Development Programme for England (RDPE), 
such as Environmental Stewardship, funding is 
available to farmers to manage their land in ways 
which protect and enhance the environment. 
Some ES options may lead to reductions in 
greenhouse gas emissions (e.g. limited agricultural 
inputs on arable land) and increase carbon storage 
(e.g. establishing grassland in fields that were 
previously arable). Guidance given to farmers, 
including the newly developed Entry Level 
Stewardship Training and Information Programme 
(ETIP), will encourage take up of appropriate options;


 

• In addition the RDPE provides support to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions in a number of different 
ways. For example, the Programme’s Energy Crops 
Scheme encourages the cultivation of short 
rotation coppice and Miscanthus. And a number 
of the RDPE initiatives delivered by the Regional 
Development Agencies help farmers invest in 
resource efficiency, such as the South West 
Agricultural Resource Management Initiative 
which provides £22m of RDPE funding to deliver 
advice, training, and small capital grants to help 
farms manage resources more efficiently;

• Anaerobic digestion can reduce methane emissions 
from manures and slurries, while at the same time 
producing renewable energy in the form of biogas 
and digestate that can be used as a fertiliser. 
The Anaerobic Digestion Implementation Plan, 
published by Defra in March 2010, provides a 
framework for joint action by Government and 
industry to drive a major increase in the use of 
anaerobic digestion. Pages 114 and 115 describe 
Government action to support anaerobic  
digestion, including a £10 million  
demonstration programme;

• Defra worked with DECC, the Carbon Trust,  
and the industry to make interest-free loans for 
energy-saving equipment available to farm 
businesses from 1st February 2010.




Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 9. Farming and food 96

would be new regulation under the Pollution, 
Prevention and Control Act 1999, to set a baseline 
of relevant good practice for farms. This would allow 
a more integrated approach and a more equitable 
coverage of farms in England. Such new regulation 
could also be adapted to help meet any new 
European environmental requirements, avoiding  
the need to adopt separate legal instruments for 
each requirement;

• Economic incentives. Regulation would be 
a blunt instrument, requiring all farm businesses to 
adopt particular practices relevant to their sectors. 
However, there will be some cases where there are 
net costs to reducing emissions which outweigh  
the benefits to society. Economic incentives could 
be more cost-effective, allowing farm businesses 
more scope to judge where action is appropriate. 
This could work by requiring farmers who wish  
to receive a particular financial benefit from the 
public sector, or avoid particular costs, to take  
the emissions reduction actions relevant to their 
business. The Government will continue to consider 
the nature of the penalties which would apply 
under this option to farms who fail to implement 
the necessary measures. 

Preparing for future carbon budgets
Delivering the target for the third carbon budget is 
only the first step. In the future the sector will be 
required to make further emissions reductions, as part 
of the national effort to reduce UK emissions to 80% 
below 1990 levels by 2050. Defra will work with 
the industry, and wider stakeholders, to agree on 
the potential to deliver further emissions savings 
during the fourth carbon budget period (2023 
– 2027) and beyond. 

Sainsbury’s sells over 470 million litres of fresh 
milk and 18 million litres of fresh cream each 
year. In 2006, Sainsbury’s launched its Dairy 
Development Group to help its 325 milk farmers 
become more sustainable businesses through 
on-farm efficiencies. Sainsbury’s has invested 
£16m in the Group to date and recently 
announced plans for a further £40m over the 
next three years. The scheme is now being 
extended to Sainsbury’s UK beef, lamb, and 
cheese producers, with pork and poultry 
suppliers to follow shortly.

Reducing greenhouse gas emissions is one of the 
four key work streams. Following an on-farm 

environmental assessment, provided by Sainsbury’s, 
farmers in the Group complete an environmental 
scorecard on various aspects of their farming practices. 
Smart software then provides them with an emissions 
figure per cow and per litre of milk. The scheme has 
removed more than 5,000 tCO


2

e from Sainsbury’s 

dairy supply chain over the past year, as well as 
delivering significant cost savings for farmers.

Sainsbury’s says it is on a continuous learning curve 
in terms of sustainability and how best to communicate 
the complexities involved to consumers. The success 
to date of the Dairy Development Group, and its 
ambitious plans to roll-out to other farming sectors, 
suggests that they are learning fast.

Sainsbury’s Dairy Development Group 

Straw baling.




Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 9. Farming and food 97

Defra will:

• develop the evidence on the potential to reduce 
agricultural emissions over the fourth carbon 
budget period, and assess the potential to reduce 
emissions from the sector in 2030 and 2050 (see 
page 152 for more detail on this strand of work);

• continue to engage with the international 
community as discussions on the role of agriculture 
in reducing greenhouse gas emissions develop;

• work with DECC, the agriculture industry, and wider 
stakeholders to develop scenarios for possible 
agriculture and land use in 2050;

• continue to work with other Government 
Departments on the project, led by the Food 
Standards Agency, to develop integrated advice on 
food sustainability issues, including information on 
the greenhouse gas impacts of food;

• take a whole food supply chain approach to 
achieving reductions in food-related emissions in  
a low-carbon economy, including through an 
improved understanding of the potential for,  
for example, successful reduction of food waste  
to lead to reductions in emissions from  
agricultural production.

Finally, in ensuring that the Common Agricultural 
Policy (CAP) is used in the future to deliver public 
goods of European relevance, the Government will 
want to ensure that the strategic importance of 
climate change is adequately reflected in rural 
development and agri-environment policy.

Glen Ample variety raspberries.

Anaerobic Digestion Facility.




98Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 10. Soils

Reducing emissions

10. Soils

The challenge
The 2009 Soil Strategy for England, Safeguarding our 
Soils36, set out the incredibly important role our soils 
play in climate regulation. They are the UK’s largest 
terrestrial carbon store, containing around 10 billion 
tonnes of carbon – equivalent to more than 50 times 
the UK’s annual greenhouse gas emissions. More than 
half of this carbon is stored in peatlands, and around 
80% of it is found in Scotland.

Soil carbon is both gained and lost (including as 
carbon dioxide and methane) as a result of changes  
in the way land is used and managed and other 
climatic factors, including temperature and rainfall. 
Soils can also emit other greenhouse gases, notably 
nitrous oxide. Given the complexities, there are 
scientific uncertainties about current emissions  
from soils and future trends, but there is certainly  
a long-term risk that soils will become an increasing 
source of emissions in the future as the climate 
changes, particularly where they are already degraded 
or otherwise more vulnerable to changing  
climatic conditions.

The UK Greenhouse Gas Inventory currently estimates 
that the UK is losing soil carbon at a rate of around 
14 MtCO


2

e per year as a result of changes in the way 

that land is used – for example, losses that result from 
urban development or the ploughing up of grasslands 
and drainage of carbon-rich soils for agriculture.

Summary
•  UK soils contain over 10 billion tonnes  

of carbon, more than half of which is  
in peatlands. 

•  The 2009 Soil Strategy set out the 
Government’s approach to safeguarding 
our soils. Defra will publish additional 
guidance this year on how farmers can best 
protect their soil.

•  Later this year Defra will consult on a new 
Peat Framework for Action and publish 
the results of research on how best to 
protect our vital peatlands.

36 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/quality/land/soil/sap/index.htm




99Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 10. Soils

It is much more difficult to estimate gradual changes 
in soil carbon concentrations as a result of land 
management, when the land is used for the same 
purpose (e.g. arable farming) but is managed in 
different ways (e.g. with different cultivation or 
cropping practices). This is where the evidence base 
now needs to be strengthened. 

Meeting the challenge
Managing our land
Farmers have an important role to play in keeping 
soils in good condition, and the Government 
welcomes the commitment demonstrated in the 
industry’s Greenhouse Gas Action Plan37 to enhancing 
soil carbon stores. 

Two national surveys have agreed that there has been 
a decrease in carbon levels in agricultural soils since 
the late 1970s as a direct result of intensive agricultural 
practices. The Government’s Code of Good Agricultural 
Practice includes advice for farmers on ways to 
protect soil carbon on their land, and a number  
of existing Government policies encourage take-up  
of these practices, including:

• the Soil Protection Review (part of cross compliance 
under the Common Agricultural Policy), which was 
updated this January;

• Environmental Stewardship schemes, which include 
a range of measures that contribute to protecting 
or enhancing carbon stores, including peat soils; 

• the England Catchment Sensitive Farming 
Delivery Initiative.

Defra has committed to publish, later in 2010, 
additional guidance on good agricultural practices to 
protect and increase soil organic matter and soil carbon.

37 See http://www.nfuonline.com/Our-work/Environment/Climate-change/GHG-emissions---reducing-agricultural-emissions

Moors for the Future is one of several important 
partnership restoration projects. Launched in 
2002, they are focusing on restoring large 
areas of degraded peat habitat in the Peak 
District National Park that are internationally 
important for biodiversity, wildlife, and the 
valuable carbon that it stores. To date, 6km2 
of damaged moorland has been re-vegetated 
and stabilised.

Moors for the Future

Peat habitat in the Peak District National Park. 
Bruce Wilkinson © Moors for the Future / PDNPA




Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 10. Soils

Protecting our peat
Peat bogs in good condition are able to accumulate 
carbon almost indefinitely, but this happens extremely 
slowly. As well as the carbon they store, peat soils and 
habitats provide important ecosystem services for 
society, including as a home for valuable biodiversity 
and wildlife and playing a vital role in the water cycle. 

However, our peatlands are already significantly 
degraded, and continue to be degraded, as a result  
of human activities including intensive agriculture, 
drainage, afforestation, industrial emissions and 
extraction. A recently published report by Natural 
England provides a useful summary of current impacts 
on the condition of English peatlands and the 
implications of this for greenhouse gas emissions. 

In 2007, Defra joined with a number of partner 
organisations to launch the Partnership Project on 
Peat38, which is focused on improving the evidence 
base on peat and exploring the potential for policy 
changes to strengthen peat protection and promote 
restoration in both upland and lowland peatlands.

Later this year, Defra will:

• publish an online summary of new knowledge 
gained as a result of research commissioned by the 
Partnership Project on Peat.

• consult on a new Peat Framework for Action, which 
will consider potential policy changes to strengthen 
peat protection and include proposals for measures 
to further reduce the horticultural use of peat when 
the current target expires at the end of 2010.

Improving our knowledge
The Soil Strategy for England recognises that the 
evidence base on a wide range of soils and climate 
change issues needs to be strengthened. In particular, 
Defra is committed to improving soil carbon and 
greenhouse gas monitoring and data on the impacts  
of land management practices, including in relation to 
peat soils. For example, Defra and a number of partner 
organisations are contributing to important research to 
design a greenhouse gas monitoring programme for 
UK peatlands. Other research funders are also carrying 
out extensive work that will contribute to data and 
evidence improvements – for example, by monitoring 
carbon losses from peat using satellite remote sensing. 

As well as protecting our existing soil carbon,  
there is much debate about whether it is possible to 
permanently increase soil carbon levels, particularly in 
agricultural soils. Because soils are a dynamic natural 
system, actions taken to increase levels of soil carbon 
are usually easily reversible, unless something can be 
done to convert the carbon into more stable forms. 
There is also a danger that action to increase soil 
carbon will release other, more powerful greenhouse 
gases (methane and nitrous oxide). Defra is funding 
research to review land management options, as well 
as emerging technologies such as biochar, which 
could offer future opportunities to permanently 
sequester carbon in soil.

38  http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/quality/land/soil/peat/partnership-project.htm


100

Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 11. Forestry

Reducing emissions

11. Forestry

The challenge
The value of forestry in tackling climate change
As new trees grow, they reduce the UK’s overall 
emissions by removing carbon dioxide from the 
atmosphere, storing the carbon as wood. Left untended, 
carbon uptake by woodlands will eventually reach zero 
when carbon loss through natural tree mortality and 
decay is balanced out by re-growth. But when woodlands 
are actively managed, trees are felled to provide 
timber, which makes space for new trees to grow. 

This sustainable approach to woodland management 
also benefits biodiversity, provides opportunities for 
climate change adaptation (see Chapter 2), and 
supports the rural economy.

The wood produced from managed woodlands is also 
valuable in reducing emissions:

• it can be used instead of other materials, for example 
in the construction sector. This avoids the emissions 
associated with producing the other materials, and 
keeps the carbon locked up in the wood.

• it can be used as a fuel, instead of burning fossil 
fuels. This releases the carbon absorbed during the 
trees’ growth back into the atmosphere, but avoids 
emissions from burning coal, oil, or gas. As part of 
the sustainable forest management cycle, the carbon 
will once again be removed from the atmosphere 
when the woodland re-grows.

Summary
•  In the long-term forestry is a cost-effective 

way to reduce the UK’s emissions.

•  The Government wants to see a major 
increase in the level of woodland creation 
and will establish a Woodland Carbon Task 
Force to help drive it forward.

•  The Government will consult a wide-range 
of stakeholders, including business and 
environmental NGOs, on the potential for 
company reporting guidance to deliver 
additional carbon sequestration through 
stimulating new investment.

•  Existing woodlands represent a renewable 
energy resource that Defra and the Forestry 
Commission will help to unlock through 
implementing the Woodfuel Strategy.


 

On many types of soil, woodland creation also leads to 
an increase in the amount of carbon stored in the soil,  
a process that can continue for many hundreds of years.

The need for woodland creation
Overall, more woodland is being created in the UK  
than is being removed – about 8,000 hectares of new 
woodland were created in 2008. However, the planting 


101

102Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 11. Forestry

rate was higher during the 1950s to 1980s, when new 
woodland creation peaked at 43,000 hectares in 1971. 

The rate at which our forests remove carbon dioxide 
from the atmosphere is predicted to decline between 
now and 2020. This is mainly because many of the 
woodlands planted in the second half of the last 
century are reaching economic maturity and will be 
felled for timber. These forests will be re-planted, as 
required by law, but the new trees will take some 
time to become established and reach the high 
growth rate of “mid-rotation” woodlands.

As set out in the UK Low Carbon Transition Plan39, 
the Government would like to see a major increase  
in the level of new woodland planting. The recently 
published Read Report, Combating Climate Change: 
a Role for UK forests40, concluded that while changes 
in the management of our existing woodlands could 
deliver some carbon benefits, greater woodland creation 

offers the greatest opportunities in the medium  
to long term. For example, planting an additional 
10,000 hectares of sustainably managed woodland 
per year in England for the next 15 years could 
absorb 50 MtCO


2

e by 2050, and the wood produced 

could reduce UK emissions by a further 37 MtCO


2e.-18-16-14-12-10-8-6-4-20

High emissions scenario

Low emissions scenario

UK Business As Usual (BAU)

England High

England Low

England BAU

2020201520102005200019951990



Year Forestry GHG balance(Mt CO2/yr)

Figure 7: Carbon dioxide removals by the forestry 
sector have generally been rising slowly since 1990, 
but – unless there is a significant increase in 
woodland planting – are expected to decline rapidly 
to 2020, even under a low emissions scenario.

Forestry is also a cost-effective way to reduce the UK’s 
emissions over the long term: new woodland planting 
can absorb carbon dioxide for as little as £20 to £40 
per tonne over the lifetime of the trees.41

But there are challenges to achieving a step change  
in the rate of woodland planting:

• most of the cost comes upfront, when the trees 
are planted.

• new woodlands take up land, which changes the 
landscape and can have implications for food 

Lancashire County Council has a 25-year waste 
management contract with Global Renewables, 
which is based on zero waste going to landfill. 
Organic waste that would have been landfilled will 
be converted to a soil improver that can be applied 
to derelict and brownfield land. From Autumn 2010, 
trees will be planted on these sites to create new 
community woodlands. Over the 25 years, 100,000 
trees will be planted each year. This will create 1,200 
hectares of new woodland by 2032, increasing 
Lancashire’s woodland cover by almost 10%.  
The initiative is a truly integrated approach to climate 
change mitigation, delivering abatement through 
reduced methane emissions from landfill, increased 
soil carbon levels in brownfield and degraded land, 
carbon uptake into the new woodlands and future 
potential for those woodlands to provide woodfuel 
and timber products to reduce fossil fuel use.

Lancashire County Council: 
Woodlands from Waste

39  http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/publications/lc_trans_plan/lc_trans_plan.aspx
40 http://www.tsoshop.co.uk/bookstore.asp?FO=1159966&DI=622276
41  The exact costs depend on factors including land prices, timber prices, the type of woodland, and the previous use of the land. 




103Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 11. Forestry

production, biodiversity, water availability, and the 
local economy and community.

Meeting the challenge
Planting new trees on the scale needed will require  
a concerted effort by everyone: the Government, 
businesses, landowners, and individuals. To support 
this effort, and working with partners, Defra and the 
Forestry Commission will:

• establish a Woodland Carbon Task Force to mobilise 
action across society and establish the business models 
and market conditions needed to stimulate large scale 
investment (see box) in woodland creation.

• uphold the principle of the “the right tree in 
the right place”. In addition to existing regulations, 
Defra and the Forestry Commission will develop  
a high-level spatial framework to help locate new 
woodlands where they can best deliver a wide range 
of environmental, social, and economic benefits. 
Defra, the Forestry Commission, and Natural England 
will also ensure the right balance of woodland planting 
(for climate change objectives) and woodland 
removal (to restore priority open habitats).

• continue to fund woodland creation and 
management through the Rural Development 
Programme for England (RDPE), and consider 
how best to place woodland measures in the 
development of the new Programme beyond 2013.

• provide standards for sustainable forest 
management, to ensure that the carbon benefits 
of woodland are accurately measured, reported, 
and verified. In addition to the existing UK Forestry 
Standard and its Climate Change Guidelines, the 
Forestry Commission will publish a Code of Good 
Practice for Forest Carbon Projects later in 2010.

• implement the Woodfuel Strategy for England;42 
focusing on bringing existing undermanaged 
woodlands into management.

• improve the measurement of emissions and 
removals from land use and forestry, including 
through a new assessment of forest carbon stocks 
through the National Forest Inventory.

• consult a wide range of stakeholders, including 
environmental NGOs and business, on the potential 
for company reporting guidance to encourage  
new investment;

• work with the Devolved Administrations43 
to help unlock the potential of the forestry sector 
across the UK.

Defra and the Forestry Commission will also continue 
to explore a range of possible initiatives, including 
private sector investment vehicles and the role of local 
authorities, for encouraging woodland creation.

The Task Force will be a multi-disciplinary  
team working to establish the conditions  
for significant private sector investment in 
woodland creation, increased supply and 
demand of woodfuel, and greater uptake in 
general of sustainable forest management 
practices. It will seek to create a step change in 
woodland planting in England in support of the 
aspirations set out in the UK Low Carbon Transition 
Plan. Its work will explore a range of mechanisms 
including company GHG reporting guidance and 
the potential of investment vehicles, and whether  
a commitment from the Government to purchase 
the carbon sequestered by new woodlands could 
unlock significant private sector investment. The 
Task Force, working with stakeholders, will establish 
criteria to indicate where new woodland planting 
will best deliver the many potential co-benefits  
of woodlands within the existing sustainable 
woodlands framework. A key theme will be 
understanding and addressing barriers to woodland 
creation and management through dialogue with 
landowners – those that have woodland and  
those that don’t; from local authorities to ‘city 
institutions’ and from small farms to large estates 
– providing the key to unlocking the abatement 
potential of the forestry sector.

The Woodland Carbon Task Force

42 http://www.forestry.gov.uk/england-woodfuel
43  The work of the Devolved Administrations on forestry is discussed briefly in chapter 18.




Reducing emissions

12.  Sustainable  
consumption  
& production

The challenge
The products and services that we buy, use and 
dispose of account for 75% of an average UK 
individual’s carbon footprint, when emissions 
embedded in the production, distribution, use and 
disposal phases of a product’s life are factored in.

Summary
•  The Sustainable Consumption and 

Production Programme will help reduce 
emissions across the economy, by helping 
individuals, organisations and the 
Government operate in a more sustainable 
and lower-carbon way. 

•  Defra is helping businesses become more 
resource efficient by providing advice, 
reporting guidance and standards.

•  Defra is driving up standards across a range 
of products, and supporting more 
sustainable behaviour among consumers. 

•  Product roadmaps will deliver emissions 
savings throughout the supply chain.


0100200300400500600700800

Indirect emissions 
from services

Appliances and 
other products

Textiles

Food and drink

Aviation and 
public transport

Indirect emissions 
from energy use

Fuel for private cars

Fuel use in the home

Indirect
 emissions

Direct
 emissions


Million tonnes CO2 equivalent


Figure 8: Estimated greenhouse gas emissions from 
UK household consumption, 2006

If we are to successfully reduce emissions on the  
scale needed over the next few decades, we need  
to radically change our patterns of consumption  
and systems of production. Individuals, businesses, 
and the Government all need to operate in a more 
sustainable fashion. 

104Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 12. Sustainable consumption & production




Meeting the challenge
Defra works to make the UK’s economy more 
sustainable, by looking at the whole life-cycle of 
products and services (from manufacture, through 
use, to disposal) and focusing on those with the 
highest environmental impacts. By improving these 
activities within the UK and in the global supply 
chains which feed the UK, Defra’s policies can reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions (in the UK and abroad), 
pollution, waste, and natural resource use.

Making entire supply chains more sustainable reduces 
emissions across a number of different sectors of the 
economy, including power generation, transport, 
workplaces, and homes and communities. Parts of 
these sectors are covered by the EU Emissions Trading 
Scheme (EU ETS), where Defra’s policies make it 
cheaper for businesses in the UK to meet the current 
emissions cap, and easier for the Government to 
negotiate for tighter caps to be set in the future.

Defra’s approach focuses on:

• the operations and behaviour of businesses, 
public bodies and other organisations.

• products and services placed on the market.

• consumer choices and behaviours in buying and 
using products and services, and disposing of them 
at the end of their lives.

Making the public and private sectors  
more sustainable
Helping businesses to become more  
resource efficient
Defra supports UK businesses to save money and 
reduce their environmental impacts, by improving the 
way they use natural resources such as energy, water 
and other raw materials. Defra’s approach is to:

• spread best practice and innovation.

• support market development where there is 
a market failure (for example, by promoting the 
potential of energy from waste).

• raise awareness (for example, through the Real Help 
to Business Now top ten tips campaign).

In 2006-07, Defra’s business resource efficiency policies 
delivered approximately 2.5 MtCO


2

e44 of emissions 

savings, spread across several UK carbon budget 
sectors (including those covered by the EU ETS) and 
including some reductions in emissions overseas.

Helping organisations to report their emissions
On 1 October 2009, Defra and DECC published 
Guidance on how to measure and report your 
greenhouse gas emissions46. The Guidance aims to 
help all organisations to measure and account for 
their direct and indirect emissions, and to set targets 
to reduce emissions in the future.

Defra is currently reviewing the contribution that 
reporting of emissions makes to meeting the UK’s 

44  This figure includes the work of the Carbon Trust, which was set up by this Defra programme but is now funded by DECC
45  Ministers announced in March 2009 that the seven bodies responsible for delivering the Department’s material resource efficiency policies would be 

brought together under the umbrella of WRAP by April 2010. The bodies covered by this measure are the Waste & Resources Action Programme 
(WRAP), Envirowise, National Industrial Symbiosis Programme (NISP), Construction & Resources Waste Programme (CRWP), Centre for 
Remanufacturing & Reuse (CRR), Action Sustainability and the BREW Centre for Local Authorities.

46  http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/business/reporting/index.htm

The Waste and Resources Action Programme 
(WRAP) is Defra’s principal delivery body 
responsible for implementing the Government‘s 
policies to minimise waste and improve material 
resource efficiency. They are currently focusing 
on four priority areas of packaging, food waste, 
collection systems and quality of materials. 

WRAP is steadily moving the focus of its activities 
further up the supply chain, from waste 
management and recycling to improved product 
design, reuse, and waste minimisation. On 1st 
April 2010, WRAP will be expanded into a new 
delivery body45 with a wider focus.



WRAP


Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 12. Sustainable consumption & production 105




climate change objectives, and will lay a report before 
Parliament by 1 December 2010. The Climate Change 
Act specifies that by April 2012, the Government must 
make regulations that require companies to measure 
and report their emissions, or explain to Parliament 
why they are not doing so. 

Providing trusted standards and methodologies
Businesses need assessment tools and methods to 
enable them to measure the environmental impacts 
of their products and services and to benchmark their 
performance. Defra supported the British Standards 
Institute (BSI) in developing the world’s first standard 
for the carbon footprinting of products, “PAS2050”. 
This standard has been downloaded more than 
17,000 times from the BSI website and has been used 
on thousands of products (5,000 by the Carbon Trust 
alone). Defra is now playing a leading role in the 
debate to develop global standards, underpinned by 
PAS2050, and is supporting a review of PAS2050 to 
improve usability and boost uptake.

It is important that businesses and consumers can 
trust claims about the environmental impacts of 
products and services. Defra publishes guidance47 to 
businesses on ensuring green marketing claims are 
accurate, credible, and substantiated. This guidance  
is currently being updated, for consultation in 2010. 

Making public procurement sustainable
The public sector spends £220 billion each year on 
procurement. Defra aims to bring this purchasing 
power to bear on some of the most important sectors 
selling goods and services in the UK market. Defra’s 
Buy Sustainable Quick Wins purchasing specifications 
are part of the Government Buying Standards, which 
are mandatory for central Government Departments. 
In 2009, new procurement specifications for information 
and communications technology were published, to 
be followed by revised standards for paper and furniture. 

Defra works with procurers and key suppliers in sectors 
with large environmental impacts (e.g. construction, 
transport, and food) to assess and reduce carbon 

emissions down their supply chains. As announced  
in the Pre-Budget Report 2009, the Government  
is creating a Supplier Charter for Departments to 
communicate high level procurement objectives, 
which include low carbon and resource efficiency. 

Reducing the environmental impact of products  
and services
Improving the energy performance of products
Improving the energy efficiency of products, such as 
white goods, TVs, and heating and cooling systems, 
helps consumers save on their energy bills while at 
the same time reducing their carbon emissions.

Defra is improving the energy performance of 
products by:

• setting minimum energy efficiency and 
energy labelling standards at European level, 
which manufacturers must meet if they wish to sell 
their products across the European Single Market. 
Standards have been agreed for ten energy-using 
products so far, including televisions and domestic 
lighting. By 2020, these ten standards should reduce 
UK emissions by over 7MtCO


2

e per year and save 

the UK economy £900 million per year. Defra is 
negotiating strongly in Europe for further standards, 
including for heating systems and commercial 
refrigeration, which could save the UK at least 
another 7MtCO


2

e each year and £14 billion 

between now and 2030. EU standards also help  
the development and marketing of more efficient 
products outside the EU.

• developing voluntary initiatives with 
manufacturers and retailers to improve the 
efficiency of their products – for example the 
phase-out of inefficient light bulbs. Defra is working 
on further initiatives, including on televisions.

• strengthening the enforcement of standards 
and labels through product testing. Defra will consult, 
later this year, on giving the UK Market Surveillance 
Authority new powers to create a more flexible 
enforcement regime (including the ability to impose 
administrative penalties as well as criminal penalties). 

47 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/business/marketing/glc/code.htm 

106Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 12. Sustainable consumption & production




• working towards harmonisation of 
international standards and developing 
internationally agreed product testing procedures.

Developing “product roadmaps”
Working with businesses, Defra is piloting an approach 
called “product roadmapping”. A roadmap gathers 
together evidence of the environmental impacts of  
a product’s whole life-cycle, shows the actions that 
are already being taken to reduce them, and 
highlights gaps. As part of the roadmap, Defra can 
work with the supply chain and others involved to 
agree a voluntary Action Plan to address these gaps. 
There are 10 pilots covering a wide range of products: 
milk, fish, clothing, plasterboard, windows, toilets, 
cars, TVs, lighting, and commercial electric motors. 

Defra aims to have all the ten Action Plans agreed by 
December 2010. If these pilots are successful, the aim 
is to get the ‘roadmap’ approach adopted by many 
more business sectors, with less direct involvement 
from the Government.

Supporting more sustainable behaviours
Individuals and communities can make a real 
contribution to protecting and improving our 
environment. Defra works to support and encourage 
this action by undertaking ground-breaking research 
and developing best practice on influencing behaviour 
change. This shapes Defra’s own policy development, 
and provides advice to the Government and others on 
delivering change. For example, this work supports 
the Government’s Act on CO


2

 campaigns.

The Sustainable Clothing Action Plan sets out 
agreed stakeholder actions (individual and 
collaborative) from the clothing and fashion 
industries and supports organisations to 
improve the sustainability of clothing in the 
following priority areas:

1.  improving Environmental Performance across 
the supply chain 

2. consumption trends and behaviour 

3. awareness, media, education & networks  

4. creating market drivers 

5.  traceability across the supply chain  
(ethics, trade & environment) 

Over 90 actions are in the current Action Plan which 
is updated as new actions are added. The Action 
Plan can be seen at the following website:  
http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/business/
products/roadmaps/clothing/action-plan.htm 

The Sustainable Clothing  
Action Plan

107Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 12. Sustainable consumption & production

Market town – shoppers in Horsham high street.




In 2008, Defra published the Pro Environmental 
Behaviours Framework48 which sets out the actions 
people can take to live more sustainably. Most of  
the actions help to reduce emissions, covering food 
and drink, personal travel, homes and household 
products, and travel tourism. The Framework also 
segments the population into seven groups based on 

their beliefs and values towards the environment, 
which enables policy and communications to address 
people’s different motivations and barriers. A wide 
range of people and organisations in the public, 
private and third sectors are actively using the 
different components of the Framework. 

48 http://www.defra.gov.uk/evidence/social/behaviour/
49 www.greenerlivingfund.org.uk

Defra’s Greener Living Fund49 is using the research 
and approach set out in the Pro Environmental 
Behaviours Framework. It is providing over £5 
million between 2009 and 2011 to third sector 
organisations, so they can run projects to help 
individuals and communities in England to live 
more sustainably.

For example, the National Union of Students’ 
“Degrees Cooler” project aims to embed behavioural 
change in higher education institutions in England. 
The project’s Student Force for Sustainability  
and Greener Living Assistants are supporting 
initiatives including:

•  Student Switch Off: an energy competition between 
student halls at 11 universities. In 2008/09, 4,964 
students became Eco-Power Rangers and reduced 
electricity usage in their universities by an average 
of 8.1%.

•  Green Impact: an environmental accreditation 
scheme for departments at the University of Bristol. 
Over the 2008/09 pilot year, 46 departments took 
part, covering half of all the staff at the University. 
As a result, 31 departments now induct all new 
staff on environmental issues, 29 departments 
have created vacation shutdown plans, and 16 
departments have refreshed energy-saving  
stickers and posters in the last six months.

•  People & Planet, Go Green: A student-led 
grassroots campaign to green 30 higher  
education institutions. 

The Greener Living Fund

108Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 12. Sustainable consumption & production




Reducing emissions

13. Waste

The challenge
In 2008, the direct greenhouse gas emissions from 
waste were 22.7 MtCO


2

e overall, accounting for 

around 4% of total UK emissions. 

Around 90% of these emissions came from landfills 
where biodegradable wastes50 decompose, often over 
many decades, to release landfill gas which is roughly 
60% methane and 40% carbon dioxide. A proportion 
of this gas is captured for energy recovery or flaring51 
(currently assumed to be 75%), but a significant 
amount does escape into the atmosphere. The rest of 
the emissions from the waste sector come from the 
incineration of wastes, or dealing with waste water 
from homes and businesses. 

According to the UK greenhouse gas inventory, 
emissions from the waste sector have fallen by  
57% since 1990 (Figure 9), largely as a result of  
the successful implementation of policies like the 
landfill tax and the Landfill Allowance Trading Scheme 
(LATS), which provide strong incentives not to put 
waste into landfills.

Summary
Emissions from the waste sector have fallen 
by 57% since 1990. The Government is 
confident it will achieve further emissions 
savings of 1 MtCO


2

e by 2020 through: 

(a) working with industry and consumers  
to reduce the amount of biodegradable 
waste produced.

(b) making it harder to send biodegradable 
waste to landfill, and promoting alternatives 
such as recycling and energy generation 
from waste. 

(c) capturing more methane from landfill sites.

50  Organic materials, such as food, wood, paper, green waste, and textiles, which decay through the action of bacteria.
51  Methane flaring: the direct conversion of methane to carbon dioxide through burning, but without energy recovery. 

109Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 13. Waste


110

Emissions from waste are projected to fall further  
to 21.1 MtCO


2

e by 2020, as a result of policies to 

reduce the amount of waste sent to landfill. But in 
the UK Low Carbon Transition Plan, Defra estimated 
that even greater reductions – an additional 1MtCO


2e 

by 2020 – could be achieved through the introduction 
of additional policy measures. This will bring the total 
reduction in waste emissions since 1990 to 62% – 
almost double the 34% reduction target sought 
across all sectors of the UK economy. 

This chapter sets out how the Government intends  
to drive down emissions in the waste sector. It focuses 
exclusively on tackling emissions from landfills, as this 
provides the biggest opportunity for savings. Waste 
water is dealt with in chapter 15. 

In parallel with reducing emissions from landfills, 
action in the waste sector can make important wider 
contributions to tackling climate change, through 
reducing demand for new raw materials, reducing 

energy used in replacing goods and transporting 
waste, and providing a source of renewable energy 
(see the case study on page 114 as an example).

There are unique challenges to reducing emissions 
from landfill. There are significant uncertainties in 
estimating waste emissions, for instance in relation  
to estimating the methane capture rate at landfill 
sites, accurately measuring the amount of waste 
going to landfill (particularly from commercial and 
industrial sources) and predicting the effects of new 
policies. These issues are explored further on pages 
154 to 156, which set out Defra’s plans to improve 
understanding of waste emissions. There are also 
limits to how far emissions from landfills can be 
reduced, because waste materials already in landfills 
will continue to produce landfill gas, potentially  
for many decades to come. Where landfills are  
no longer actively managed, it can be difficult to 
implement actions to increase the amount of landfill 
gas captured.

Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 13. Waste


0102030405060

2008200720062005200420032002200120001999199819971996199519941993199219911990

LandfillIncinerationWaste Water Handling


Mt CO2e

Figure 9: Greenhouse gas emissions from the waste sector, 1990 – 2008




52  A consultation on draft Regulations transposing the revised Waste Framework Directive in England is due to be launched later this year. This will 
require the application of the waste hierarchy as a priority order in law, although departures from the hierarchy will be allowed where this is 
justified by life-cycle thinking on the overall impacts of the generation and management of such waste.

Figure 10: The waste hierarchy

In spite of these challenges, Defra is confident that 
the actions outlined in this chapter will reduce waste 
emissions by at least the target set in the Low Carbon 
Transition Plan of 1 MtCO


2

e by 2020. 

Meeting the challenge
The waste hierarchy
The Government’s approach to managing waste is 
based on the ‘waste hierarchy’52 (Figure 10). Options 
towards the top of the hierarchy are more sustainable 
ways of managing waste than those lower down 
– for example preventing waste from being created in 
the first place is more resource and carbon efficient 
than recycling it or disposing of it in another way. 

Defra’s plan for the waste sector is underpinned by 
this hierarchy and centres on three themes:

1.  reducing the amount of biodegradable  
waste produced.

2.  diverting more biodegradable waste away  
from landfill.

3.  capturing and treating more methane from landfill. 

Reducing the amount of biodegradable  
waste produced
Waste prevention and re-use are at the top of the 
waste hierarchy, because they prevent the unnecessary 
loss of resources, reduce overall demand for resources, 
reduce energy used in replacing goods and transporting 
waste, and reduce the amount of waste going  
to landfill. 

Reducing food waste
Every year in the UK we throw away approximately 18 
– 20 million tonnes of food waste. It is estimated that 
each year, in total, householders could avoid throwing 
away food worth around £12 billion.

Waste prevention/Re-use

Preparing for re-use

Recycling/Composting

Recovery/Energy 
Recovery

Disposal

111Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 13. Waste

Landfill site © WRAP




Defra plans to reduce food waste through the 
following actions: 

• through the Waste and Resources Action 
Programme (WRAP), working with the grocery 
sector to secure more demanding food waste 
reduction targets in phase two of the “Courtauld 
Commitment”, a voluntary agreement due to be 
launched in March 2010, which is sponsored by 
Defra and the Department for Business, Innovation, 
and Skills (BIS). 

• funding WRAP’s ‘Love Food Hate Waste’ campaign, 
which reduced household food waste by 110,000 
tonnes between 2007 and 2008 through raising 
consumer awareness of food waste and providing 
practical tips to prevent it. Defra has extended this 
funding to 2011 and set a higher waste reduction 
target of 250,000 tonnes.

• working with WRAP and the Food Standards Agency 
to reduce food waste by improving the clarity and 
consistency of date labels and improving consumer 
understanding of food storage and usage guidance. 

• through WRAP, piloting food waste reduction 
initiatives in schools. The outcomes of these pilots 
will inform the development of guidance for schools 
more widely. 

• funding research on food waste from the hospitality 
sector to inform development of policy actions in 
this area. 

Reducing wood waste
Every year we throw away around 4.6 million tonnes 
of wood waste in the UK, about half of which comes 
from the construction sector. The joint Government 
and industry Strategy for Sustainable Construction, 
published in June 2008, included the ambitious target 
of halving construction and demolition waste going 
to landfill by 2012 (compared to 2008 levels). Defra is 
working closely with BIS and with the industry to drive 
forward delivery of this target. Actions include WRAP 
support for individual signatories to the target, guidance 
for small builders, resource efficiency plans for individual 

construction sectors (e.g. the British Wood Federation’s 
work with joiners and window-makers), and working 
towards a target to reduce construction packaging 
waste by 20%. 

Defra also values action from the third sector which  
is helping to reduce wood waste. For example, the 
Furniture Reuse Network, which is part of REalliance53, 
is supporting charitable organisations across the UK 
to reduce poverty by collecting unwanted furniture 
and passing it onto low income households.

Reducing other types of biodegradable waste
Defra supports work to reduce paper and card  
waste, through:

• a voluntary agreement between WRAP and the 
home improvement industry to reduce packaging 
by 15% and waste to landfill by 50% by 2012.

• a number of industry-led opt-out mailing schemes, 
which allow householders to sign up and reduce 
the amount of direct mail they receive.

• the Strategy for Sustainable Construction.

The Sustainable Clothing Roadmap (page 107)  
is reducing textile waste, and the third sector plays  
an important role in encouraging the reuse of 
clothing, for example through the wide network  
of charity shops. 

Diverting biodegradable waste away  
from landfill
We need to deal with the waste that is produced in 
better ways than sending it to landfills. Defra is 
driving this by making landfilling harder, and making 
the alternatives easier – including using waste as  
a resource to generate new products or energy.

Making landfilling harder
The Government introduced the landfill tax in 1996, 
making it progressively more expensive to send waste 
to landfill. Budget 2009 announced that the cost of 
sending waste to landfill would continue to rise by £8 

53  The four principal networks that support third sector organisations concerned with reuse, recycling, compost and waste minimisation have come 
together to form REalliance CIC: Community Recycling Network, London Community Resource Network, Community Composting Network, and 
Furniture Reuse Network 

Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 13. Waste 112




per tonne each year until at least 2013. Defra estimates 
that these increases will divert approximately 3 million 
tonnes of waste away from landfill per year by 2013/14.

A consultation launched this year asks for views on 
whether introducing landfill restrictions or bans for 
certain waste materials, e.g. metals, glass, plastic and 
some biodegradable wastes (food, wood, paper/card, 
green waste) would make an effective contribution to 
reducing emissions and increasing resource efficiency.  
If, following consultation, landfill restrictions were 
found to be an effective way to do this, their introduction 
could lead to significantly more biodegradable waste 
being diverted from landfill by 2020.

Making the alternatives easier
The Government will encourage more sustainable 
methods of waste management by:

• ensuring the necessary infrastructure and collection, 
sorting and processing systems are in place.

• creating and stimulating markets for waste.

• driving behaviour change through working 
with industry.

Defra established the Waste Infrastructure Delivery 
Programme to help local authorities accelerate the 
building of the infrastructure needed to treat residual 
waste. To date, £2.6 billion in Private Finance Initiative 
credits has been committed to 38 projects.

Supporting recycling & composting
The UK has already achieved a paper and card 
recycling rate of about 70%. Defra is due to launch  
a consultation in March 2010 on higher targets for 
recovering and recycling packaging waste (as part of 
revising the Packaging Regulations), and later this 
year will start to review the voluntary agreements it 
has with the paper industry to ensure its recycling 
targets remain challenging.

Wood waste recycling rates in the UK are currently 
about 75%. The Strategy for Sustainable Construction 
will help to increase wood recycling rates, and further 
policy development in this area will be informed by the 
outcome of an ongoing wood waste research project.

Green-Works is an environmental social 
enterprise and registered charity. The Green-
Works furniture reuse programme sees high 
quality furniture from large organisations sold 
back into local communities – charities, small 
businesses, and volunteer organisations – for  
a fraction of their original price, or donated 
to poor communities overseas.

Nothing is wasted at Green-Works. Items get stripped 
down for component parts and different materials 
for use elsewhere, old desks are remanufactured 
in-house to create new items that will last for 
years; recycling is a last resort for unreuseable 
metal and plastic components and scraps of wood.

The reuse programme has been running for 10 
years. Over that time GreenWorks have diverted 
more than 63,000 tonnes of office and school 
furniture from landfill. In 2009, 313,573 items of 
furniture were diverted through a combination  
of reuse, remanufacture and recycling. The skills 
involved in these processes mean that for every 
1000 tonnes of furniture reused Green-Works has 
created more than 20 jobs. Consequently Green-
Works has created volunteer opportunities and 
paid training for over 200 people from deprived 
areas across the country.

Green-Works furniture  
reuse programme

113Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 13. Waste

© Green-Works




Defra provides a range of targeted support to help 
encourage composting of food and green waste.  
For example, WRAP has worked with local authorities 
and other partners to improve the uptake of home 
composting through the distribution of approximately 
1.6 million home composting bins to households 
across the country, which has meant that over 
260,000 tonnes of waste have been diverted from 
the waste stream each year. 

Anaerobic digestion is a proven technology for 
recovering organic waste to land. Organic matter is 
broken down to produce renewable energy in the 
form of biogas and the treated material (or digestate) 
can be used as a fertiliser and soil conditioner.  
The Government is taking forward a wide range of 
actions to promote anaerobic digestion. For example, 
the WRAP Organics Capital Grant Programme 
provides financial assistance towards the capital costs 
of plant equipment and infrastructure for food waste 
processing capacity, including anaerobic digestion and 
in-vessel composting. Other anaerobic digestion 
support measures are covered below.

Supporting energy from waste
In general, biodegradable waste that cannot be 
prevented, re-used or recycled should be used to 
generate energy including electricity, heat or fuel for 
use in transport. Defra is working closely with a number 
of other Departments – including BIS, the Department 
of Energy and Climate Change (DECC), the 
Department for Transport (DfT), and the Department 
for Communities and Local Government (CLG) – to 
remove the barriers to recovering energy from waste, 
which include the lack of infrastructure, security of 
waste supply, and collection and sorting arrangements 
which are not fit for purpose. 

The Renewable Energy Strategy54, published in July 
2009, sets out in detail what the Government is 
doing to increase the generation and use of energy 
from renewable sources, including waste. 

54  Available via DECC’s website http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/what_we_do/uk_supply/energy_mix/renewable/res/res.aspx.

Slough Heat and Power‘s combined heat and 
power (CHP) plant, a wholly owned subsidiary 
of Scottish and Southern Energy plc, has a 
potential generating capacity of 80 megawatts. 
It produces electricity and heat, with the latter 
being distributed via a steam and hot water 
distribution network. There are also around  
100 kilometres of underground electricity 
cables connected to the power station and local 
grid which supply the surrounding Slough 
Trading Estate. 

The CHP plant is the UK’s largest dedicated biomass 
energy facility. Its main sources of fuel are wood  
chips, biomass and waste paper. The plant uses 
approximately 3,500 tonnes per week of clean, 
untreated waste wood from pallets, packaging and 
demolition and 1,250 tonnes per week of non-
recyclable packaging, paper and card. The lifetime 
emissions savings achieved by diverting this amount of 
waste from landfill is approximately 100 ktCO


2

e per 

year that the diversion occurs, with additional savings 
made by producing heat and electricity from biomass.

Slough Heat and Power supplies electricity, hot water and steam  
to local businesses

114Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 13. Waste




The Government’s policies to encourage energy from 
waste include the following:

Financial support
• Energy from waste facilities are exempt from the 

Climate Change Levy, and may also benefit from 
enhanced capital allowances. 

• The Government has reopened the Bioenergy 
Capital Grants Scheme which promotes the early 
deployment of biomass energy plants. 

• A fund of £10 million has been made available for 
a series of projects demonstrating innovative use of 
anaerobic digestion.

• Defra is providing substantial financial support 
to local authorities to invest in residual waste 
infrastructure, including energy from waste 
facilities, through Private Finance Initiative credits. 

Creating markets for energy produced from waste
• Renewable electricity from waste receives 

Renewables Obligation Certificates (ROCs), which 
generators can sell to generate income in addition 
to the market price received for the electricity.  
The ROC system was recently extended to 2037  
and the banding was reformed to provide greater 
support to anaerobic digestion, increase investor 
certainty, and remove barriers to the use of solid 
recovered fuel. 

• The Feed-In Tariff scheme, to be introduced in April 
this year, will guarantee a minimum payment per 
unit of renewable electricity for small scale electricity 
generators. A specific ‘farm-scale’ anaerobic 
digestion Feed-In Tariff will be introduced.

• The Renewable Heat Incentive (RHI), to be 
introduced in April 2011, will guarantee a minimum 
payment per unit of heat from renewable sources, 
which will encourage the capture and use of heat 
from anaerobic digestion and waste combustion 
plants. It will also provide support for the injection 
into the gas grid of biomethane (biogas upgraded 
to pipeline quality).

• The Renewable Transport Fuel Obligation (RTFO) 
requires fossil fuel suppliers to ensure that 3.25% 
(rising to 3.5% in 2010/11) of their fuels for road 
transport comes from renewable sources, including 
those produced from waste (eg. used cooking oil 
and biomethane). The Department for Transport will 
be consulting later this year on changes to the RTFO 
required under the Renewable Energy Directive (RED). 
As part of these changes, the contribution made by 
biofuels produced from wastes is proposed to be 
considered twice as valuable as that made by other 
biofuels and so could receive double the support.

Addressing practical issues 
• Ensuring a secure supply of quality fuel. Policy 

measures such as the landfill tax escalator provide  
a secure and accessible stream of waste for energy. 
If they were introduced, landfill restrictions could 
also have a role to play here. 

• Managing wastes generated during the energy 
recovery process. For example, to help facilitate 
the development of the market for the digestate 
produced by anaerobic digestion plants,  
the Environment Agency published a Quality 
Protocol in 2009, setting out conditions for the 
production and use of quality digestate. Work is 
currently underway on an industry certification 
scheme to support the Quality Protocol. 

• Enabling Combined Heat and Power (CHP) 
plants to get the right support through ROCs 
and the RHI. For example, by developing an online 
tool which enables the determination of the energy 
content from the biomass fraction of a mixed waste 
stream (e.g. solid recovered fuel).

• Providing advice and information. For example, 
in Spring 2010 Defra published an Implementation 
Plan of practical actions for anaerobic digestion, 
including the new web-based advice portal by the 
National Non Food Crops Centre, supported by 
Defra and DECC. 

115Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 13. Waste




Helping people to choose the right waste 
management options
A wide range of individuals and organisations are 
involved in making decisions about how to manage 
waste at the local and regional level, such as local waste-
collection and disposal authorities, Regional Development 
Agencies and Government Offices. A range of 
information tools are being developed to ensure they 
receive the correct direction and guidance from central 
Government on how best to manage waste, as it  
is not always clear how to implement the waste 
hierarchy (e.g. decisions on whether to recycle wood 
waste or burn it to produce heat and electricity depend 
upon the grade and quality of the waste wood).

Waste Management services
Waste management and recycling is an essential 
public service, and it is critical that local authorities 
offer an effective and efficient service. To help them 
do so, Defra is developing guidance which identifies 
the most sustainable waste management option or 
technology according to the type of waste material. 
This guidance is being informed by a number of 
research projects currently underway. 

Planning
Developing better uses for waste is an essential part 
of the planning system’s wider objectives for making 
preparations for low-carbon living. The planning 
system is key to the adequate and timely provision of 
the facilities and infrastructure needed to manage 
waste in a sustainable manner and to move waste  
up the waste hierarchy (see figure 10). Planning 
authorities are required by law to have regard to  
the waste hierarchy when undertaking many of  
their planning functions (e.g. when producing 
development plan documents) and CLG’s Planning 
Policy Statement 10: Planning for Sustainable Waste 
Management55 provides the overarching policy 
framework on how this should be done. CLG intends 
to update PPS10 by December 2010 to reflect the 
new waste hierarchy set out in the revised Waste 
Framework Directive.

The right energy from the right waste using  
the right technology
Within the overarching waste hierarchy, there is a 
hierarchy of different energy from waste technologies. 
For example, combined heat and power (CHP) plants 
are, in most cases, preferable to incinerating waste 
solely for electricity, because the heat produced in the 
process can be captured and used. 

55  Available via http://www.communities.gov.uk/planningandbuilding/planning/planningpolicyguidance/mineralsandwaste/wastemanagement/pps10 

Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 13. Waste 116

© WRAP




Defra has established a project, involving DECC,  
HM Treasury, BIS, DfT and CLG, to clarify the 
Government’s stance on energy from waste, to 
encourage appropriate industry development and 
investment, and to ensure that the development of 
energy from waste is environmentally sustainable. 
This project is working to provide more detailed 
guidance for waste management operators, including 
local authorities, on recovering the right energy  
from the right waste with the right technology in the 
right place. 

Waste collection and sorting
Dealing with different types of waste in different ways 
requires properly planned and co-ordinated collection 
and sorting. One of the options under consideration 
as part of the consultation on landfill restrictions is 
to introduce a requirement to sort. This will make it 
easier to divert specific waste materials from landfill 
and ensure they are directed towards the most 
appropriate treatment option. 

The separate collection of food waste is crucial for 
anaerobic digestion. The Government has taken  
a number of steps to encourage separate collection, 
including the following:

• Defra has given WRAP £3.5 million to help local 
authorities pilot or improve food waste collections. 

• WRAP, through its Recycling and Organics Technical 
Advisory Team (ROTATE), also undertake research 
and provide tailored advice to local authorities on 
developing recycling services with a priority area 
being food waste collections. 

• The Code for Sustainable Homes encourages 
developers to provide facilities to compost household 
waste, reducing the amount sent to landfill.  
In December 2009, CLG launched a consultation  
on proposed improvements to the Code. CLG also 
plans to start an evaluation later in 2010 of a number 
of technical parts of the Building Regulations, 
including Part H6 and associated guidance on 
provision for the storage of solid waste, looking  
at what changes might be considered for the next 
revision of the Building Regulations in 2013.

• To make it easier for small businesses to recycle 
their commercial and industrial waste, Defra is 
funding pilot trade waste collection schemes.

Capturing more methane emissions from landfill
Landfills will continue to generate methane over the 
coming decades, both because some biodegradable 
waste will continue to be landfilled, and because 
waste that was landfilled in the past will continue  
to decompose for many years.

Defra is working to ensure that as much methane as 
possible is captured from landfill sites and then either 
used to produce energy or converted to CO


2

 through 

flaring. Electricity produced in this way receives support 
through ROCs, and heat could qualify for the RHI, 
depending on the outcomes of the RHI consultation. 

The Environment Agency has redrafted and re-issued 
its guidance on landfill engineering and landfill gas 
management, and the industry has developed a code 
of best practice. In 2008, the Environment Agency 
introduced a programme of technical assessments 
(‘audits’) of landfills to identify improvements that  
can be made to increase levels of methane capture. 

117Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 13. Waste

Recycling food waste © WRAP




Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 14. Fluorinated gases & industrial process emissions 118

Reducing emissions

14.  Fluorinated gases  
& industrial process 
emissions

The challenge
Fluorinated gases, or ‘F-gases’, are greenhouse gases 
that are used mainly as a refrigerant in commercial 
refrigeration and air-conditioning equipment 
(including in cars). F-gases have some more specialised 
uses as well, such as the Perfluorocarbons (PFCs) 
which are used in fire protection equipment, or in 
high voltage switchgear where they are used as an 
insulating gas (sulphur hexafluoride).

In the F-gas sector, total emissions for 2008 according 
to the Greenhouse Gas Inventory were 12.1 MtCO


2e. 

This was split into the following gases:

Type of F-gas Emissions 2008 

Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) 11.2 MtCO


2e 


Perfluorocarbons (PFCs) 0.2 MtCO


2e 


Sulphur Hexafluoride (SF6) 0.7 MtCO


2e 


A Defra study from 2007 indicated that 27% of total 
HFC emissions related to air conditioning and 
commercial refrigeration, with the UK food retail 
sector accounting for 56% of this figure56.

Summary
•  There has been a significant fall in 

fluorinated gas (F-gas) emissions since  
the mid-1990s.

•  Regulatory measures were introduced 
from 2008 to clamp down on leakage  
and reduce emissions.

•  The Government is pushing for an 
international agreement to pave the way  
for major worldwide reductions in F-gas 
consumption and production. 

•  Nitrous oxide and methane emissions from 
industrial processes have fallen 90% since 
1990. Defra is exploring the scope for 
further reductions.

56  http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/quality/air/fgas/documents/fgas-report-1107.pdf




Considerable progress has been made to date  
in reducing F-gas emissions and there has been  
a decrease of 5.1 MtCO


2

e since 1990 (a 30% 

reduction). This reduction is shown in figure 11, 
alongside that for methane and nitrous oxide  
from industrial processes (see box on page 121).

Progress to date is a result of a comprehensive EU 

framework of controls, underpinned in the UK by 
the Fluorinated Greenhouse Gases Regulations 
2009, which prescribe offences and penalties 
applicable to non-compliance with the EC provisions. 
The principal objective of these measures is to 
contain, prevent and reduce emissions of F-gases.  
For example the framework of controls establishes 
minimum personnel qualification and company 
certification requirements, in order to avoid unnecessary 
emissions and ensure proper recovery of F-gases.57 

As stated in the UK Low Carbon Transition Plan, F-gas 
emissions are expected to decrease by some 1.9 MtCO


2e 

between now and 2020, due largely to a continued 
reduction in leakage rates, increased efficiency as older 
units are replaced by more efficient ones, and market 
penetration of lower/no global warming potential 
(GWP) refrigerants such as hydrocarbons, CO


2 


and low GWP HFCs.

Defra has commissioned a study looking at future 
HFC consumption and emissions, aimed at improving 
the quality of our data, which will inform the UK’s 
negotiating position for an international HFC 
emissions reduction arrangement (see below).

Meeting the challenge
The Government wants to see continued progress 
towards the reduction of F-gas emissions and 
increasing use of alternatives where this makes 
commercial and environmental sense. 

57  Under the regulations only qualified personnel can carry out skilled tasks involving F gases, and only certified companies should provide work 
with F gases that involves breaking into circuits.


0510152025303540

F-Gases Nitrous Oxide


Mt CO2e

Methane

2008200720062005200420032002200120001999199819971996199519941993199219911990

Figure 11: Historical non-CO


2

 greenhouse gas emissions from Industrial Processes and Fluorinated Gases

119Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 14. Fluorinated gases & industrial process emissions




Domestically, to back up the F-gas Regulations,  
the Government sponsors a business advice unit 
called F-Gas Support58, which offers guidance to all 
organisations covered by the F-gas Regulations in 
order to help them comply with their obligations. 
F-Gas Support is encouraging the largest emitters and 
other major users of equipment containing F-gases to 
sign Compliance Assistance Agreements (CAAs). 
These voluntary agreements require organisations to 
provide data showing how they are complying with 
the F-gas Regulations. Reducing emissions from 
supermarkets is a key focus of this work (see box on 
Supermarket Actions on page 121). 

Potentially very ambitious F-gas reductions are in the 
pipeline. Defra has been working with DECC to push 
for an international agreement to progressively reduce 
the production and consumption of HFCs. Such an 
agreement could pave the way for a significant reduction 
of production and consumption, perhaps as much as 
90% by 2030/35. 

The European Commission must review all the provisions 
of the EU F-gas Regulation and produce a report and 
proposals by July 2011 on whether further action 
should be taken to reduce F-gas emissions. Everything 
within the Regulation is open to review, including the 
possibility of introducing new use bans. An advisory 
group is to be set up to inform this process and the 
UK will play an active role in these discussions. 

120Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 14. Fluorinated gases & industrial process emissions

58  http://fgassupport.com/

Fluorinated gases are often used in commercial refrigeration.




HFC emissions from the ten largest supermarket 
companies represent almost 60% of F-gas 
emissions from the food retail sector. There is 
potential for substantial emissions reductions 
in this area, through reducing leaks or using 
refrigerants with much lower, or no, global 
warming potential (GWP). Regulations relating 
to testing, automatic leak detection, and 
record-keeping ensure that supermarkets are 
working to avoid leakage. But some supermarket 
companies are going beyond regulatory 
requirements and adopting measures to make 
further emissions reductions, including:

•  converting existing refrigeration plants to use 
HFC blends with half the GWP of more established 
refrigerants. This can lead to a 70% reduction in 
leakage emissions and a 10% reduction in energy 
related emissions. Some of the large supermarket 
companies already have major retrofit programmes 
in train;

•  better system design, installation and commissioning 
improved HFC refrigeration equipment. One 
supermarket company has found that a strict 
approach to design and installation has reduced 
leakage from new systems by a factor of ten 
during the first year of plant operation;

•  using alternative refrigerant systems. Several 
supermarket companies have voluntarily announced 
they will adopt CO


2

 as the refrigerant of choice 

on all or most new installations. 

Supermarket actions to  
reduce emissions

121Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 14. Fluorinated gases & industrial process emissions

Certain industrial processes emit nitrous  
oxide or methane, as well as carbon dioxide. 
While carbon dioxide emissions from industrial 
installations are covered by the EU Emissions 
Trading System (EU ETS), Defra is responsible for the 
regulatory framework through which nitrous oxide 
and methane emissions are dealt with. In 2008, 
emissions of these two greenhouse gases from the 
industrial processes sector totalled 2.6 MtCO


2e. 

This was primarily made up of nitrous oxide 
emissions (2.5 MtCO


2

e). These nitrous oxide 

emissions are now dominated by two chemical 
production installations in England, while the 
methane emissions are derived from fewer than  
ten installations in the steel and chemicals sector.  
The Environment Agency is responsible for 
regulating these installations.

Since 1990, emissions in this area have decreased 
dramatically, by 22 MtCO


2

e (90%). This is the 

result of contracting industrial activities and 
improvements in process control. Those improvements 
will have been driven largely by regulation, at first 
under the UK’s integrated pollution control system 
and, since the middle of this decade, under the 
EU’s integrated pollution prevention and control  
(IPPC) Directive.

Going forward, baseline emissions are expected to 
fall further to below 2.5 MtCO


2

e by 2020, as a 

result of further contraction in industrial activities 
and possibly further tightened IPPC requirements. 
Defra will shortly complete an assessment of the 
permit conditions on the major nitrous oxide 
emitting installations to establish if any further 
cuts in emissions would be viable and appropriate. 

Nitrous oxide & methane emissions 
from industrial processes




Reducing emissions

15.  Water availability  
& quality

The challenge
Water usage contributes to greenhouse gas emissions 
in several different ways. First there are the essential 
– and energy-intensive – operational activities which 
supply us with clean water: pumping, treatment and 
distribution. Then there is the emissions impact of 
heating water once it has reached our homes and 
workplaces. Finally there are the emissions associated 
with the treating and handling of wastewater. 

This is a challenging area in which to try to cut 
emissions. Clean water is essential to all our lives. 
Treating water is energy-intensive, and water quality 
standards (largely driven by European legislation) are 
likely to tighten over the next few years, increasing 
the carbon cost of water treatment. At the same 
time, demographic changes, such as population 
growth and a smaller average household size, are 
likely to require more drinking water to be supplied 
and wastewater to be treated. 

As described in Chapter 3, the changing climate will 
make the challenge stiffer. The UK Climate Projections 
2009 forecast a decline in overall levels of rainfall, but 
an increase in the number of severe storms likely to hit 
the UK. Both these changes would lead to upwards 
pressures on emissions. For example, an overall fall  

in water levels would reduce river flows and the 
ability of receiving waters to cope with sewage and 
pollution, increasing the need for further treatment.  
A rise in the number of violent storms would require 
more pumping of surface water with an associated 
increase in energy use.

Summary
•  Water has a significant emissions impact: 

we need to be more efficient in the way 
we supply and use water.

•  The Government’s water strategy for 
England, Future Water, was published 
in 2009.

•  The Government is working to reduce 
average daily individual water consumption 
from 150 litres to 130 litres, including 
through a £1m Act on CO


2

 campaign. 

•  Significant progress has been made in 
reducing water leakage from supply. Defra 
is working with industry and Ofwat to 
increase operational efficiency. 

122Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 15. Water availability & quality




Meeting the challenge 
To reduce emissions associated with water, we need 
to make the way it is used and supplied more efficient. 
Using less water means reducing emissions at every 
stage in the process: pumping, treatment, distribution, 
heating, and wastewater handling. To that end, Defra, 
working closely with other key departments, has put 
in place a number of measures aimed at the public 
and at the water industry. Water efficiency is also  
vital to the adaptation agenda, so in many cases the 
actions Defra is taking are ‘win-win’s – policies that 
will help us adapt to climate change while also 
cutting emissions. The measures below, designed to 
make water usage more efficient, are covered in more 
detail in the adaptation section on pages 56 and 57:

•  The Government’s water strategy for England, 
Future Water,59 set an ambition to reduce a person’s 
average daily water consumption from 150 litres to 
130 litres.

•  A £1 million Act on CO


2

 campaign, launched in 

September 2009, informs consumers of the energy 
and carbon implications of water use, and how they 
can help save water and emissions.

•  As set out in Ofwat’s 2009 Price Review, metering 
is to increase to 50% by 2014-15. The Government 
is considering metering policy in light of the Walker 
Review which was published in December 2009.

The Government also supports a number of programmes 
to encourage sustainable water consumption by 
businesses, such as the Enhanced Capital Allowance 
scheme for water efficient technologies. 

As well as making demand more sustainable, we need 
to make systems of supply more efficient. Already, major 
efficiency gains have been made in operational activities. 
The water industry now uses around 10% less energy to 
deliver a unit of water and treat a unit of wastewater 
than it did five years ago. As noted earlier, since 1994-
95, leakage from the supply network has fallen by 
about 37%, with enough water saved to supply the 
daily needs of over 12 million domestic customers. 
These are major improvements, but we need to go 
further. Ofwat has set new water efficiency targets for 
water companies for 2010-2014 to achieve water 
savings of 23 million litres per day. The Government has 
made it clear that it does not rule out taking forward a 
water efficiency commitment should water usage per 
head not fall sufficiently through other measures.

Ofwat’s Price Review 2009 required companies  
to use the Shadow Price of Carbon in their cost-benefit 
appraisals of their capital programmes. This ensures 
companies put a value on carbon for both operational 
and embedded emissions.  

123Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 15. Water availability & quality

59 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/quality/water/strategy/pdf/future-water.pdf




Lake District

Water companies are seeking to ensure that at least 20% 
of all energy used by the industry comes from renewable 
sources by 2020. Currently the water industry generates 
renewable energy from anaerobic digestion, wind and 
hydropower, representing around 750 GWh per year. 
Together with purchased accredited renewable energy, 
this totals about 17% energy use from renewable 
sources.

Tackling emissions from wastewater is very challenging, 
as the level of emissions is so contingent on population. 
One way to reduce the negative impact of wastewater 
is to capture the methane emissions and convert 
them into energy. Government provides an incentive 
for this process through a Renewables Obligation 
Certificate (ROC) (see page 115 for a description of 
ROCs). In 2008-2009 water companies beneficially 
recycled 84% of their sewage sludge, mainly by 
sending it for anaerobic digestion, to agriculture,  
and for land reclamation.60 

60 Water UK sustainability indicators 2008-09

Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 15. Water availability & quality 124

Most people don’t consciously think about the 
water that they use in their everyday lives, let alone 
the energy used to pump, treat, clean and heat it. 
Water use in our homes accounts for about 5% of 
the UK’s total greenhouse gas emissions, mostly 
due to the energy needed to heat it for washing, 
cooking, and cleaning. Reducing wastage of water, 
particularly hot water, is a simple and effective way 
of reducing greenhouse gas emissions and saving 
money on household bills.

Two water companies, Northumbrian Water and 
United Utilities, have each developed web-based 
carbon calculators to show the link between water 
and energy use. Customers can see how much 
water is being used at their home, and where,  
as they answer questions about their appliances 
and habits. They can also see how much carbon is 
being produced to meet their demand for water 
and where simple changes can reduce both their 
water use and carbon footprint.

http://www.nwl.co.uk/CarbonCalculator.aspx  
http://www.unitedutilities.com/CalcCarbonWater.htm

Northumbrian Water and United 
Utilities – online carbon and  
water calculators




Reducing emissions

16. Marine and fisheries

The challenge
The marine environment plays a vital role in natural 
carbon storage and cycling. The world’s oceans have 
absorbed about 25% of all the carbon dioxide emitted 
globally as a result of human activities over the last 
200 years.61 Ocean acidity has increased by 30% over 
the last 200 years, the fastest rate at any time in the 
last 65 million years.62

Ocean acidification, and other consequences of 
carbon dioxide emissions, pose a serious risk to global 
food webs, ecosystems, and biodiversity:

• the more carbon the upper ocean stores, the less it 
can absorb in the future – so the effect of the oceans 
in slowing climate change could diminish;

• increasing acidity and rising sea surface temperatures 
could damage marine carbon stores such as kelp 
forests. It is estimated that over half of the carbon 
captured each year by the world’s biological systems 
is “blue carbon” in marine ecosystems, not only in 
the oceans but also in salt marshes and seagrasses.63

Summary
•  Marine waters are vital carbon sinks:  

the world’s oceans have absorbed 25%  
of all the carbon dioxide emitted from 
human activities over the past 200 years. 

•  Climate change and ocean acidification 
are affecting the oceans’ ability to  
store carbon.

•  Defra is co-funding (with the Natural 
Environment Research Council and the 
Department of Energy and Climate 
Change) the £12m UK Ocean Acidification 
Research Programme to understand better 
the implications of ocean acidification and  
its impacts on the whole earth system. 

61  Sabine, C.L., Feely, R.A., Gruber, N., Key, R.M., Lee, K., Bullister, J.L., Wanninkhof, R., Wong, C.S., Wallace, D.W.R., Tilbrook, B., Millero, F.J., 
Peng, T.-H., Kozyr, A., Ono, T. and Rios, A.F., 2004. The Oceanic Sink for Anthropogenic CO


2

, Science 305: 367-371.

62  MCCIP (2009), Marine Climate Change Ecosystem Linkages Report Card 2009. (Eds. Baxter JM, Buckley PJ and Frost MT), Summary Report, 
MCCIP, Lowestoft, 16pp. P.5

63  Nellemann, C., Corcoran, E., Duarte, C. M., Valdés, L., De Young, C., Fonseca, L., Grimsditch, G. (Eds). 2009. Blue Carbon. A Rapid Response 
Assessment. United Nations Environment Programme, GRID-Arendal, www.grida.no, p.6

125Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 16. Marine and fisheries




Reducing global emissions will help to protect the 
marine environment, but we need to better understand 
the impacts of climate change and ocean acidification 
on its ability to absorb carbon. Unlike changes in 
terrestrial carbon balances in trees, plants, and soils, 
changes in marine carbon balances are not currently 
included in international greenhouse gas emissions 
reporting or targets. But it is estimated that over the 
next 20 years, preserving and recovering blue carbon 
sinks could contribute to tackling global emissions on 
the same scale as reducing deforestation64

Meeting the challenge
Defra, together with DECC and the Natural Environment 
Research Council (NERC), recently launched the UK 
Ocean Acidification Research Programme. The 
Programme is providing £12 million over five years to 
drive forward research on the implications of ocean 
acidification, its risks to marine biogeochemistry and 
biodiversity, and its impacts on the whole Earth System. 

Defra is also working with DECC to understand  
and manage the risks to the marine environment.  
This will enable the new Marine Management 
Organisation to ensure that any new energy 
development including wind, wave, tidal, oil and gas 
takes the marine environment into consideration, 
bearing in mind that offshore wind in particular is 
expected to play a substantial part in meeting our 
renewable energy targets.

Defra will also ensure that the storage of carbon 
dioxide in sub-seabed geological formations as  
part of the Carbon Capture and Storage process  
is taken forward in line with the environmental 
safeguards provided for by our international 
obligations, including those under the OSPAR 
Convention and the London Protocol. 

Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 16. Marine and fisheries 126

64  Nellemann, C., Corcoran, E., Duarte, C. M., Valdés, L., De Young, C., Fonseca, L., Grimsditch, G. (Eds). 2009. Blue Carbon. A Rapid Response 
Assessment. United Nations Environment Programme, GRID-Arendal, www.grida.no, p.6

Waves crashing against Kynance Coves.  
These coves are protected by the National Trust.




127Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Reducing emissions | 16. Marine and fisheries

Defra is also looking at some of the factors 
which affect greenhouse gas emissions from 
fisheries. Fisheries account for around 1.2% of 
global oil consumption.

For example, Defra ran the Environmentally 
Responsible Fishing Project, a pilot study which 
concluded in November last year, designed to 
measure the environmental and economic impact 
of commercial fishing vessels targeting quota species 
in inshore waters. The data collected includes 
information on the factors which affect emissions, 
including the gear type and engine efficiency of 
vessels and the distances travelled to reach different 
fishing grounds.

Defra will publish its findings from the project later 
this year.

Reducing emissions from the 
fishing industry

Fisherman opening a catch © Seafish.

Seagull on the Gweek Creek.




Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan 128

Defra’s Climate Change Plan

Carbon Reduction 
Delivery Plan




Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan 129

1.  The carbon budget 
process and what Defra’s 
carbon budget looks like;

2.  The governance structures 
put in place to manage 
the carbon budgets 
process and the roles and 
responsibilities of 
different organisations, 
including the Devolved 
Administrations;

3.  Delivery milestones over 
the next decade; 

4.  The indicators which will 
be used to track progress;

5.  The work Defra is taking 
forward to improve the 
evidence base for climate 
change mitigation policy.

This section sets out how Defra will deliver the actions 
to reduce emissions set out in chapters 9 to 16.  
It covers the following:




Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan

17.  What is Defra’s  
carbon budget?

The 2009 UK Low Carbon Transition Plan introduced 
the concept of “Departmental carbon budgets” as  
a way of providing Government Departments with 
accountability for reducing greenhouse gas emissions. 
This new approach is the first time any government 
has introduced such a mechanism, and it serves as  
a pilot that will be reviewed ahead of the second 
budget period (2013-2017).

Each Government Department holds a carbon  
budget covering the emissions from its own estate 
and operations, and several Departments, including 
Defra, hold a sectoral carbon budget made up of a 
proportion of the emissions in the sectors over which 
they hold a degree of influence. This chapter focuses 
on Defra’s sectoral carbon budget. The emissions 
from its estates and operations are covered on pages 
162 – 166. 

Defra’s sectoral carbon budget is made up of shares 
of six sectors of the economy. The largest of these are 
in the Agriculture, Forestry and Land Management 
(AFLM) sector and Waste sector where Defra holds 
the majority of policy levers (see Chapters 9 to 11 
and 13) and is the lead Department (see roles and 
responsibilities, Chapter 18).

Defra has a substantial share of the Industrial Processes 
sector (led by DECC) which reflects the Department’s 
leading role on fluorinated gas policy in the UK  
(see Chapter 14), and its regulatory role in relation to 
non carbon dioxide greenhouse gases from industrial 
processes (see page 121). Defra also has a relatively 
small share of emissions in the Heating Workplaces 
and Homes and Communities sectors (led by DECC and 
CLG respectively). This is because of the influence Defra 
has on sustainable consumption and production (see 
Chapter 12). Finally, Defra also has a small share of 
the Transport sector, as food freight is a considerable 
proportion of overall UK transport. Figure 12 
illustrates how Defra’s carbon budget is made up 
from the different sectors.

130Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 17. What is Defra’s carbon budget?




Agriculture, forestry 
and land management

Waste

Industrial Process and F-Gases

Heating Workplaces

Transport

Homes and Communities


64%24%6%3%

2% 1%

Figure 12: Defra’s Carbon Budget


020406080100120

Agriculture, forestry 
and land management

Waste

Industrial Process and F-Gases Heating Workplaces

Transport Budget limitHomes and Communities


20102011201220132014201520162017201820192020202120222009200820072006200520042003200220012000199919981997199619951994Mt CO21993199219911990

Figure 13: Defra’s first three carbon budgets (2008 – 2012, 2013 – 2017, 2018 – 2022), compared with 
projections of the related emissions over the same period. This clearly shows that Defra expects to keep 
emissions below the carbon budgets in all three periods.

131Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 17. What is Defra’s carbon budget?




Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 18. Governance, roles and responsibilities

Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan

18.  Governance, roles  
and responsibilities

How Defra is organised to deliver
Defra has established a Climate Change Mitigation 
(CCM) Programme to ensure it meets its departmental 
carbon budget. Within Defra, the Director for Climate 
Change, Air Quality, Landscape, and Rural Affairs 
(CALR) is the Senior Responsible Owner (SRO) for the 
CCM programme. As SRO, he also sits on the cross-
Whitehall Delivery and Strategy High-level (DASH) 
Board. Responsibility for management of the Defra 
Climate Change Mitigation Programme rests with the 
Head of Climate Change Mitigation. 

Working level leads in each of Defra’s relevant policy 
areas, report to the CCM Programme Manager.  
These reports are fed into the Defra Climate Change 
Mitigation Programme Board, which reports directly 
to the Defra Management Board. 

Working with others to deliver
Successfully combating climate change will involve  
a huge range of actors, from other Government 
Departments, to individual consumers. Defra’s 
extensive delivery chain is summarised in the  
chart below:

Frontline / 
operational

The agriculture, land management, food, waste, industrial process and water sectors; 
individual consumers, retailers, and businesses; supermarkets, industry, producers of 
products containing fluorinated gases; the fishing industry.

Intermediary 
bodies

Industry bodies including the National Farmers’ Union, the Country, Land and Business 
Association, the Agricultural Industries Confederation, and Water UK; third sector bodies 
and non-governmental organisations such as the Waste and Resources Action Programme 
(WRAP) and REalliance.

Central 
government

Other Government Departments, including HM Treasury, DECC, CLG, BIS, DfT and the Forestry 
Commission; International bodies such as the European Commission, the European Union, 
the United Nations; Advisory bodies such as the Committee on Climate Change; Regulators 
including Ofwat and the Environment Agency; Defra delivery agencies and Non-
Departmental Public Bodies including Natural England and the Forestry Commission;  
Sub-national governmental bodies, such as Government Offices, Regional Development 
Agencies, and Local Authorities. 


132

The Norfolk Broads.

The English National Parks and the Broads are 
spectacular landscapes, rich in wildlife and 
cultural heritage. Together they make up 8% of 
England’s land area, are home to 210,000 people, 
and attract 75 million visitors each year. The English 
National Park Authorities (NPAs) and the Broads 
Authority work closely with many partners, 
including the farming community, to help to look 
after these areas. 

Climate change will significantly affect the National 
Parks and the Broads. Higher temperatures, changes 
in rainfall patterns, and sea-level rise will all have an 
impact. It is vital that these areas are well-managed, 
so they can adapt to these changes and continue to 
thrive, not least because they have a major role to 
play in reducing emissions. Peatlands and woodlands, 
so prevalent in National Parks, are very important 
carbon sinks (see Chapter 10). 119 Mt carbon is 
held in the 449,000 ha of peat soils in National 
Parks – equivalent to England’s entire CO


2

 emissions 

for one year.

The National Park Authorities and the Broads 
Authority have set out four key areas for actions  
in relation to climate change: 

• a sustainable approach to land management, 
whereby the Authorities champion and support 
work to maintain and restore peatlands, fens, 
moors and woodlands;

•  the development of rural low carbon communities, 
particularly the promotion of appropriate 
renewable energy and energy efficiency measures 
for protected areas through initiatives such as the 
Sustainable Development Fund; 

•  adaptation to climate change on a landscape 
scale, through, for example, expanding woodland 
habitat networks and wildfire risk management;

•  engagement with the public on issues and 
solutions relating to climate change, including the 
61,000 young people who come to National Parks 
on school visits each year.

The climate change work that is already happening 
in National Parks and the Authorities’ ambitions for 
the future are described in more detail in a 2009 
document published by the Authorities: Climate 
Change Mitigation and Adaptation in National 
Parks. This document can be downloaded at:

http://www.enpaa.org.uk/enpaa/whatsnew/climate_
change_statement.htm

Climate change in National Parks and the Broads

133Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 18. Governance, roles and responsibilities


 

Carbon Budgets Working Group on Waste

Organisation Responsibility within the sector

Defra (Chair) Lead on waste policy across Government.

Department of 
Energy and 
Climate Change

Lead on renewable energy policy including on energy from waste, which can play an 
important role in diverting waste from landfill. 

HM Treasury Controls levels and types of taxation, including the landfill tax.

Department  
for Business, 
Innovation  
and Skills

Has the ability to influence a major waste stream through its broad sponsorship of, 
and close working with, the commercial and industrial sectors.

Department for 
Communities and 
Local Government

Lead on planning policy across Government so has key influence on waste 
infrastructure; also has influence over local authorities who collect municipal waste. 

Department  
for Transport

Similarly to DECC, DfT leads on the renewable fuels so has policy levers to influence 
levels of energy from waste.

Environment 
Agency

Regulates waste management activities in England, and advises Government,  
regional bodies and local authorities on waste.

Scottish Executive Waste management and strategy is a devolved issue.

Welsh Assembly 
Government

Waste management and strategy is a devolved issue.

Northern Ireland 
Executive

Waste management and strategy is a devolved issue.

Committee on 
Climate Change

Lead on independent advice to the Government on climate change.

Central Government
The carbon budgets system ensures that each 
Government Department has responsibility for  
a share of the emissions in every sector it has 
influence over. Cross-Government working  
groups have been established for each of the carbon 
budget sectors. Defra chairs the working groups for 

the AFLM and Waste sectors, as the Department with 
the largest influence over emissions in those areas.  
All the Departments with a carbon budget stake in 
the sector are represented on the relevant working 
group, along with key delivery agencies and the 
Devolved Administrations. The make-up of these 
working groups is shown in the tables below.

134Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 18. Governance, roles and responsibilities




Carbon Budgets Working Group on Agriculture, Food, Forestry, 
and Land Management (AFFLM)

Organisation Responsibility within the sector

Defra (Chair) Lead on AFLM policy across Government

Department  
of Energy and 
Climate Change

Lead on bioenergy. The production of feedstocks for bioenergy within the UK could 
impact on emissions from this sector.

Department  
for Transport

Lead on biofuels for transport. The production of feedstocks for biofuels within the UK 
could impact on emissions from this sector.

HM Treasury Lead on public spending and economic instruments, and their role within the sector.

Department  
for Business, 
Innovation,  
and Skills

Lead on science and innovation, including in this sector.

Department for 
Communities and 
Local Government

Lead on planning policy. Emissions from this sector can be affected by planning 
decisions on land use change, and on planning permission for anaerobic  
digestion plants.

Department  
of Health

Lead on healthy eating policy, and significant public food procurement via the National 
Health Service.

Department for 
Children, Schools, 
and Families

Lead on food education in schools, and significant public food procurement via the 
school system.

Scottish Executive Policy in this sector is largely devolved.

Welsh Assembly 
Government

Policy in this sector is largely devolved.

Northern Ireland 
Executive

Policy in this sector is largely devolved.

Forestry 
Commission 
England

Lead on delivery of forestry policy in England. 

Natural England The Government’s statutory advisor on the natural environment. Delivery of Environmental 
Stewardship, and farm advice. 

Environment 
Agency

Regulates farming in England and Wales, and advisor to industry and Government  
on environmental impacts

Committee on 
Climate Change

Lead on independent advice to the Government on climate change.

135Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 18. Governance, roles and responsibilities




Defra sits on each of the other working groups where 
it has a stake in the sector: Industrial Processes, 
Transport, Homes and Communities, and Heating 
Workplaces. Defra is also represented on the 
interdepartmental Carbon Budgets Working Group, 
the National Climate Change and Energy Programme 
Board, and the National Inventory Steering Committee.

Defra works with a range of sub-national governmental 
bodies, such as Government Offices, Regional 
Development Agencies and Local Authorities. These 
bodies have a particularly important role to play in 
reducing emissions from the waste sector. For example:

• Regional Development Agencies work to improve 
resource efficiency in businesses and encourage them 
to consider more environmentally friendly technologies 
(e.g. the South East England Development Agency  
is leading on a Pathway To Zero Waste initiative 
focusing on the construction industry).

• Government Offices bring together key regional 
stakeholders, influencing what they do to meet the 
Government’s waste strategy, and interpreting and 
explaining the Government’s waste policies.

• Local Authorities have a wide range of 
responsibilities relating to waste management 
including to act as waste collection authorities, waste 
disposal authorities and waste planning authorities.

Defra also works with a number of Non-Departmental 
Public Bodies, delivery agencies, regulators and 
advisory bodies. The roles these bodies – such as the 
Environment Agency, Ofwat, and Natural England – 
play in work towards reducing emissions is highlighted 
throughout the policy area chapters (pages 89 – 127). 

Intermediary bodies and the third sector
Intermediary bodies and the third sector have a vital 
role to play in the transition to a low-carbon economy. 
This Plan contains a number of actions which are 
being or will be implemented by third sector 

organisations. For example, the Waste & Resource 
Action Programme (WRAP), a not-for-profit company 
created in 2000 which is supported by funding from 
the UK Government, will work on a number of 
aspects within the Waste plan, including waste 
minimisation and the creation of new markets for 
recycled materials.65 

Defra is working very closely with industry 
representatives, such as those who have written the 
agriculture industry’s Greenhouse Gas Action Plan. 
These representatives have an important leadership 
role to play in helping their industries move to  
a lower-carbon future. 

Frontline/Operational
To deliver emissions cuts on the scale necessary, 
frontline savings will be delivered at different levels  
of the economy in all sectors; from individual farmers 
to waste management companies making investment 
decisions. Defra is working closely with industry and 
individuals to give clear advice and a clear steer in 
each sector. For instance, Defra’s sustainable 
consumption and production programme (see 
Chapter 12) aims to give consumers the information 
they need to make sustainable choices. 

The Devolved Administrations
The UK Low Carbon Transition Plan assigned 
responsibility for delivering the UK carbon budget  
to Whitehall Departments, not the Devolved 
Administrations (DAs) (although this arrangement 
could be reviewed). But the actions taken by Scottish 
Government, Welsh Assembly Government and 
Northern Ireland Executive will all contribute to efforts 
to meet the UK carbon budget. The approaches of 
the Devolved Administrations to climate change 
mitigation in waste, agriculture and forestry, all of 
which are, to a significant degree, devolved policy 
areas, are summarised below.

136Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 18. Governance, roles and responsibilities

65 See page 101 for further details on WRAP.


136

66 Subject to advice from the Committee of Climate Change.
67 http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Publications/2009/08/19141153/0
68  http://www.forestry.gov.uk/pdf/SFS2006fcfc101.pdf/$FILE/SFS2006fcfc101.pdf

Scotland
The Climate Change (Scotland) Act commits the 
Scottish Government to reduce emissions by at least 
42% by 202066 and by at least 80% by 2050. Annual 
targets for the years 2010-22 must be set by 1 June 
2010 and Scottish Ministers are required to set out 
proposals and policies for meeting these targets 
thereafter. The Act also requires Scotland’s share of 
emissions from international aviation and international 
shipping to be included in the emissions reductions 
targets, and places a duty on Scottish public bodies  
to contribute to emissions reductions and statutory 
adaptation programmes.

In September 2009 the Scottish Government launched 
the ‘Farming for a Better Climate’ initiative67. This initiative 
identifies and provides information on five key action 
areas where farmers are encouraged to reduce avoidable 
emissions while also improving and strengthening  
their businesses. The Scottish Rural Development 
Programme offers grants to improve the efficiency  
of farm business operations. 

The Scottish Forestry Strategy (2006)68 identifies 
climate change as one of its seven key themes, and its 
aims include increasing the amount of carbon locked 

up by Scottish forestry. Last year the Forestry 
Commission Scotland published a three year Climate 
Change Action Plan, which includes plans for 
protecting and managing existing forests, creating 
new woodland, promoting the use of sustainably 
produced wood for energy and construction, and 
reducing the forestry sector’s carbon footprint. 

The consultation paper Scotland’s Zero Waste Plan 
was launched in 2009. This describes action to be 
taken to deliver Scotland’s plans to improve waste 
management, reduce waste, and make resource use 
more efficient – all of which will help to mitigate 
climate change. 

Wales
The Welsh Assembly Government has set a target  
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 3% annually 
from 2011 onwards. A Climate Change Strategy for 
delivering this target will be published in Spring 2010. 
The Welsh Assembly Government is developing land 
management schemes targeted on actions that will 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions. It provides advice and 
support for farmers on how to reduce emissions, and is 
developing red meat and dairy roadmaps to establish 
where further emissions savings could be found. 

137Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 18. Governance, roles and responsibilities 137

Highland cattle




138Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 18. Governance, roles and responsibilities

Woodlands for Wales, the Welsh Assembly Government’s 
strategy for woodlands and trees, focuses on striking 
a balance between carbon retention and sequestration, 
and using wood, for example in fuel, as a substitute 
for more carbon-intensive substances. The Strategy 
recognises the importance of creating new woodlands 
to maximise carbon storage. 

A Land Use Climate Change Sub-Group of the Climate 
Change Commission for Wales has been set up to 
provide advice on longer-term emission reduction 
options. The report (due in 2010) will provide clear 
recommendations on how agriculture and land use 
can reduce its contribution to emissions while 
maintaining viable farm businesses. 

The Welsh Assembly Government is seeking to develop 
a range of measures to increase waste prevention, 
divert waste from landfill by increasing recycling and 
composting, and increase research into methane 
capture and oxidation systems. The revised National 
Waste Strategy was launched for consultation on 29 
April 2009. It focuses on cutting direct and indirect 
emissions of greenhouse gases as a result of resource 
use and waste. The Strategy proposes that by 2025, 
Wales should have a recycling rate of 70% across all 
sectors, and that residual waste should phased out of 
landfill towards high efficiency energy from waste plants. 

Northern Ireland
In Northern Ireland the Department of Agriculture 
and Rural Development (DARDNI) is reviewing 
scientific evidence to underpin their development  
of mitigation measures based on local circumstances 
such as soil type and farming practices. Mitigation 
measures will encompass livestock management, 
nutrient management, land management and 
renewable energy. It is essential that the consequences 
of each mitigation measure are fully understood.  
The DARDNI-sponsored Renewable Energy Centre  
of Excellence, which opened in 2009, showcases 
renewable energy technologies that are applicable at 
farm level and will enable farmers to operate in a more 
carbon-efficient way. 

In terms of waste policy, current actions, including the 
Northern Ireland Landfill Allowance Scheme (NILAS), 
which is designed to achieve the increasingly stringent 
Article 5 Waste Landfill targets for reductions in 
biodegradable municipal waste landfilled by 2010, 
2013 and 2020, will deliver greenhouse gas reductions. 
Statistics indicate a steady decrease in the amount of 
biodegradable municipal waste landfilled over recent 
years, a decrease of 14.8% between 2005/06 and 
2008/09. Other supportive actions include the 
progressive updating of licensed landfill site permits 
to require the measurement and collection of 
greenhouse gases.




139Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 19. Delivery and milestones

Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan

19.  Delivery and  
milestones

The chart on the next page sets out Defra’s key actions 
and milestones over the next decade in relation to 
climate change mitigation. It summarises the policies 
set out in the individual policy area chapters. 


20092010201120122013201420152016–20192020Food and Farming Industry’s Greenhouse Gas Action Plan published Interest-free loans for energy-saving equipment available to farm businesses. Government reviewing voluntary approach and developing alternative options Improved low-carbon advice for  farmers launched. Consumer advice on food launched Industry Action Plan implemented; Government keeps under review. First stage  of inventory improvement complete. New CAP Pillar 2 programming period begins. Annual emissions reduced by at least 3 Mt CO2e on projected 2020 levels. Soils Soils Strategy published. Additional guidance on good agricultural practices. Consultation on Peat Framework for Action. Forestry Consult  on impact of Greenhouse Gas Reporting Guidelines. Woodland carbon Task Force established. Code of Good Practice for Forest Carbon Projects published. Next round of RDPE begins.

Figure 14: Defra policy and delivery milestones to 2020

140Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 19. Delivery and milestones


20092010201120122013201420152016–20192020Sustainable Consumption and Production Agreed standards for energy-using products are introduced and take effect. Sustainable behaviours framework refreshed and working group launched. Revised guidance on making green marketing claims. Review of PAS 2050 completed. Action Plans for 10 pilot product roadmaps underway. New standards for another six energy-using products. Evaluation of Greener Living Fund complete. New ISO standard on carbon footprinting published. UK and EU minimum product procurement standards in place for 10 priority  product groups. Agree new standards for more energy-related products, and review existing standards.

141Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 19. Delivery and milestones


20092010201120122013201420152016–20192020Waste Further landfill tax rises announced. £10 million for new composting and anaerobic digestion facilities. Renewables Obligation reformed. Consultation on restrictions on landfilling certain types of waste. Phase 2 of the Courtauld Commitment launched. Consultation  on establishing higher targets for the recycling and recovery of packaging waste. Review of voluntary agreements with the paper industry. Clean Energy Cashback Feed-In Tariffs Introduced. Consultation on draft Regulations implementing the revised Waste Framework Directive. Food waste reduced by 250,000 tonnes through Love Food Hate Waste campaign. Renewable Heat Incentive introduced. Phase 2 of  the Courtauld Commitment reduces consumer food waste by 5% and supply chain food and packaging waste by 10%. Amount of construction waste going to landfill halved. Home improvement waste going to landfill halved. Waste prevention strategy published. Final programmed increase in  landfill tax. Dependent on the outcomes  of consultation, landfill restrictions could be introduced as early as 2015. Annual emissions reduced by at least 1 Mt CO2e on projected 2020 levels. Fluorinated gases (F-gases) and industrial processes New regulations on the use  of F-gases introduced. Permit conditions of the remaining nitrous oxide-emitting plants in the UK reviewed. Next round of  UN negotiations in Mexico. European  F-gas regulations reviewed by European Commission

142Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 19. Delivery and milestones


20092010201120122013201420152016–20192020Water Water efficiency Act on CO2 campaign launched. Ofwat requires water companies to cost carbon in appraising capital programmes, and sets targets for water efficiency Building Regulations amended to improve water efficiency in  new homes. Consultation  on national standards for sustainable drainage systems (SUDS). First set of Water Resources Management Plans (considering supply-demand balance over  25 years) published and implemented. Ofwat sets price limits and targets for 2015 – 2020. Level of household metering increased  to 50%. Second set of Water Resources Management Plans Voluntary water industry target that 20% of energy used in the industry should come from renewable sources by 2020. Marine and fisheries Ocean Acidification Research Programme launched. Oceans Day  at Copenhagen Conference. 

Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 19. Delivery and milestones 143




Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan

20. Indicators

To help monitor Defra’s performance in meeting  
its carbon budget, the Department has identified  
a number of indicators which can be used to measure 
progress. These indicators will serve a number  
of purposes:

• they will help track progress towards meeting 
the carbon budget. They will indicate what 
emissions are in each sector, and whether factors 
that affect those emissions are moving in the right 
direction.

• they will provide an early indication of future 
changes in emissions. Due to the complexity in 
measuring, compiling and quality assuring emissions 
data, these are not published for more than 12 months 
after the end of the year to which they refer (so, for 
example, 2008 data is published in 2010). Using 
indicators which are easier to measure will give  
a picture of what is happening to emissions before 
the official data are released.

• they will enable better understanding of the 
drivers of changes in emissions in each sector. 
The indicator pyramids described in this chapter 
have been constructed in a way which breaks down 
the sources of emissions into their constituent  
parts. Tracking these different sources will help in 
understanding which areas in particular are causing 
changes in overall emissions.

• they will help to assess the effectiveness of the 
policies that have been put in place. The indicators 
are a useful way of assessing how well policies are 
delivering expected emissions reductions, and how 
well they are performing in relation to each other.

• they will help to target new policy where it is 
needed most. The indicator pyramids will allow the 
Government to identify gaps in the policy landscape, 
and design policy which affects the key drivers of 
emissions in each sector.

For each of the sectors for which Defra is the  
lead Department (Agriculture, Forestry and Land 
Management and Waste), Defra has produced an 
indicator pyramid which sets out key indicators of 
emissions at different levels. These indicator pyramids 
are set out on pages 148 and 151, together with an 
explanation of why these particular indicators have 
been chosen. 

The indicator pyramids have a common structure,  
as shown in Figure 15. At the top of the pyramid are 
total emissions from the sector, whilst Tier 2 breaks 
down these emissions into relevant sub-sectors.  
Tier 3 then categorises the drivers of emissions into 
two groups: drivers which relate to the emissions-
causing activity itself (e.g. the amount of waste going 
to landfill), and drivers linked to the ”emissions 
intensity”of that activity. Tier 4 sets out these drivers 

144Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 20. Indicators




– policy, technological, behavioural or other drivers 
– in more detail. Contextual factors which help to 
explain trends in other indicators are also included. 
The full indicator tables in the annex to this document 
provide detailed information on the indicators that 
Defra will use in each sector. These can be found at: 
http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/index.htm 

Figure 15: Outline sector indicator pyramid

For carbon budget sectors in which Defra has a share 
but is not the lead Department, Defra has identified 
indicators which reflect its influence in these areas.  
As well as being monitored by Defra, these indicators 
have been incorporated into the indicator pyramids 
produced by the relevant lead Departments. 

Fluorinated gas (F-gas) and non-CO


2 

industrial process indicators
Indicators for fluorinated gases and non-CO


2 


emissions from industrial processes form part of the 
pyramid for the workplaces and jobs carbon budget 
sector. The relevant section of the pyramid and  
the associated indicators are set out in figure 15.69 
Defra has chosen a mixture of indicators covering 
policy delivery and international negotiations.  
In addition, DfT have a milestone relating to Mobile 
Air Conditioning (MAC) emissions.

69  For the full pyramid, see the DECC Departmental Climate Change Plan:  
http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/what_we_do/lc_uk/carbon_budgets/departments/departments.aspx

145Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 20. Indicators

Absolute change in 


CO2

e emissions since 

1990 / previous year

Absolute change in 
disaggregated CO


2e 

emissions since 1990 
/ previous year

Policy outcome 
indicators

Contextual factors

Policy outcome 
indicators

Drivers for change in 
carbon intensity of 


CO2

e emitting 

activities

Drivers for change in 
use or demand for 


CO2

e emitting activities




Sustainable Consumption and  
Production indicators
Sustainable Consumption and Production indicators 
feed into the pyramids for both the Homes and 
Communities and the Workplaces and Jobs sectors. 
Defra has chosen two indicators: one tracking 
cumulative savings from work to establish minimum 
standards and labelling for different energy-using 
products; the other, tracking changes in public 
attitudes towards low-carbon behaviours in the home. 

Food Transport Indicators
Defra has two contextual indicators which feed into 
the transport sector pyramid, which help to explain 
the underlying demand for transport by the food and 
farming sectors. The indicators Defra has chosen are 
freight tonnages of certain agricultural products  
and foodstuffs, and total food transport carbon 
dioxide emissions.

AFLM indicator pyramid
The Agriculture, Forestry and Land Management 
(AFLM) sector is made up of three distinct elements: 
emissions from agriculture, CO


2

 removals by forests, 

and the changing net balance of emissions from land 
use and land use change (LULUC), which can be 
either positive or negative. In terms of emissions, the 
sector is dominated by agriculture, but forestry and 
soils are vital carbon stores; if even a small fraction  
of this store were released into the atmosphere, this 
could have huge implications for overall emissions. 
The rationale for the choice of indicators in each 
sub-sector is set out below.

Emissions from agriculture
Whilst accounting for less than 1% of the UK’s 
carbon dioxide, agriculture is a major source of 
methane (38%) and nitrous oxide (76%). 

MAC policy

F-gas guidance

Certification

International 
negotiations/  

EU F-gas Review

Change in non CO


2 

industrial process 
emissions (N


2

0, CH


4)


Change in  
F-gas emissions

Change in level of 
non-CO


2

 emitting 

industrial processes

Change in non CO


2 

intensity of non CO


2 

emitting process 

Change in  
leakage rate

Change in F-gas 
process intensity

Figure 16: F-gas and non-CO


2

 industrial process indicators

146Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 20. Indicators




Livestock populations are a direct determinant of 
levels of both methane (from enteric fermentation)  
and nitrous oxide emissions (from organic fertilizer 
applications and deposits from grazing animals). 
Emissions can therefore be reduced either by reducing 
livestock populations or reducing the emissions  
per head of livestock. In relation to the former, 
improvements in animal health, reduced mortality 
and increased fertility and longevity of breeding 
animals will reduce the number of animals required to 
produce the same output of milk and meat. In terms  
of the latter, more efficient use of feed also has the 
potential to reduce emissions. Livestock housing 
systems can determine whether manure is stored in 
solid or liquid form and hence the quantity of methane 
produced. Storage of livestock manures (whether 
under cover or in the open) can influence the level of 
emissions. In addition, methane emissions can be 
reduced through the use of anaerobic digestion. 

In terms of nitrous oxide emissions from agricultural 
soils, soil nutrient balances70 are an important 
indicator. Whilst a shortage of nutrients can limit the 
productivity of agricultural soils, a surplus of these 
nutrients can cause nitrous oxide emissions. Therefore 
the nutrient balances, together with the land area to 
which they apply, are key determinants of nitrous 
oxide emissions from the sector. The use of fertiliser  
is an important determinant of soil nutrient balances. 
Appropriate application practices for manures and 
synthetic fertilisers and testing the nutrient content 
of soils and manures will help to ensure optimum 
applications. Application rates will also be monitored 
within the set of contextual indicators.

To complete the picture, consumption trends provide 
an indication of changes in the demand for food 
which will then be reflected in the level and mix of 
agricultural production (and net overseas trade) with 
a consequent impact on greenhouse gas emissions. 

Tier 4 of the pyramid includes a number of key 
current and future policies that will influence future 

greenhouse gas emissions directly or indirectly 
through one or more of the routes described above, 
including the industry’s Greenhouse Gas Action Plan 
and improved advice for low carbon farming. 

Removals by forestry
Forestry is currently a net sink, drawing carbon 
dioxide out of the atmosphere. The strength of  
this sink depends on woodland area, and the 
sequestration rate of that woodland. This Plan 
focuses particularly on policies to increase woodland 
area through afforestation, as recommended by the 
Read Report. However, forest management is another 
important objective, and the harvesting of wood 
products represents an important carbon store. 
In addition, the use of wood for fuel can replace 
fossil fuels and achieve reductions in emissions from 
power and heating in various other sectors.

Emissions from land use and land use change
Emissions from land use are a function of the land use 
itself, and the emissions associated with each type of 
land use. The second of these does not lead to a 
meaningful indicator, so Defra will therefore monitor 
land use change itself, together with a measure of 
soil carbon concentrations (which result directly 
from changes in land use). For the UK Greenhouse 
Gas Inventory71, Defra reports on peat extraction 
from horticulture and emissions from the historic 
drainage of peatland; indicators relating to these 
factors are included in Tier 4 of the pyramid. 

Contextual indicators
Several contextual indicators have also been included 
within the framework to allow monitoring of factors 
which have a more indirect impact on emissions and 
which provide relevant background when interpreting 
trends in the main indicators. Agricultural total factor 
productivity measures the efficiency with which 
inputs are turned into outputs. More efficient use of 
many inputs (e.g. fertiliser, fuel) will reduce emissions 
from the agriculture sector per unit of output. 
Commodity and input prices will influence management 

70  Further information on soil nutrient balances can be found at  
https://statistics.defra.gov.uk/esg/publications/monthly%20brief/July%202009%20Farming%20%20Food%20Brief.pdf

71 http://www.ghgi.org.uk/index.html

147Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 20. Indicators




Figure 17: Agriculture, Forestry, and Land Management indicator pyramid


Contextual factors: • Trends in UK production and consumption • Fertiliser application rates • UK Biofuel from crop • Commodity prices • Total factor productivity Absolute change in AFLM sector CO2e emissions since 1990/previous year Change in forestry emissions since 1990/previous year Change in agriculture emissions since 1990/previous year Methane N2OCO2Change in land use and land use emissions since 1990/previous year Traded emissions Change in  woodland area Funding for afforestation Timber production Amount of peat extracted Breeding longevity and fertility Animal health and welfare Consumption CAP Reform Feed Nutrient mgmt Animal housing or slurry/manure management facilities Anaerobic digestion Nitrates Action Plan, soil strategy and Water Framework Directive National emissions ceiling directive Industry Action Plan  for GHG emissions Advisory service for  Low Carbon farming Policy instruments to tackle GHG emissions from farming Renewable fuels policy Consumption CAP Reform Forest carbon projects Area of peat under different mgmt/condition Change in net sequestration rate of woodland Change in  livestock populations Change in emissions ‘intensity’ of livestock*Change in  nutrient loading Change in  land area Change in  fuel use Change in area of different land types Grid electricity consumption Change in  soil carbon concentrations Woodfuel delivery

148Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 20. Indicators




and business decisions taken by farmers. Monitoring 
self sufficiency allows an assessment as to whether 
we are seeing “leakage” of emissions through  
a greater reliance on imported foods.

Waste management indicator pyramid
The Waste sector is made up of three elements: 
emissions from landfill; emissions from wastewater; 
and emissions from incineration. The sector is 
overwhelmingly made up of methane emissions from 
landfill (90%), hence the primary focus of the pyramid 
is on this element. However, it is important to track 
what is happening in the other two elements because 
– whilst they are small in comparison – significant 
changes in their emissions could cause the sector  
as a whole to miss its targets. 

The waste sector indicator pyramid is on page 151. 
Once again, total sector emissions are shown at the 
top of the pyramid, with the three sub-sector sources’ 
emissions detailed at the next level down. The rationale 
for the choice of indicators in each sub-sector is set 
out below.

Emissions from landfill
When biodegradable waste materials are put into 
landfill they decompose to produce landfill gas which 
is typically comprised of roughly 60 percent methane 
and 40 percent carbon dioxide. A proportion of this 
gas is captured for energy recovery/flaring, however  
a significant amount does escape into the atmosphere. 
Emissions from landfill are therefore determined by 
the amount of biodegradable waste materials 
landfilled and the methane capture rate achieved 
by landfill site operators – the pyramid contains an 
indicator for each of these drivers for change.

The Government has a wide range of current and 
planned policies, as described earlier in Chapter 13, 
which aim to reduce the amount of biodegradable 
waste landfilled and improve the methane capture 
rate – the pyramid contains indicators for each of the 
key policy outcomes that the Government is trying  
to achieve. 

In relation to reducing the landfilling of biodegradable 
waste, the policies principally act to either: 

• prevent waste arising in the first instance or 
encourage its reuse (e.g. by changing consumer 
and SME attitudes or by encouraging industry to 
enter into voluntary agreements such as the 
Courtauld Commitment), or 

• divert waste away from landfill (e.g. by encouraging 
higher recycling rates or by increasing energy 
recovery from waste through market support 
measures such as the Renewables Obligation). 

The main policy in place to improve the methane 
capture rate is the programme of audits of landfill 
sites undertaken by the Environment Agency. 

Aside from the impact of the policies in the waste 
management sector, there are also significant impacts 
in other inventory sectors including emissions covered 
by the EU ETS. As well as being users of energy  
(for transport, running plant/recycling processes),  
the waste sector is a supplier of renewable energy  
via energy from waste facilities. 

Emissions from wastewater
Similarly to landfill methane, emissions from wastewater 
are determined by the volume of waste produced 
(in this case sewage sludge) and the method used 
to treat that waste. The volume of sewage sludge 
produced is in turn dictated by population growth 
and diet (in simple terms what we eat determines the 
nutrient content of what we flush down the toilet and 
ultimately has to be treated at the sewage works).  
A number of policies are designed to encourage 
recycling of sewage sludge, including the availability 
of Renewables Obligation Certificates (ROCs) to 
incentivise capture and conversion to energy of 
methane emissions from waste water. 

Emissions from incineration
Emissions from incineration are determined by the 
volumes of waste that are incinerated. However, 
not all incinerated wastes contribute to the emissions 
from this sub-sector. The incineration of wastes at 

149Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 20. Indicators




energy-from-waste facilities72 and the in-situ burning 
of agricultural waste (e.g. crop residues) are excluded 
as they count towards emissions in other inventory 
sectors. The incineration of chemical wastes,  
clinical wastes, sewage sludge and animal carcasses  
is included here, and emissions from crematoria are 
also included. The Government does not have any 
current or planned policies that directly affect the 
volumes of these waste-types that are incinerated.

Contextual factors
The pyramid also highlights key contextual factors for 
the waste sector which can help explain changes in 
emissions/drivers that are not necessarily the result of 
policy actions. For example:

• the ‘volume of waste’ (a key driver under each of 
the three sub-sectors), whilst influenced by our 
current and planned policies, is also dependent on 
other factors such as changes in population and 
Gross Domestic Product (in simple terms more 
people with more money will produce greater 
volumes of waste, all other things being equal). 

• the composition of waste is a key contextual 
factor which will influence the size of the emissions 
from each of the three sub-sectors. For example, 
different types of biodegradable waste decompose 
at different rates when put into landfill and contain 
varying amounts of carbon (i.e. have different 
emissions factors).


 

Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 20. Indicators 150

72 see Chapter 13

Composting more food waste will help  
to reduce landfill methane emissions




Figure 18: Waste indicator pyramid

151Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 20. Indicators


Absolute change in GHG emissions from the waste management sector since 1990/previous year Change in GHG emissions from waste incineration since 1990/previous year Change in landfill GHG emissions since 1990/previous year Change in GHG emissions  from waste-water handling  since 1990/previous year Traded emissions Change in  volume of incinerated waste Recycling levels Capacity of Ef W facilities Landfill audits and best practice Market incentives for Ef WIndustry Voluntary Agreements Consumer and SME attitudes Carbon intensity of process Change in volume of biodegradable waste landfilled Change in methane capture rate Change in volume of sewage sludge Grid electricity consumption Carbon intensity of treatment process Energy recovered  from waste Contextual factors: • Emissions factors • Waste composition • GDP • Population • Landfill tax 


Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan

21. Evidence plans

The actions Defra is committing to in this Climate 
Change Plan are based upon the best available 
evidence, much of it available due to work 
undertaken or commissioned by Defra. As the 
Department takes forward work across its policy 
areas, it will develop the evidence base in a number 
of areas, including:

• reducing measurement and reporting uncertainty. 

• assessing the potential to reduce emissions further.

• assessing the potential contribution of specific 
policy instruments. 

Reducing measurement  
and reporting uncertainty
The bulk of emissions targeted in this Plan are of 
non-carbon dioxide greenhouse gases. Estimates of 
non-carbon dioxide emissions are subject to considerable 
uncertainty, and are inherently more difficult to calculate 
than those in other sectors. This is due to the current 
state of knowledge around emission sources and their 
measurement. Calculating carbon dioxide emissions 
from, for example, burning a tonne of coal in a power 
station is relatively straightforward. Burning a tonne 
of coal releases the same quantity of carbon dioxide 
regardless of where and when it happens. In contrast, 
the quantity of nitrous oxide released following 
fertiliser application on a hectare of agricultural land 
is affected by a range of factors, including weather, 
soil type and farm management practices. Another 
example is methane emissions from landfill, where 
actual emissions are heavily influenced by temporal 
factors which cannot be picked up by a model 
producing annual estimations (e.g. a wet summer  
will have a big impact on  
actual emissions). 

152Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 21. Evidence plans




The emissions figures quoted in this Plan, which replicate 
those in the UK’s Greenhouse Gas Inventory (from 
which the carbon budgets are derived), are therefore 
often based on simplified methodologies. While 
generally providing a strong sense of the overall 
magnitude of emissions, they do not reflect the 
intricacies of the real world, such as those described 
above. As this variability cannot be picked up, many 
potential mitigation measures cannot be accurately 
accounted for in the overall emissions figures. 

A key part of the Defra’s evidence plan therefore 
revolves around increasing understanding of emissions 
under different conditions and practices, and making 
improvements to the way they are measured and 
reported in Defra’s sectors. In the Agricultural sector 
this work will be developed under the Greenhouse Gas 
Research and Development Platform (see box above).

Defra is also working with international partners  
to improve the evidence base both in the UK and 
internationally. The UK will join other countries in 
participating in the Global Research Alliance initiated 
by New Zealand which seeks to increase international 
cooperation, collaboration and investment in both 
public and private research into agricultural emissions. 
This will enable the sharing of research findings and 
best practice to develop a stronger evidence base. 

For the agriculture sector, Defra is establishing  
a Greenhouse Gas Research and Development 
platform, in collaboration with the Scottish 
Government, Northern Ireland Executive and 
Welsh Assembly Government, to develop  
a more sophisticated methodology for 
measuring, reporting and verifying emissions 
for inventory purposes (introducing what is 
known by international convention as a Tier 2 
or Tier 3 methodology). The objective is to develop 
country specific emission factors which can be used 
with national statistics in order to better characterise 
and allocate emissions from agriculture. Specific 
objectives of the research are:

• to improve the spatial and temporal resolutions  
of the agricultural greenhouse gas inventory and 
reduce its uncertainties. 

• to improve the understanding of emissions from 
UK agricultural systems. 

• to better understand management options for 
reducing emissions of greenhouse gases from the 
agricultural sector and the food chain.

• to identify productivity benefits for the agricultural 
sector and the food chain.

Developing the agricultural inventory presents  
a significant scientific challenge, which requires long 
term investment. Defra is commissioning work in 
this area to be delivered through a collaborative 
research model encompassing academics, 
consultants and industry. This approach will facilitate 
information sharing and draw together state of the 
art techniques and knowledge to bring about rapid 
improvements in our understanding of agricultural 
emissions. The first phase of investment (ending in 
2014) will deliver major changes that will reduce the 
uncertainty in, and enable the Government to record, 
the impact of improved farm management practices 
on national emissions. When fully developed the 
inventory will replace (wholly or in part) the need for 
proxy indicators and will be capable of measuring 
the extent to which the targeted annual reduction 
in emissions from English farming is being achieved.

Agricultural Greenhouse Gas Research and Development

153Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 21. Evidence plans




In the Waste sector, the measurement of landfill 
methane emissions is currently a priority area for 
development within the UK inventory improvement 
plan. Work is underway to address uncertainties 
around both the science and data. In relation to the 
science, there are considerations around the emissions 
factors associated with different waste components, 
as well as uncertainty around oxidation rates. On data, 
one example is information on commercial and 
industrial (C&I) waste sent to landfill. In recent years, 
this has begun to decrease as a result of the impact  
of the landfill tax and other policy measures. Given 
the escalation of the landfill tax and the impact of 
other policy measures since the projections were  
last changed in the inventory model, the model’s 
assumption of unchanged commercial and industrial 
waste to landfill is particularly inaccurate, and will be 
revised as part of the improvements.

A further important area of uncertainty surrounds  
the rate of methane capture at landfill sites (currently 
believed to be 75%). This is a combination of science 
and data. Defra and the Environment Agency have 
recently considered this issue, and given the evidence 
available, there is not a strong case to move to a  
new figure at present. However, both organisations 
will continue to investigate and are putting in place 
work to improve confidence in the ongoing use  

of this figure. For example, knowledge is being 
improved of:

• the amount of methane produced. The model used 
to estimate methane emissions will be upgraded. 
The quality of the input data, relating to the quantity 
and composition of waste entering landfill, has 
improved greatly in recent years and is continuing 
to improve due to changes in waste recording  
and reporting.

• the amount of methane captured. All landfill 
sites that were operational at the time the Landfill 
Directive was introduced in 2001 have a permit 
which includes an obligation to report the measured 
amount of methane being flared and put through 
the gas engines.

• the amount of fugitive emissions. The Environment 
Agency are currently carrying out scoping work for 
a possible joint Defra-EA-DECC survey to measure 
fugitive emissions from a range of landfill sites across 
the UK. The results of this survey could be used to 
provide a better picture of actual emissions from 
landfill sites and ground-truth model outputs.

Work is also being taken forward on the Land Use 
Land Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) inventory. 
This is managed by DECC, although Defra plays a key 
role in shaping the project. In addition, Defra will 

Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 21. Evidence plans 154

Water Waste Treatment Works.




soon be commissioning a project which will in the 
long term lead to an improvement in the inventory  
by addressing evidence gaps in relation to emissions 
and removals from UK peatlands.

Improvements are also planned for the forestry part 
of the LULUCF inventory. The National Forest Inventory 
will include an assessment of standing biomass for 
15,000 forest sites, providing a direct measure of 
biomass carbon stocks of British woodlands when 
field measurements for the first cycle are completed 
in 2014. Subsequent cycles will provide a measure  
of carbon stock changes while integration with the 
Forestry Commission’s production forecast system will 
provide improved projections of changes in forest 
carbon stocks.

For fluorinated gases (F-gases), Defra is taking forward 
work to revalidate and update current UK models for 
historic consumption and resulting emissions by 
sector, application and substance.

Assessing the potential to reduce  
emissions further
Uncertainty regarding the measurement and reporting 
of emissions affects our understanding of the extent 
to which emissions can be reduced through different 
measures. However, given the challenge of emissions 
targets, waiting until the Government has a complete 
understanding of all the uncertainties is not an option. 
Defra’s evidence plans therefore include work to refine 
estimates of abatement potential in a number  
of sectors where baseline emissions are not yet  
fully understood.

In terms of the technical abatement potential, Defra 
will undertake work to improve understanding of the 
most effective way to deliver the reductions committed 
to in this plan, as well as looking forward to the fourth 
carbon budget period (2023 to 2027) and beyond. 

In the agricultural sector, Defra is working jointly with 
the Committee on Climate Change (CCC) to review 
and update the UK’s marginal abatement cost curve 
(MACC) for agriculture, in light of the latest evidence. 
This work will increase our understanding of the 
uncertainties around current estimates of abatement 
potential and costs, and provide greater confidence of 
the overall abatement potential from the agricultural 
sector for the fourth carbon budget (2023-2027).  

155Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 21. Evidence plans




It also seeks to understand the barriers to greater 
up-take of abatement measures by the industry, and 
enforcement costs of various mitigation options. 

Ongoing and future Defra research will also focus  
on refining and developing cost-effective mitigation 
options (e.g. ruminant nutrition, livestock breeding, 
nitrification inhibitors and optimum fertiliser application) 
as well as investigating the feasibility of on-farm 
mitigation activities. To inform this work and to 
develop a consistent long-term trajectory across 
farming sectors, Defra will develop a framework for 
exploring mitigation opportunities to 2050 through 
scenario analysis. This framework will be developed in 
collaboration with stakeholders to ensure a full range 
of options is explored. 

The outputs from the above work, and work 
discussed below, will be used to support the industry, 
through advisory services and direct discussions with 
the Industry Climate Change Task Force, to deliver the 
emissions reduction target for the third carbon 
budget (2018 to 2022). 

In the Waste sector, Defra will assess how current 
policy measures will contribute to emissions reductions 
in the fourth carbon budget period. In addition, Defra 
will consult on further restrictions on the landfilling of 
waste, which has the potential to reduce landfill methane 
emissions. As Defra builds up a better picture of the 
methane capture rate at landfill sites, it will also be 
able to consider the extent to which increases in 
methane capture (beyond the 75% currently 
assumed) are a possible means of reducing  
methane emissions. 

In the forestry sector the Government has a good 
sense of what abatement is available through the 
recent publication of the Read report Combating 
Climate Change: a Role for UK Forests; the issue is 
around identifying potential policy instruments to 
deliver this. Evidence needs in relation to these are 
discussed below. Likewise in the F-gases sector, the 

evidence being taken forward relates to the impacts 
of policies rather than technical abatement potential.

In the land use and land use change sector, emissions 
are still too uncertain to be able to identify specific 
mitigation measures. 

In relation to Sustainable Consumption and 
Production, Defra already has a broad evidence base 
relating to the potential for emissions reductions 
through, for example, greater resource efficiency, and 
the focus of the evidence work is now on assessing 
the potential impacts of specific policies in this area.

Assessing the potential contribution  
of policy instruments
In a number of sectors where understanding is 
already more advanced Defra will undertake work  
to assess the potential role of different policy 
instruments in delivering our emissions targets.

In agriculture, for example, evidence examining  
the socio-economic barriers and costs of different 
abatement opportunities by farm types will feed into 
the policy development process to ensure policies 
effectively tackle the barriers to action. As part of its 
evaluation of the industry’s Greenhouse Gas Action 
Plan, Defra will carry out an impact assessment of 
policy options that may be required if industry-led 
action is judged insufficient to guarantee delivery of 
the annual abatement target. 

In the Waste sector, the aforementioned consultation 
on restricting waste to landfill will assess different 
options to achieve emissions reductions.

In the forestry sector Defra and the Forestry 
Commission will continue to explore financial 
instruments, changes to reporting procedures and 
market mechanisms that could deliver increased levels 
of private funding for woodland creation, as outlined 
in the UK Low Carbon Transition Plan.

156Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 21. Evidence plans




157Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Carbon Reduction Delivery Plan | 21. Evidence plans

In the F-gases sector, a number of projects are being 
taken forward to assess the impacts of current and 
forthcoming policy on emissions, including: 

• an assessment of how the further adoption of 
existing low global warming potential technologies 
is likely to affect consumption of F-Gases in the UK 
over the next 10 years. 

• how these trends will be affected by the emerging 
new group of low-global warming potential HFCs 
and HFOs and in which areas of application. 

• when these new alternatives will be available in the 
UK market and what the implications will be  
of that timing. 

• what the likely cost barriers are to their 
introduction.

In relation to Sustainable Consumption and Production, 
Defra’s Market Transformation Programme team 
conducts analysis on the impact of Government policies 
that contribute to improving the efficiency of energy 
using products. A current consultation on this analysis 
asks for views on the assumptions feeding into the 
analysis as well as the overall results. Revisions will 
then take place, and a more detailed breakdown of 
emissions impacts provided, before publication of the 
Final Report in summer 2010. In addition, work is 
on-going to assess the impacts of wider policies,  
for example to establish the relationship between 
emissions reporting and behaviour change, to see  
if there is scope for further emissions reductions.




Defra’s Climate Change Plan | Defra Estates and Operations 158

Defra’s Climate Change Plan

Defra Estates  
and Operations




22. Defra estates  
and operations

Adapting Defra for a changing climate 

Defra estates and operations: risks, opportunities and impacts of climate change

Increased risk of flooding A number of Defra’s properties have been identified as being at risk 
from coastal flooding, surface water flooding and water ingress 
from extreme or heavy rainfall due to ineffective drainage systems.

Extreme summer and winter 
temperatures; urban heat  
island effect

May affect comfort levels for staff and the operation of  
ICT infrastructure.

Reduced summer water availability May impact on our ability to provide cooling for offices and  
ICT equipment.

Increased frequency of extreme 
weather events

May cause damage to properties and infrastructure, present health 
and safety risks to staff, and disrupt business continuity, availability 
of workspace and capability of ICT networks. Impact on transport 
networks may affect staff access to offices.

Disruption to supply chains May disrupt supply of goods and materials, and access to offsite 
utilities (e.g. communications, waste treatment).

159Defra’s Climate Change Plan | 22. Defra Estates and Operations

Defra continues to strive to operate more sustainably 
to make its own contribution to the national effort, to 
learn from its experiences, and to set an example for 

others. This chapter sets out what Defra is doing to 
reduce emissions, and to ensure the Department’s 
estates and operations are resilient to climate change.




Dragonfly House, which has been leased by 
Defra, is the greenest office in the East of England, 
with an Excellent rating on the Building Research 
Establishment’s BREEAM scale which measures 
the environmental performance of buildings. 

The state of the art office houses the Broads Authority, 
the Environment Agency and Natural England. It means 
that three of the main environmental bodies working 

together on issues such as climate change can now be 
located in the same place.

Some of the key features of the new building that 
give it an excellent rating are:

• environmentally friendly building materials.  
The office is clad in sustainably sourced timber, 
with brise soleil sunshades to reduce solar gain 
and provide natural cooling of the building.

• air drawn through an earth duct: a large pipe 
buried three metres underground, helps to warm 
the building in winter and cool it in summer.

• propane powered chillers are being used to cool the 
temperature in the computer room and maintain 
performance of the building’s key ICT infrastructure. 
As well as being an effective risk management 
measure, propane has virtually no global warming 
impact and due to the clever design of the building 
the cooling requirement is much smaller than for  
a conventional office building.

• rooftop solar panels are expected to heat 35%  
of the water used in the building.

• water efficiency will be increased by collecting 
rainwater that falls on the building roof and 
filtering and storing it in an underground tank for 
use in flushing toilets. The storage tank can hold 
30,000 litres of water.

• a sustainable urban drainage system (SUDS) will 
reduce the risk of flooding and protect water quality. 

Dragonfly House

Policy and practical responses
Estates management
In 2009, Defra carried out a comprehensive initial 
survey of its properties both to understand the current 
resilience of the Defra estate to climate impacts and to 
assess how our grounds and buildings might be affected 
in future. The results are already being used to inform 
our departmental estates strategy. 

The survey looked at 172 sites across the Defra estate. 
It used the UKCP09 projections to support a broad 
assessment of current and future risk, and looked at 

flooding, the urban heat island effect, solar gain, 
subsidence, increased wind speeds, higher rainfall,  
and summer drought conditions. It also considered the 
impacts of climate change on local transport networks 
and the accessibility of buildings to staff. The survey 
highlighted a number of areas where the Defra estate 
could be affected by the changing climate, for example 
26% of Defra buildings are potentially at risk from the 
urban heat island effect and 23% from flooding.

Results from the survey have been checked for 
consistency with the Department’s latest energy and 

160Defra’s Climate Change Plan | 22. Defra Estates and Operations

Dragonfly House.




water surveys and the Defra estate strategy. They 
have been taken into account in the latest round of 
investment planning and prioritisation, and now 
provide an effective baseline for future strategy on 
the Defra estate. The review process will be refined 
and updated as part of formal business planning on 
an annual basis. It will help to achieve the progressive 
improvements needed in terms of identifying and 
managing climate risks which will be introduced 
under the proposed new framework for sustainable 
development in Government for adaption from 
2010-11 onwards.

Information and Communications Technology 
Work is being carried out to ensure that the 
Department’s key IT and communications infrastructure 
is well-adapting to the risks of climate change.  
For example:

• Defra has introduced a range of remote and mobile 
communications services, which allow staff to work 
remotely in the event of fire or flood, transport or 
utilities disruption. In the recent cold and snowy 
weather some 3,000 staff were able to work at 
home or away from their main offices, reducing 
disruption to Defra’s business;

• Defra’s main IT partner has confirmed that its key 
servers and equipment are now capable of operating 
within a wider range of temperatures (18 to 270C 
instead of the previously accepted range of 20 to 
250C). This will improve resilience to external 
temperature change at local Defra sites as well as 
the two main off-site data centres used to support 
Defra’s IT services.

Procurement
Defra’s Procurement and Contracts Division is taking 
forward a range of actions to build climate change 
adaptation into Defra’s procurement strategy and 
contractual arrangements.

A formal commitment to adaptation is now set out  
in Defra’s sustainable procurement policy statement. 
We have also developed a “condition of contract” 
which requires suppliers to identify the risks arising 
from climate change and variable weather that have 
the potential to disrupt the supply of goods to the 
Department, and improve their resilience by putting 
appropriate preventive, recovery and support systems 
in place. 

72. Defra is planning a number of major new build 
and significant refurbishment projects over the next 
five years. These projects will each incorporate a 
formal adaptation assessment at the design stage.

73. We are working with our suppliers to raise their 
awareness of the need to implement adaptation 
measures, through:

•  Defra’s Supplier Engagement Programme – through 
which we are encouraging suppliers to carry out 
reviews of their business models, check that their 
processes are ‘fit for purpose’ and climate-proof;

•  provision of adaptation advice via our suppliers 
web site which contains advice to suppliers on 
what they can do to adapt, and links to tools such 
as Defra’s “adaptation wizard”, a “business 
assessment tool” and a risk framework. 

74. We will be implementing the joint Defra/OGC 
guidance on how to embed adaptation within the 
public procurement process (due to be published in 
2010). Defra will look to be an exemplar organisation 
in its adoption and use of the new guidance.

75. Defra is supporting the introduction of a process 
for sharing best procurement practice on adaptation 
at the corporate level across Defra. 

76. The Government is currently finalising the 
review of the SOGE targets. The new framework  
is expected to include a new adaptation target to 
improve the preparedness of departmental estates 
to the impacts of climate change by 2015 and 
ensure that progress is reviewed on an annual basis. 
In 2010, Defra will set out a plan of action to deliver 
early progress for our own estate.

D THE DEFRA ESTATE ACTIONS 

161Defra’s Climate Change Plan | 22. Defra Estates and Operations




Reducing Defra’s carbon footprint
In the last ten years Defra has made significant progress 
in reducing the size of its own carbon footprint. 
Emissions from Defra’s office estates are down 18% 
on 1999/2000 levels. This section describes what  
Defra is doing to drive emissions down still further. 
These actions are part of a wider programme of 
work, described in Defra’s Sustainable Development 
Action Plan73 which sets out the principles of 
sustainable development that run through the 
Department’s operations. 

Under the Sustainable Operations on the Government 
Estate (SOGE) framework, Defra has a set of carbon 
emissions reduction targets which apply to its office 
estates and operations, and across those of its executive 
agencies74. These targets have been converted into 
a carbon budget for Defra’s estates and operations. 
Defra’s carbon budget comprises: i. Emissions from 
Defra’s office estate (incorporating core Defra offices 
and office based Executive Agencies, but not its 
laboratory based Agencies); ii. Emissions from all 
operational travel undertaken by core Defra, it’s 
executive agencies and also the Environment Agency.

Budget 
period 1 


(t CO2e) 

Budget 
Period 2 


(t CO2e) 

Budget 
Period 3 


(t CO2e) 

2008 – 2012 2013 – 2017 2018 – 2022 

187,097 168,652 150,874 

Figure 19: The carbon budget for Defra’s estates 
and operations

In 2008/09 the CO


2

 footprint of Defra’s office estate 

and operations (including those of its office based 
executive agencies) was 34.8 tCO


2

. Of this 14.6 tCO


2e 

came from offices primarily arising from energy use 
for heating, lighting and electrical/ICT equipment.  
An exercise carried out by Defra’s ICT supplier, IBM,  
in 2009 estimated the emissions from ICT usage to be 

approximately 4.9 tCO


2

e per year. The rest came from 

business and administrative travel, split between 
motor vehicles (15.4 tCO


2

e), rail (1.7 tCO


2

e), and air 

travel (3.2 tCO


2e). 


Defra’s Climate Change Plan | 22. Defra Estates and Operations 162

The Defra network  
and carbon budgets

The Defra delivery network is complex, because  
of the wide range of responsibilities and activities it 
undertakes. Beyond the core Department are seven 
executive agencies74, which deliver specific outputs 
and are accountable to ministers. The SOGE 
framework includes emissions from office based, 
Executive Agency operations. 

Non-Departmental public bodies (NDPBs) operate 
at arm’s length from the Government and ministers. 
NDPBs can be executive – such as Natural England 
– or advisory – like the Royal Commission on 
Environmental Pollution. Currently NDPBs are not 
incorporated into the SOGE framework. Defra 
voluntarily reports the Environment Agency’s 
emissions. The Forestry Commission, as a non-
ministerial Department, completes a separate 
SOGE return.

This Plan is based on the current scope of the SOGE 
targets and Defra’s carbon budget. As the new 
SOGE framework is built into the carbon budget 
allocation from budget period two onwards, Defra 
will work across its estates and wider family to 
ensure that it reports against and meets the broader 
and more challenging targets. These emissions 
reductions will also deliver financial savings, 
contributing to the Government’s aim of releasing 
£300 million in energy bill savings by 2012/13. 
Defra’s Plan to reduce emissions from estates and 
operations is expected to be updated in the next 
18 months to present Defra’s new share of the public 
sector, and the revised set of measures being 
planned to secure both carbon and financial savings.

73 http://www.defra.gov.uk/sustainable/defra/pdf/sd-action-plan-2009-2011.pdf
74  Defra’s office-based executive agencies are the Rural Payments Agency (RPA), Animal Health, and the Marine & Fisheries Agency. Defras 

laboratory-based executive agencies are the Veterinary Laboratories Agency (VLA), the Veterinary Medicines Directorate, the Food & Environment 
Research Agency (FERA), and the Centre for Environment, Fisheries, and Aquaculture Science (CEFAS).




Nobel House interior.

Defra Estates
Defra is performing well against its SOGE targets. 
The 2008/09 Sustainable Development in Government 
(SDiG) report showed Defra had already met and 
exceeded the 2010 targets for emissions from offices 
and travel. Defra has also achieved five stars for 
performance against the mandated mechanisms  
and scored 100% in this area.75 

In 2006 Defra began benchmarking energy and  
water usage to identify potential savings. The projects 
implemented as a result of this exercise resulted in 
Defra achieving Energy Efficiency Accreditation 
Scheme (EEAS) certification in August 2007 for its 
whole estate and The Carbon Trust Standard for its 
office estate in May 2008. Projects undertaken during 
this phase were mainly quick win initiatives, including 
voltage reduction technologies, energy efficient 
lighting, boiler sequencing and latest technology 
applications for building insulation. 

A Defra Estates Climate Change Delivery Plan has 
been developed, based on evidence from portfolio 
wide surveys, along with Forward Maintenance and 
Repair (FMR) requirements and the high-level Estate 
Strategy. This plan will deliver the Department’s 
ongoing sustainability requirements, supported by  
a comprehensive Behavioural Change Programme, 
designed to embed sustainable behaviour in the day 
to day activities of Defra employees.

The delivery plan includes the following actions: 

• Upgrade of building infrastructure and fabric 
(including Insulation, double glazing,  
and lighting systems);

• Upgrade of heating and ventilation systems 
(boilers, radiators and air conditioning systems);

• Improved monitoring and management 
of Building Management Systems;

• Installation of energy efficiency technologies 
(voltage reduction and gas boiler sequencing);

• Improved monitoring of energy and water 
use through smart metering;

• Installation of renewable technologies 
(e.g. photovoltaics, wind turbines, rainwater 
harvesting, CHP and biomass boilers). 

Defra’s Climate Change Plan | 22. Defra Estates and Operations 163

75  More information on the SOGE targets can be found at: http://www.defra.gov.uk/sustainable/government/gov/estates/targets.htm

Defra’s headquarters are at Nobel House,  
a ten storey listed building in Westminster. 
Over the past decade the building has been 
drastically refurbished and improved. Open plan 
office areas, conference facilities, a central atrium, 
a new restaurant and staff facilities were created. 
When completed, the project achieved the then 
highest ever BREEAM rating for a project of its 
type and was awarded the RICS London Regional 
Award for Sustainable Building.

Nobel House




These measures are expected to deliver at least  
a 12% reduction in emissions over the next three years. 
This means that by 2013 Defra should have reduced 
its emissions by 30% on 1999/2000 levels, hitting  
its 2020 target seven years early. The Department is 
working to identify further gains across the estate. 
Figure 20 shows Defra’s year on year performance 
against the SOGE carbon emissions from offices target 
and the projected trajectory to 2013.

A programme of property development and 
refurbishment will run in parallel to the delivery plan 
which will improve the quality and sustainability of 
the Defra estate, incorporating measures which reduce 
emissions and minimise the use of natural resources. 

Since April 2004 Defra has reduced the size of  
its estate by 19%, disposing of some 83,000m2. 
Efficiency gains have been achieved through the 
introduction of hot desks, 80:20 desk ratios, 
geographic co-location of agencies within single 
buildings and by actively challenging expansion where 
space exists elsewhere on the estate. All new build 
and major refurbishment projects within the Defra 

estate aspire to the BREEAM Excellent standard and 
use the latest cutting edge sustainable technologies 
where appropriate. These standards and other 
prestigious awards have been gained by several new 
properties in Weybridge, York, and Norwich. Further to 
these achievements, in January 2010, Defra’s new 
ultra-low-carbon office at Alnwick was the first 
building in the UK to be awarded the BREEAM 
Outstanding standard.

164Defra’s Climate Change Plan | 22. Defra Estates and Operations

2001 /


2002


2011 /


2012


2010 /


2011


2009 /


2010


2008 /


2009


2007 /


2008


2005 /


2006


2004 /


2005


2003 /


2004


2002 /


2003


2012 /


2013


2006 /


20070

5,000

10,000

15,000

20,000

25,000


tonnes of carbon dioxide (t CO2)

Carbon emissions from Defra Office estate

Defra total
Forecast Trajectory

2010 Target

2020 Target

Defra total

Figure 20: Historic and projected emissions from Defra Office estate




Travel
Later this year, Defra will publish a new Departmental 
Travel Plan, setting out a sustainable and low carbon 
approach to staff travel. Already, there are a number 
of actions in place to reduce emissions from travel: 

• Audio and video conferencing is being promoted 
across the Defra Network as an alternative to travel. 

• Defra has met its 2010 target to reduce its fleet’s 
emissions average to 130 gCO


2

/km (the current 

average is 126 gCO


2

/km). The Department only 

procures vehicles which support and develop 
low-carbon technologies.

• Staff are encouraged to use rail travel within the 
UK and, where possible, for journeys to Europe.

All of these commitments are supported by mechanisms 
to influence and change staff choices and attitudes 
towards travel. Many of these are embedded in the 
systems used by staff to book travel, for example 
Travel Decision Trees which steer staff towards the 
most sustainable options.

The Travel Plan published later this year will set out an 
approach to behavioural change, as well as how Defra 
will work with its Network Agencies and suppliers to 
ensure appropriate travel solutions are delivered. 

Information and Communications Technology (ICT)
Defra’s Green ICT programme has two work streams: 
the first to improve the energy efficiency of its ICT 
services; the second to extend the use of ICT services 
to enable smarter and lower-carbon working for staff. 
The second strand includes remote and mobile 
networking, e-conferencing and mobile telephony 
services. In undertaking this work Defra is taking on 
board the best practices set out in the Government’s 
Green ICT strategy. 

The cornerstone of work to increase ICT efficiency is 
the refresh of Defra’s IT contract with IBM. This includes 
a comprehensive server virtualisation and consolidation 
workstream which will result in a 25% reduction 
(some 2,500 tCO


2

) in the overall ICT energy footprint 

for Defra and its executive agencies by October 2011. 
The remaining servers, and the IBM data centres, will 
be run according to the best practice set out in the 
EU Code of Conduct for energy efficient data centres.

The refresh programme will further rationalise print 
services, reducing the cost and carbon footprint of 
printing. It will also see a move from a three year to  
a four year refresh cycle for ICT assets. Defra is now 
consistently achieving 97% or better recycling/re-use 
rates by weight for IT equipment. 

To enable more flexible working that will reduce travel 
and accommodation, new laptop and communication 
services have been deployed to some 8,000 staff in 

Installing biomass-fuelled boilers, to provide 
space and water heating, offers significant 
on-site carbon savings and increased security 
of energy supply. 

To date, Defra has installed six biomass-fuelled 
boilers at properties in Alnwick, Crewe, Penrith, 
Preston, Thirsk, and Worcester. These installations 
are currently saving the department 450 tCO


2 


a year and approximately £25,000 in annual fuel 
costs. A further seven installations are planned for 
2010, with anticipated savings of a further 300 


t CO2

 per year. Fuel has been sourced from sustainably 

managed forests or waste wood sources and where 
possible, from within a 50 mile radius of the site, 
thereby minimising emissions from transportation. 

Biomass Boilers

165Defra’s Climate Change Plan | 22. Defra Estates and Operations

Biomass boiler.




166Defra’s Climate Change Plan | 22. Defra Estates and Operations

Defra and its executive agencies. The Department  
will improve the provision of electronic conferencing 
services, including web and video conferencing, and 
promote their uptake in support of the Travel and 
Estates programme of emissions reductions.

Procurement
Defra is revising its Sustainable Procurement Policy 
Statement to reflect the three priority areas to be 
delivered through public procurement agreed by the 
Government in the 2009 Pre-Budget Report, one  
of which is to use procurement to achieve resource 
efficiency focusing on greenhouse gas emissions.  
Defra is continuing to embed these policies into  
procurement to help the Department reduce its 
emissions and improve its sustainable performance 
generally. Defra has looked beyond its own activities 
to those of the suppliers that provide its goods and 
services and through its supplier engagement 
programme is working with them to improve 
performance and drive down emissions in the supply 
chain. Defra’s Procurement and Contracts Division is 
working to reduce emissions firstly, by ensuring the 
Department purchases eco-efficient goods and 
services such as low-energy IT systems and green 
vehicles for business travel; and secondly by seeking 
to promote best practice in the supply chain, by, for 
example, encouraging suppliers to participate in the 
Carbon Disclosure Project. 

To embed sustainability in its contracts, Defra has 
committed to: 

• achieve the Government’s new SOGE target for 
procurement by 2012, three years ahead of the 
2015 deadline.76 

• exceed the EU target for 50% of public 
procurement tenders across a range of priority 
product groups to comply with the core criteria of 
the EU’s Green Public Procurement (GPP) by 2010. 
Defra is working towards aligning the UK 
Government Buying Specifications (previously 
known as the Quick Wins standards) with the GPP. 

• strengthen the Department’s supplier engagement 
programme, including using the apportionment 
methodology once developed under the Carbon 
Disclosure Project77 to calculate the carbon 
emissions specific to Defra contracts and use  
that information to help reduce emissions.

• continue to promote the UK Government’s 
sustainable timber procurement policy across 
Government, the wider public sector and 
internationally where other EU member states are 
adopting similar approaches to that of the UK.

Defra’s suppliers website explains Government 
procurement policy and practice and directs suppliers 
to guidance, tools and available support: http://www.
defra.gov.uk/corporate/about/how/procurement/
sell-sustainably/index.htm

76 The SOGE target for procurement designates requires departments to reach the lead level (#5) of the refreshed Flexible Framework by 2015.
77 https://www.cdproject.net/en-US/Pages/HomePage.aspx




167Defra’s Climate Change Plan | 23. Abbreviations and acronyms 

23.  Abbreviations  
and Acronyms 

ACC Adaptation to Climate Change

AD Anaerobic Digestion

AFFLM Agriculture, Food, Forestry and Land Management

AFLM Agriculture, Forestry and Land Management

BAP Biodiversity Action Plan

BIS Department for Business, Innovation and Skills

BREEAM Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method 

BSI British Standards Institute

CAAs Compliance Assistance Agreements

CALR Climate Change Adaptation, Air Quality, Landscape and Rural Affairs

CAP Common Agricultural Policy

CBD Convention on Biological Diversity

CC Countryside Commission

CCC Committee on Climate Change 

CCM Climate Change Mitigation

CFE Campaign for the Farmed Environment

CFMP Catchment Flood Management Plan

CHP Combined heat and power 

C&I Commercial and Industrial

CLA Country Land and Business Association

CLG Communities and Local Government




Defra’s Climate Change Plan | 23. Abbreviations and acronyms 168


CO2

e Carbon Dioxide emissions

CQuEL Character and Quality of England’s Landscapes (a Natural England monitoring programme)

CRWP Construction & Resources Waste Programme 

CSP Code for Sustainable Homes

CSS Countryside Stewardship Scheme

DAP Departmental Action Plan

DARDNI Department of Agriculture and Rural Development Northern Ireland

DASH Delivery and Strategy High-level 

DECC Department for Energy and Climate Change

Defra Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs

Dfes Department for Education and Skills

DfID Department for International Development

DSO Departmental Strategic Objective

EA Environment Agency

EEAS Energy Efficiency Accreditation Scheme

ELS Entry Level Stewardship

ENPAA English National Parks Authorities Association

ESS Environmental Stewardship Scheme

ETIP Entry Level Stewardship Training and Information Programme

EU European Union 

ETS ` Emissions Trading Scheme

Fera Food and Environment Research Agency

F-gases Fluorinated gases

FMD Foot and Mouth Disease

FRM Forward Maintenance and Repair

GOs Government Offices

GWh Gigawatt-hours of electricity

GPP Green Public Procurement

GWP Global Warming Potential

HFCs Hydrofluorocarbons

HLS Higher Level Stewardship (part of Environmental Stewardship scheme)

ICT Information and Communications Technology 




169Defra’s Climate Change Plan | 23. Abbreviations and acronyms

IEA International Energy Agency 

IPPC Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control Directive

JNCC Joint Nature Conservation Committee

LATS Landfill Allowance Trading Scheme

LULUC Land Use and Land Use Change

MAC Mobile Air Conditioning

MACC Marginal Abatement Cost Curve

MCCIP Marine Climate Change Impacts Partnership

MCZ Marine Conservation Zone

MDG Millennium Development Goals

MONARCH Modelling Natural Resources Responses to Climate Change



Mt CO2

e Mega tons of Carbon Dioxide emissions

MWe Megawatts of electricity

NAO National Audit Office

NE Natural England

NERC Natural Environment Research Council

NFU National Farmers Union

NGO Non-Government Organisation

NILAS Northern Ireland Landfill Allowance Scheme

NPAs National Park Authority

OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development

OELS Organic Entry Level Stewardship 

OGD Other Government Department

OSPAR 
Convention

The Oslo and Paris Convention for the Protection of Marine Environment of the North-East 
Atlantic

PAS Publicly Available Specification

PFCs Perfluorocarbons)

PiP Projections in Practice

PPS Planning Policy Statement

PSA Public Service Agreement

RCCF Rural Climate Change Forum

RDAS Regional Development Agencies

RDPE Rural Development Programme for England




170Defra’s Climate Change Plan | 23. Abbreviations and acronyms

RED Renewable Energy Directive

RHI Renewable Heat Incentive

ROCs Renewables Obligation Certificates

ROTATE Recycling and Organics Technical Advisory Team

RPA Rural Payments Agency

RSPB Royal Society for the Protection of Birds

SCPP Sustainable Consumption and Production Programme

SDAP Sustainable Development Action Plan

SDiG Sustainable Development in Government

SFP Single Farm Payments

SLA Service Level Agreement

SMP Shoreline Management Plan

SOGE Sustainable Operations on the Government Estate

SRO Senior Responsible Owner

SSSI Site of Special Scientific Interest

SUDS Sustainable Drainage System


t CO2

e Tonnes of CO2 equivalent

UKCIP United Kingdom Climate Impacts Programme 2002

UKCP09 UK Climate Projections 2009

UN United Nations

UNEP United Nations Environment Programme

UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change

VLA Veterinary Laboratory Agency

WFD Water Framework Directive 

WRAP The Waste and Resources Action Programme




Climate
Change Plan 


2010


Defra’s

Published by the Department for Environment, 
Food and Rural Affairs. 
Nobel House, 17 Smith Square 
London SW1P 3JR 
www.defra.gov.uk

© Crown Copyright 2010 
PB13358 March 2010

Copyright in the typographical arrangement and design rests with the Crown.

Printed on material that contains a minimum of 100% recycled fibre for uncoated paper 

The report can be viewed at: http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/index.htm




