



Beyond the Ice
UK policy towards the Arctic




Beyond the Ice
UK policy towards the Arctic

© Crown copyright 2018. 

You may re-use this information (not including logos or images) free of charge in 
any format or medium, under the terms of the Open Government Licence.

To view this licence, visit http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/
open-government-licence/version/3/ or write to the:

Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, Richmond 
TW9 4DU,or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.

This publication is available for download at www.gov.uk/government/publication.

Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at polarregions@fco.gov.uk.

Polar Regions Department
Foreign and Commonwealth Office,
King Charles Street,
London

SW1A 2AH




D - Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic - E

Contents
Foreword ............................................................................................................................. 2

Introduction ........................................................................................................................ 3
What is the Arctic? ...........................................................................................................................................5

Projecting global influence ............................................................................................... 7
Governance and Global Britain .......................................................................................................................7

Arctic Council ........................................................................................................................... 7
Bilateral Relations with the Arctic States ................................................................................... 8
Multilateral Engagement ........................................................................................................... 8

Science ........................................................................................................................................................... 11
Support for UK Research ........................................................................................................11
International engagement ....................................................................................................... 13

Protecting people and the environment ........................................................................ 15
Climate ............................................................................................................................................................ 15
People ............................................................................................................................................................. 17
Environment ................................................................................................................................................... 18

Marine Conservation .............................................................................................................. 18
Marine Litter ........................................................................................................................... 19
Pollution ................................................................................................................................. 20
Migratory Birds ....................................................................................................................... 21

Defence ...........................................................................................................................................................21
Safety  .............................................................................................................................................................22

Promoting prosperity .......................................................................................................23
Trade Routes .......................................................................................................................... 23
Energy and extractives ........................................................................................................... 27
Fisheries ................................................................................................................................. 27
Connectivity ........................................................................................................................... 29
Financial Services .................................................................................................................. 29

References and endnotes ............................................................................................... 31

Acronyms ..........................................................................................................................32

The Arctic States ..............................................................................................................33

Arctic Council ...................................................................................................................35




1 - Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic - 2

The Rt Hon Sir 
Alan Duncan MP, 
Minister of State for 
the Polar Regions

Foreword

We have all heard how greenhouse gases 
produced elsewhere on the planet are causing 
Arctic temperatures to increase, which are in turn 
causing sea ice to melt and sea levels to rise.  
This is just one example of the interdependence 
between the Arctic and the rest of the world.

This mutual influence means that what happens 
in the Arctic matters to Arctic and non-Arctic 
states alike. 

Although the UK is not an Arctic State, we are its 
nearest neighbour, with Lerwick in the Shetland 
Islands closer to the Arctic Circle than it is to 
London.  We have always been a world leader in 
Polar affairs where British views have long held 
sway in the fields of polar science, exploration, 
diplomacy, business and environmental 
protection.

In 2013, the UK Government published its 
first Arctic Policy Framework to set out the 
UK’s approach to the region.  We undertook 
to update the Framework on a regular basis, 
and, in response to the House of Lords Select 
Committee Report on the Arctic in December 
2015, the Government also committed to keep 
our approach under review.

This second iteration of our framework,  
Beyond the Ice: UK policy towards the Arctic, 
meets both of our commitments.

This report demonstrates our continuing interest 
in the region and our desire to share our Arctic 
experience and expertise for the benefit of all.  
This is consistent with the UK Government’s 
vision of a Global Britain; indeed, the UK’s role 
in the Arctic reflects the very best of what Global 
Britain has to offer, from world-leading science, 
and business investment, to our commitment 
to environmental protection, international 
cooperation, and the rules-based system. 

As we set our course to exit from the European 
Union, this Framework reaffirms our intention 
to remain a significant player in Arctic affairs.  It 
recognises the essential need to protect the 
Arctic environment while also enabling its peoples 
to flourish.  In other words, it sets out the UK’s 
commitment to remain a good neighbour to the 
Arctic, as a responsible steward of its interests. 

“With its vast scale and diversity, the Arctic defies definition, but 
its influence on the environmental well-being of the rest of the 
world – and our influence on the Arctic – is now beyond doubt.”




It both noted that the UK is not an Arctic State 
and our respect for the sovereign rights of 
those States, the indigenous peoples and the 
environment of the region.  

The rate of change in the Arctic has accelerated 
since that point.  Scientists reported in January 
2016 that the Arctic was 5oc warmer than the 
1981-2010 average for the region.  Meanwhile, 
the decline in sea-ice continues.  A record low 
sea ice extent occurred in summer 2012 and a 
record low maximum sea ice extent occurred in 
winter 20161.  The Arctic may become effectively 
ice-free in the summer sooner than predicted, 
perhaps as soon as the late 2030’s. In addition, 
the Arctic is becoming increasingly polluted and 
increasingly visited, while a growing number of 
non-Arctic nations are looking toward the Arctic 
as a place for commerce. 

Given the rapid environmental changes happening 
in the region, it was always the intention of the UK 
Government that the Framework would receive 
regular updates.  There have also been significant 
geopolitical changes in respect of the countries 
engaged in the region, the effects of these are 
reflected in this new Framework.

We believe that the three core principles of 
Adapting To Change remain the right ones and 
are central to our approach in the Arctic.  It also 
advocated supporting the Arctic States efforts 
to ensure a sustainable future for the region.  
This ambition remains and will be achieved by 
projecting appropriate leadership to support 
good governance, by protecting people, the 
environment and vital ecosystems, and by 
promoting prosperity in the region, ensuring the 
people whose livelihoods rely on the Arctic can do 
so for generations to come and encouraging UK 
companies to explore opportunities in the Arctic. 

Our second iteration of the Framework outlines 
how the UK has remained, and will continue 
to be, one of the most active and influential 
non-Arctic States.  It will set out what we have 
achieved since the publication of Adapting To 
Change and what our plans are to ensure we 
remain in this preeminent position.

Perhaps the biggest change to the UK’s Arctic 
position since 2013 was the decision by the 
people of the UK to leave the European Union.  
While the exact nature of the UK’s relationship 

In 2013, the UK Government published its first Arctic Policy Framework: 
Adapting To Change.  It set out the UK’s approach towards the Arctic, based 
upon the three principles of respect, cooperation and appropriate leadership. 

with the EU has still to be determined, the UK 
Government is confident that this presents new 
opportunities to develop pioneering policies that 
will meet our needs for generations to come.  
In some areas, the UK Government is already 
seeking to articulate its future policies.  The 25-
year environment plan (see page 16), published 
in January 2018, is a clear articulation of the UK 
Government’s commitment to the environment, 
both at home and abroad.  For other policy 
areas, it is still too soon to commit to post EU 
exit policies, nevertheless the UK will continue to 
display the same strong leadership shown when 
we became the first country in the world to set 
legally binding emission reduction targets through 
the 2008 Climate Change Act or became one of 
the first Arctic Council Observer States.  It will not 
diminish our cooperation with EU nations but will 
enhance the possibility for forging even closer ties 
with non-EU nations.

Beyond the Ice: UK policy towards the Arctic 
focuses on UK actions and priorities across three 
key areas: 

Protecting global influence – The UK holds fast 
to a vision of a Global Britain that is respected 

abroad, engaged in the world and working with 
our international partners to advance prosperity 
and security around the world.  Integral to this 
in the Arctic is the UK’s world leading science 
and innovation, which helps to advance global 
understanding of how changes in the Arctic 
have global consequences and helps to find new 
solutions to the challenges.

Protecting people and the environment – 
When the United Nations set the Global Goals for 
Sustainable Development in 2015, it recognised 
the importance of taking urgent action to combat 
climate change and its impacts; to conserving 
and sustainably using marine resources; and 
of life on land.  The UK is firmly committed to 
delivering the Goals at home and around the 
World. 

Promoting prosperity - Promoting the Arctic 
as a place where economic and commercial 
development occurs in a sustainable and 
responsible manner.  Where the people of the 
region benefit from the prosperity that a changing 
Arctic may bring.  Supporting UK companies 
investing in the Arctic; making them aware, and 
connecting them to, the opportunities available. 

Introduction

3 - Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic - 4


National Snow and Ice Data Centre, University of Colorado Boulder

Figure 1: Arctic Sea ice extent, 17 March 2018




What is the Arctic?
You could be forgiven for thinking of the Arctic 
as purely a vast and hostile landscape but there 
is no single Arctic and no universally agreed 
definition of the Arctic.  Those that exist range 
from the area within the Arctic Circle (66o 34’ 
North); the area within the July 10oc isotherm; 
and the area within the Arctic tree line, which 
is the northern limit of tree growth.  Different 
descriptions result in a variation in the number 
of people who are defined as living in the Arctic; 
estimates range from four to ten million people.  

Regardless of technical definitions, the Arctic 
is a vibrant mix of communities and cultures, 
languages and traditions; a place where people 
live, trade and visit.  The region comprises 
Canada, Finland, Greenland and the Faroe Islands 
(The Kingdom of Denmark), Iceland, Norway, 
Russia, Sweden and the United States (Alaska).  
Its panorama consists of the Arctic Ocean and 
adjoining seas plus wildly different landscapes, 
from the frozen tundra of North America and 
Russia, to vibrant cities across the region.  

The Arctic is an area of fascination for many people who first learned about the region from the stories of the 
early explorers.  For others their passion develops from a desire to protect the landscape and its wildlife.  To 
continue increasing awareness and understanding of this beautiful region we must encourage from an early 
age the next generation of polar researchers and champions.  

By providing educational tools and learning materials, schools can engage their pupils on a wide range of 
issues that affect the Arctic.  The award-winning education resource ‘Discovering the Arctic’, tells the story 
of the people and the place.  It provides an online platform, www.discoveringthearctic.org.uk, that contains 
the tools that teachers and school pupils need to learn about Arctic.  A curriculum-based resource, it hosts 
interactive content and downloads aimed at GCSE level in England and Wales but is suitable for other age 
groups.  Initially funded by the FCO, the site is hosted and developed by the Royal Geographical Society with 
IBG, in partnership with NERC, BAS and SAMS.  The platform will relaunch in Spring 2018, with new content 
and mobile device capability. 

In addition, the UK has participated in the Model Arctic Council initiative, taking part in events hosted in 
Greenland, Italy and the UK.  The initiative enables students between 15 and 19 to learn about the Arctic 
through mock Arctic Council meetings that also enable them to develop their negotiating and consensus 
building skills. 

Encouraging a new generation of Polar researchers and champions

Figure 2: Arctic Definitions2 

5 - Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic - 6




The UK holds fast to a vision of a Global Britain that is engaged in 
the world and working with our international partners to advance 
prosperity and security in the Arctic.  UK science and innovation helps 
advance global understanding of how changes in the Arctic have global 
consequences and helps to find new solutions to the challenges.  

Projecting global influence

Governance and Global Britain
Since Adapting To Change, the UK Government 
have taken the important step of formally 
appointing a Minister responsible for the 
Polar Regions, based within the Foreign and 
Commonwealth Office (FCO). This is currently 
Minister of State, the Rt Hon Sir Alan Duncan MP.  
The Minister is supported by the Head of Polar 
Regions Department, a senior FCO official who 
oversees the development and implementation of 
the UK Government’s policy towards the Arctic, 
Chairs the regular cross-government Arctic 
Network meetings, and ensures that the UK has 
appropriate representation at the Arctic Council 
and in other international Arctic fora. 

This approach supports the UK’s ability to 
consider Arctic matters in a cross-government, 
cross-region and multi-discipline way given our 
diverse interests and established engagement 
across the Arctic States and within the Arctic 
Council.  We believe that this is the right approach 
for the UK.

Arctic Council
The UK’s primary foreign policy objective remains 
maintaining the Arctic as a peaceful and stable 
region. Integral to this is recognising that the 
vast majority of the Arctic region falls within the 
sovereign jurisdiction of the eight Arctic States.  
Their leadership is vital to sustain a safe, secure 
and peaceful region.  Given the UK’s close 
proximity to the Arctic and its connection with 
the global systems, we reaffirm our commitment 
to support and work in partnership with the 
eight Arctic States and the region’s indigenous 
peoples, to uphold this position.  

Adapting To Change made clear that the Arctic 
Council is the pre-eminent intergovernmental 
regional forum for discussing sustainable 
development and environmental protection 
in the Arctic and this firmly remains the UK 
Government’s view.  The Council, with its vision 
for peace, stability and constructive cooperation 
in the Arctic, is rightly heralded for its role 
in promoting cooperation and coordination 
between the Arctic States and for ensuring 
that the indigenous peoples are central to their 
discussions.  The recent nomination of the Arctic 
Council for the Nobel Peace prize underlines 
the success of these efforts.  The UK offers its 
sincere congratulations.

The UK Government confirmed its continued 
commitment to the Arctic Council when we made 
our case to the Council to remain as an Observer 
State in 2016.  We were pleased that the UK’s 
observer status was reaffirmed at the Ministerial 
Meeting of the Arctic Council held in Fairbanks 
Alaska in 2017. 

As an original observer state, the UK has 
continued to influence Arctic Council policies 
by providing scientific analysis and evidence 
in its working and expert groups.  We were a 
prominent voice in the Protection of the Marine 
Environment Working Group (PAME), during the 
development of the Polar Code.  UK experts were 
also actively involved in the development of the 
2015 Black Carbon framework, produced by the 
Arctic Council Taskforce on Black Carbon and we 
remain close to this group’s work.   

Consistent calls from the UK and other leading 
Observers have led to recent enhancements to 
inclusivity and shared working between Arctic 
Council Members and Observers.  We believe 

that this will further strengthen evidence-based 
policymaking and will help Observers make an 
important contribution to the work of the Council.  
We also welcome the decision to develop an 
Arctic Council strategic plan.  We hope that 
the views of Observer states will be taken into 
account in the development of this plan. 

Most importantly, the UK will continue to send 
appropriate representation to all future political 
and official level meetings of the Arctic Council 
and to contribute to its work in areas of mutual 
interest.

Bilateral Relations with the Arctic States
Our relationship with the Arctic States is strong 
and multidimensional.  We work with them 
bilaterally and within a multitude of international 
fora.  

Our bilateral relationships with individual 
Arctic States bring greater depth to our Arctic 
engagement.  Diplomatic relationships long pre-
date the Arctic Council and most other multilateral 
organisations discussed here.  It is natural that 
these relationships will differ according to the 
relative priorities of those countries.  When 
Finland acceded to the chair of the Arctic Council 
in 2017, British Embassy Helsinki bolstered their 
team to enhance bilateral engagement.  This 
approach recognises the priority that Finland is 
giving to its Chairmanship and we will consider 
replicating this step in future Arctic Council Chair 
countries.

In 2017, the UK and Norway updated their 2011 
High Level Agreement on the Strengthening of 
United Kingdom-Norway cooperation on polar 
research and cultural heritage by extending and 
enhancing our existing bilateral memorandum of 
understanding (MoU).  The two countries have a 
strong mutual interest in ensuring that collective 
decisions about the future of the Arctic are 
made in light of the best science available.  As 
part of the UK-Norway MoU, the parties have 
commissioned The Polar Oceans: status and 
change report, which will be available in 2018 and 
will help us understand the impacts of climate 
and environmental change on the crucial Polar 
Oceans.  

In September 2017, the UK and Canada signed 
a 10-year MoU that will enhance bilateral 
cooperation in complementary areas of research, 
technology and innovation.  This will strengthen 
ties between our governments, knowledge 
based institutions and businesses who are vital 
to understanding and finding solutions to the 
challenges faced across the Arctic. 

Such agreements can be important catalysts for 
international cooperation and collaboration.  The 
UK is interested in exploring similar arrangements 
in areas of mutual interest, with other Arctic and 
non-Arctic nations, particularly as the Arctic 
Council Agreement on Enhancing Scientific 
Cooperation is implemented.

Multilateral Engagement
As strong advocates of the international rules 
based system, we recognise the importance of 
negotiated and consensus driven agreements 
through multilateral organisations, treaties 
and conventions such as the United Nations 
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), 
International Maritime Organisation (IMO) (page 
20) and the Convention for the Protection of the 
Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic 
(OSPAR) (page 18).  Such arrangements continue 
to provide an additional platform for cooperation 
and collaboration between the Arctic States and 
with the wider international community. 

For example, UNCLOS defines the rights and 
responsibilities of Arctic coastal states, providing 
an overarching agreement that regulates the 
various uses of Arctic waters.  Continuous decline 
in Arctic sea-ice will necessitate negotiated 
agreement to ensure that claims to Continental 
Shelf under the Arctic Ocean are conducted 
within international norms and that there is 
continued cooperation in areas of the Arctic 
Ocean that are beyond national jurisdiction.  In 
this respect, the UK has been supportive of 
efforts to develop an Agreement to prevent 
unregulated high seas fisheries in the Central 
Arctic Ocean and foster international cooperation 
on relevant research. 

7 - Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic - 8




Some Arctic issues have purely regional 
implications.  Where this is the case, it is 
appropriate for regional organisations such as 
the Barents Euro-Arctic Council and the Northern 
Dimension to discuss issues at a regional 
level.  We encourage such organisations to be 
transparent and inclusive in order to build trust 
and confidence between partners and beyond. 
The UK Government will examine its relationship 
with these bodies in the context of its exit from 
the European Union.

In addition to formal multilateral bodies, the 
growth of interest in the Arctic has led to a 
significant interest in the region from both 
governments and civil society.  This has resulted 
in the development of a number of international 
conferences focused on the Arctic, aimed at 
sharing expertise and experience.  Prominent 
amongst these are the Arctic Circle Assembly and 
Arctic Frontiers, which have become significant 
annual events that bring together academics, civil 
society, scientists, businesses and governments.   

Due to the importance of these meetings both 
as platforms for information sharing, but also in 
demonstrating UK interest in the region, the UK 
Government has sought and remains committed 
to regularly sending delegations to such 
meetings.  In 2015, Professor Robin Grimes, the 
FCO Chief Scientific Adviser, led a delegation to 
the Arctic Circle Assembly to highlight the breadth 
and depth of UK engagement in the Arctic and 
the enduring nature of our scientific research.  
The UK’s Science and Innovation Network 
(SIN) teams in the Arctic States and the Natural 
Environment Research Council (NERC) Arctic 
Office have continued to foster the UK’s profile 
and reputation for high quality scientific research 
and international cooperation at all subsequent 
events.

At the 2016 Arctic Circle Assembly in Reykjavik, 
Nicola Sturgeon, the First Minister of Scotland, 
set out the steps that the Scottish Government is 
taking to tackle climate change and to promote 
climate justice.  

Due to its proximity to the European Arctic, 
Scotland enjoys a long history of shared 
economic, social and cultural links.  Northerly 

parts of Scotland lie on similar latitudes and have 
similar geographies to Arctic countries, resulting 
in synergies between their remote communities 
and the socio-economic issues they face.  

The Scottish Government announced that 
it would develop its own Arctic Strategy on 
devolved matters at the Arctic Circle Forum in 
Edinburgh in November 2017.

In collaboration with Euro-Arctic states, Northern 
Ireland and Scotland work through the Northern 
Periphery and Arctic Programme to help generate 
vibrant, competitive and sustainable communities, 
using innovation and entrepreneurship to seize 
the unique growth opportunities of the northern 
and Arctic regions.  The UK Government 
supports these relationships and is keen to 
work with all the devolved administrations 
and organisations across the UK to develop 
appropriate connections in their region.  

The UK Government has also been involved in 
supporting discussions related to a changing 
Arctic.  The FCO’s world leading conference 
facility, Wilton Park, hosted a meeting in 2016 to 
explore what the Arctic might look like in 30 years 
(see page 10). 

To further understand the impact of the evolving Arctic climate and explore the policy options available to 
the international community, the UK, Norwegian and Canadian Governments jointly funded a Wilton Park 
round-table discussion to explore alternative scenarios for the environmental, political, economic and social 
challenges faced by the Arctic, looking ahead to 2045.

The February 2016 meeting and subsequent report The Arctic in 2045: a long-term vision found that:

• While there were areas where rules and collaborative mechanisms could be further developed, no major 
governance gaps exist at present.  

• The Arctic appears to be geopolitically insulated at present, but there are risks that this could change

• While the Arctic region consist of many different geographies it is not about to become a national park, 
but will continue as a lived in, and managed, environment.  

• Conservation is of high importance but that this will be maintained alongside the utilisation of Arctic 
resources.

• The need for coordinated, long-term, science programmes, sustained over a large area and a long time 
scale to understand changes as they happen.

• Science collaboration on the Arctic should be global, involving stakeholders beyond the Arctic states.

• Development in the Arctic will take investment.  Greater collaboration between public and private 
investment is needed. 

The Arctic in 2045: A long-term vision

UK-Canadian Arctic Partnership

Bursaries Programme

Now entering its second year, this UK Government 
programme has funded over 30 bursaries to 
support UK-based researchers in the Canadian 
Arctic, this provides them with access to a wide 
range of logistical support, including Canada’s 
£85mn Cambridge Bay High Arctic Research 
Station.  

These bursaries enable UK-based researchers 
to undertake high quality research in partnership 
with the best Canadian researchers across a wide 
range of marine terrestrial and other fields.  This 
work helps to further our collective understanding 
of this rapidly changing region, the threats and 
opportunities, as well as the innovative responses 
that will be increasingly required in future.

These findings support the UK’s approach to the Arctic3.

9 - Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic - 10


 


www.great.gov.uk

RRS James Clark Ross
Arctic

Britain is a leading nation in Arctic research involving  
over 70 universities and specialist research centres.  
For world-class science, choose the UK.

Science
Cooperation and collaboration, whether sharing 
research capability such as icebreakers or 
collaborating on research projects, helps 
to deliver better solutions and help to build 
confidence between nations. 

The UK research community has a strong record 
of collaborating internationally and delivering high 
impact Arctic research – nearly two-thirds of UK 
Arctic papers have international co-authors, while 
only three other countries – the US, Russia, and 
Canada – produce more Arctic science papers 
than the UK4.  High-level agreements, with Arctic 
States such as those previously mentioned 
(Norway and Canada) and the one between 
NERC and the US National Science Foundation, 
provide strong frameworks for collaborative 
research.  We will explore options for agreeing 
other such arrangements with Arctic States 
once the Agreement on Enhancing Scientific 
Cooperation is implemented. 

Support for UK Research
The NERC Arctic Office, which is hosted by the 
British Antarctic Survey, plays an integral role in: 
promoting and enabling UK research; providing 
advice to policy-makers; and seeking out new 
opportunities for the UK-based researchers to 
join international research collaborations.  The 
important role of the Arctic Office was noted 
in the response to the House of Lords Select 

Committee inquiry in 2015 and the Office has 
since expanded its work.  It now delivers across 
an enhanced range of areas, including new 
funding initiatives, a strengthened international 
and national profile and work to promote closer 
bilateral links with Arctic States.

The UK has maintained a summer research 
station at Ny-Ålesund on the high Arctic 
archipelago of Svalbard since 1972.  In 1991, 
NERC established the UK Arctic Research 
Station when Ny-Ålesund became the focus of an 
international research community.  The station is 
open from March to September and is available 
for use by UK-based researchers across a wide 
range of fields.  As members of the European 
Commission’s INTERACT initiative, the station is 
also available for use by an extremely broad range 
of international researchers.  It has consistently 
been one of the most active of the research 
stations in Ny-Ålesund, supporting a variety 
of research including: glaciology; hydrology; 
terrestrial and marine biology; geology; and, 
atmospheric physics.  In addition, the station is 
able to support innovative engineering and design 
research, including the testing of new technology 
for polar and cold-weather applications.

NERC recently committed to funding the 
operation of the station until at least 2028, 
providing important long-term platform for UK 
presence and science in the Arctic region.

The UK Science and Innovation Network (SIN) 
operates across the eight Arctic States in support 
of both UK Government Arctic policy and UK-based 
scientists and research bodies.  SIN teams build 
the connections necessary to enhance UK research 
collaborations and provide advice and guidance 
on UK Government engagement with international 
partners.  This included support for the UK’s 
attendance at the Arctic Ministerial in the US in 2016 
and for UK contributions in its observer capacity to 
attend Arctic Council Working Group meetings. 

SIN also contributes to bilateral and multilateral 
research and innovation collaborations by helping 
identify opportunities for expanding and deepening 
these relationships and supporting projects and 
programmes during implementation.  Such practical 
support includes the facilitation of academic 
exchanges, the organisation of events highlighting 
examples of UK-based science and technology and 
assisting with local capacity-building that enhances 
the future scope for collaboration.

SIN Russia
In 2017-2018, the SIN team in Russia scaled-
up its support for UK-based Arctic science, 
proactively building on the Agreement on Enhancing 
International Arctic Scientific Cooperation signed by 
the Arctic States in May 2017 to identify opportunities 
for increased UK/Russia collaboration.  The number 
of Arctic-related projects has increased from just one 

to five, with additional funding secured from BEIS, 
the NERC Arctic Office and the FCO’s Global Britain 
Fund.  SIN Russia is now working with multipliers 
such as the NERC Arctic Office, the UArctic 
consortium and the UK Polar Network to implement 
these projects.  It has also joined forces with some 
of the UK’s leading Arctic research centres to deliver 
targeted workshops in Russia to increase both 
practitioner-to-practitioner links and raise the profile 
of UK-based Arctic science capability.

In order to further highlight and promote this 
capability, SIN Russia designed a global Arctic 
science digital campaign to complement its own local 
Arctic media work.  The campaign was launched 
during the run-up to the October 2017 Arctic Circle 
meeting in partnership with the NERC Arctic Office. 
UK missions in Arctic Council countries and multiple 
UK organisations are supporting implementation 
of the campaign.  The aim is to highlight UK-based 
Arctic science and infrastructure excellence to 
enhance the UK’s Arctic research reputation and 
develop greater collaboration in the Arctic, both 
through bilateral links and multilateral fora.  This 
will facilitate the UK’s access to the relevant Arctic 
facilities, data and existing programmes and 
partnerships and maximise the benefits to the UK 
from enhanced research collaboration while also 
building confidence and trust between the parties.

Science and Innovation Network

11 - Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic - 12

Two-thirds of the UK 
Arctic papers have 

international co-authors

Only 3 other countries  
produce more Arctic science 

papers than the UK




The entry into service of the ice-strengthened 
research vessel the RRS Sir David Attenborough 
in 2019 will see a significant increase in the 
capability for polar marine research, including 
through the operation of remotely piloted and 
autonomous underwater and airborne vehicles.  
The UK’s ‘blue-water’ ships the RRS James Cook 
and RRS Discovery will also continue to work in 
the Arctic.  NERC is also able to deploy a fleet 
of seven specially equipped aircraft capable 
of carrying out scientific measurements and 
logistical support in the Arctic. 

International engagement
In September 2016, representatives from the UK 
and 24 other countries, including the EU and 
representatives from Arctic Indigenous peoples’ 
organisations attended the first Arctic Science 
Ministerial meeting in Washington.  The aim of 
the meeting was to increase capacity to respond 
to major societal challenges in the Arctic and 
encourage further scientific cooperation among 
a large number of countries and representatives 
of the indigenous peoples.  Jo Johnson MP, 
then the UK Government’s Minister of State for 
Universities, Science, Research and Innovation, 
led a UK delegation focussed on UK technology 
in Arctic observation vehicles, remote sensing 
and modelling.  The UK-Canada  Arctic Bursaries 
Programme (page 9) and the UK’s involvement 
in the MOSAiC Project (page 14) are just two 
examples of the valuable collaborations resulting 
from the meeting.  We look forward to sending 
a high-level delegation that will build on the 
legacy of the first meeting, to the next Ministerial 
meeting in Berlin, hosted jointly by the European 
Commission, Finland’s Ministry for Education 
and Culture and the German Federal Ministry of 
Education and Research, Germany, in October 
2018.

The UK is already an active member in many 
international scientific organisations, notably 
the International Arctic Science Committee and 
the Forum for Arctic Research Operators.  It is 
also a member of the European Polar Board, 
which includes all European polar research 
institutes and polar operators in both the Arctic 
and Antarctic.  The UK station in Ny-Ålesund 

and the Centre for Ecology and Hydrology in the 
Cairngorms are two of 83 stations that make up 
INTERACT a circumpolar network of field stations 
that contribute to identifying, understanding, 
predicting and responding to varied environmental 
changes throughout the Arctic, with trans-national 
access funded by the EU.  Moreover, the UK 
science community has a strong reputation for 
leadership and many research organisations in 
the UK have particularly strong reputation for 
science programme management.  

The UK led participation amongst the 12 countries 
in the EU-funded Ice, Climate, Economics – 
Arctic Research on Change programme (ICE-
ARC) a four year, €12 million programme uniting 
researchers and scientists from 24 institutions 
to assess current and future changes in Arctic 
sea ice both from changing atmospheric and 
oceanic conditions.  UK-based researchers are 
active in a range of other EU-funded initiatives, 
including EU-PolarNet, optimising the use of polar 
infrastructure and identify key science questions; 
APPLICATE, predicting weather and climate in the 
Arctic and beyond; and Blue-Action, forecasting 
climate extremes.  The UK will also be working 
with a small group of other countries, including 
seven Arctic States in the ARICE programme to 
offer trans-national access to the new generation 
of polar research vessels, including the RRS Sir 
David Attenborough.

The UK Government has guaranteed funding for 
all successful bids made by UK participants for 
Horizon 2020 projects that are submitted before 
EU exit.  This includes bids that are submitted 
before exit and are successful afterwards.  We 
would welcome an agreement to continue to 
collaborate with our European partners on major 
science, research and innovation initiatives, 
including in the Arctic. 

Climate change can alter natural processes and amplify the impacts of anthropogenic activities in the 
Arctic region and wider world.  This coupled with the rate of change, leads to a multitude of stressors on 
Arctic ecosystems of which the environmental, social and economic impacts are not always understood.

To address these uncertainties  the UK Government, through NERC, is investing in research 
programmes that aim to increase our understanding and predictive capacity of numerical models so that 
we can better forecast the impacts and consequences of change in the Arctic.  For example: 

Changing Arctic Ocean Programme
NERC is investing £16 million in the 5-year (2017-
2022) research programme known as the Changing 
Arctic Ocean: Implications for marine biology and 
biogeochemistry, coordinated at the University of St 
Andrews. 

The Arctic Ocean is a vastly complex system with 
poorly understood interactions between the physical 
environment, defined by the presence of sea-ice 
and extreme annual seasonal cycles, and the 
ecosystem and biogeochemical cycles. To model this 
system in any meaningful way necessitates a solid 
understanding of key aspects of the ecosystem and 
the biogeochemical cycles that operate in the Arctic 
Ocean. This is an inherent component of the projects 
in the Programme, which are generating the data to 
test and further develop the numerical models.

The focus of this programme is to understand the 
changes in the Arctic Ocean in a quantifiable way.  
This will allow numerical models to better predict the 
consequences of these changes on, for example, 
surface ocean productivity, species distributions, 
food webs and ecosystems, and the ecosystem 
services they provide.  These future projections are 
important because they help refine decision-making 
processes.

The programme has a core of four large projects 
(Arctic PRIZE, ARISE, ChAOS, DIAPOD), and a 
further 10 smaller projects co-funded by NERC 
and the German Federal Ministry for Education and 
Research. 

Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the 
Study of Arctic Climate (MOSAiC)
The UK is an active member of the €63mn MOSAiC 
project, led by Germany, the United States and 
Russia.  This will be the first expedition of this scale 
and capacity to go to the Central Arctic Ocean.  It will 
see the German research vessel, the MV Polarstern, 
frozen into the advancing winter sea ice and drift 
for a year in 2019-20, enabling her to operate as a 
drifting research platform. 

This expedition will contribute to our understanding 
of the regional and global consequences of Arctic 
climate change and sea-ice loss and collect data 
on climatic processes.  It will also provide valuable 
access to the Arctic in the middle of the polar night.  
As a result, it will help us to improve weather and 
climate predictions and support science-informed 
decision making and policy development.  Together 
the UK Government and NERC have contributed 
£2.3m towards funding the UK research community 
participation in this truly international collaboration.

UK funded science programmes - Case Studies

13 - Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic - 14




Protecting people and the environment
When the United Nations set the Global Goals for Sustainable 
Development in 2015, it recognised the importance of taking urgent 
action to combat climate change and its impacts; to conserving and 
sustainably using marine resources; and of life on land.  The UK is firmly 
committed to delivering the Goals at home and around the World.

Climate
For the last fifty years, Arctic temperatures have 
risen more than twice as fast as the global 
average5.  A warmer climate is accelerating the 
decline of Arctic sea-ice extent – minimum extent 
decreasing by 12% every decade – and thickness 
– 65% decline between 1975 and 2012.  

Older ice that has survived multiple summers is 
disappearing: most sea ice in the Arctic is now 
‘first year’ ice that grows in the autumn and 
winter but melts during the spring and summer.  
Experts expect that the Arctic Ocean could be 
ice-free – that is down to 1 million km2 – in the 
summer by mid-century.  Snow cover has also 
continued to decline in the Arctic with its annual 
duration decreasing 2-4 days per decade.  The 
loss of land-based ice has also accelerated in 
recent decades.  Since at least 1972, the Arctic 
has been the dominant source of global sea-
level rise, most of which is due to meltwater from 
Greenland.  

The white surface of snow and ice in the Arctic 
reflects the sun’s radiation.  Less sea-ice results 
in more of the sun’s radiation being absorbed 
by the sea creating a self-reinforcing loop of 
warmer water and less sea ice.  Similarly, thawing 
permafrost leads to more warming and emissions 
of methane and CO


2

 increase as soil microbial 

activity increases as well as potential damage to 
infrastructure built on it.  These processes, known 
as ‘Arctic amplification’, may create profound 
implications for the regional and global climate, as 
well as for the people who live in and around the 
Arctic. 

Thawing permafrost changes the landscape, 
creating warmer, wetter and more densely 
vegetated land mass, which in turn caused 
difficulties for humans and animals orienting areas 
once so familiar.

The Arctic Research Programme, funded by the 
NERC, ran from 2011 to 2016 and made £15 million 
available for research into changes in the Arctic and 
their possible future consequences worldwide.  

The programme focussed on understanding and 
predicting climate change in the Arctic, both from a 
local and global perspective.  Researchers covered 
many Arctic habitats, including oceans, lakes, 
wetlands, tundra and forest.  

To supplement the resulting analysis, a policy 
report was developed to facilitate dialogue between 
scientists and decision makers.  Aspects of the 
report informed this document.

UK-Arctic Science: The rapidly changing Arctic environment

Over several decades, fragments of plastic 
has accumulated in the world’s oceans.  Large 
quantities have emerged in the Arctic and have 
become frozen into the sea ice.  The accelerated 
melting of sea ice could release 1,000 billion 
plastic particles in the coming years. That’s 200 
times the amount of plastic currently found in the 
ocean 6.   The heat trapped by increasing levels 
of greenhouse gases therefore has a damaging 
impact on the Arctic environment. 

The UK addresses our impact on the global 
climate in several ways at both an international 
and domestic level.  We played a major role when 
the world came together in Paris in 2015 to reach 
an ambitious deal to reduce global greenhouse 
gas emissions.  Having ratified the landmark Paris 
climate agreement on 18 November 2016, we are 
fully committed to it.  The Paris negotiations set 
us on an irreversible route towards low-carbon 
growth.  

While the UK would have preferred the US to 
remain in the Paris Agreement, we will continue to 
work closely with the US, and other international 
partners, on energy and climate change issues.

The 2008 UK Climate Change Act is the basis 
of our approach to tackling and addressing 
global climate change, which enshrines emission 
reduction into UK law.  The UK Government 
launched the Clean Growth Strategy in October 
2017 7, which sets out how we will meet our 
climate targets while securing the economic 
benefits of clean growth for the UK. 

The Committee on Climate Change provides 
independent advice to the UK Government 
and the devolved administrations on preparing 
and adapting for climate change.  The UK 
Government also works with the devolved 
administrations and regulators as part of UK-
wide implementation mechanisms that ensure 
regulatory consistency across the UK for business 
and industry.  

The UK has a strong record of implementing 
policies that mitigate the release of harmful 
emissions into the atmosphere.  As part of our 
plans to tackle air pollution, the UK Government 
has confirmed that it will end the sale of all new 

On 8 January 2018, the UK Government launched 
A Green Future: Our 25 Year Plan to Improve the 
Environment.  As well as setting out a long-term 
commitment to protect and enhance the natural 
environment at home for future generations, it 
described a desire to bring the United Kingdom’s 
influence to bear in the pursuit of a cleaner and 
safer world.

From reducing our carbon emissions and building 
resilience against extreme weather associated with 
climate change, to leading international action to 
protect endangered species, the UK remains an 
international champion for the protection of our 
planet.

The UK will be at the forefront of global efforts 
to protect and improve the natural world, driving 
the international community to adopt higher 
standards.  We are party to more than 300 treaties 
and agreements, each with an important role in 
protecting and improving the natural world.  

We will continue to lead by example on the 
crucial environmental challenges.  We will take a 
leading role in developing an ambitious post-2020 
international biodiversity strategy and play an active 
role in securing a new international agreement for 
the conservation and sustainable use of marine 
areas beyond national jurisdiction.14

A Green Future: Our 25 Year Plan 
to Improve the Environment

conventional petrol and diesel cars and vans by 
2040 in England.  While effective use of tax and 
regulation on landfill has successfully achieved 
a 78 percent reduction of landfill methane from 
1990 levels 8.

Legislation and action plans developed by the 
devolved administration complement the UK’s 
emission reduction ambitions.  The Scottish 
Government has announced plans to encourage 
an uptake of electric vehicles by phasing out new 
petrol and diesel cars by 2032.  By focusing on 
how energy is used rather than generated, the 
Welsh government aims to reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions in Wales by 3% every year and 
achieve a 40% reduction by 2020, compared with 
1990 figures.  

15 - Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic - 16




People
In the same way as the Arctic is not one 
homogenous landscape, neither are the people 
who live there.  The traditions and cultures of the 
indigenous people differ between each group, as 
much as they do between the indigenous people 
and those who live in the cities.  

We  recognise this diversity and strongly support 
that it continue.  Sustainable and thriving local 
economies will help to ensure a future for the 
people who choose to live there.  High quality 
education is fundamental to the future economy 
and to a range of social indicators in particular life 
expectancy and mental health. 

The UK Government will respect the views, 
interests, culture and traditions of the Arctic 
indigenous people.  Hearing directly from the 
people whose lives are most impacted by 
changes in the Arctic is a powerful motivation 
to support sustainable development there.  This 
was exemplified by the World Wildlife Fund event 
hosted by the All Party Parliamentary Group on 
Polar Regions in December 2017.  

We welcome the inclusion of indigenous peoples 
in the Arctic Council.  Researchers in the UK 
are committed to listening to, and working with, 
indigenous communities, to ensure the best 
outcomes for local communities and for science.  
It is increasingly recognised that only by learning 
about the use of traditional and local knowledge 
from the indigenous and local communities 
themselves can changes be properly understood 
and genuinely sustainable responses proposed.  
The UK has a dynamic social science community 
with experience of working in these ways.  
Projects involving such exchanges of knowledge 
are part of the UK-Arctic Bursaries Programme 
(page 9), while the Nordics SIN teams have 

encouraged the voice of indigenous participants 
in the major Arctic forums by fostering 
collaboration between indigenous peoples and 
researchers.

At the end of 2017, researchers from across the 
UK took part in the latest in a series of multi-day 
events, involving local community and indigenous 
representatives from the Yamal-Nenets region in 
Northern Siberia with the aim of building capacity 
to monitor, understand and predict extreme 
weather events in the Arctic.  The event was 
facilitated by the SIN team in Moscow.

The UK’s strong history in polar exploration 
means that our people to people links are deep 
and enduring.  In the worst tragedy in the history 
of Arctic exploration, the British explorer John 
Franklin perished with his 128-crew as HMS 
Erebus and HMS Terror sank while charting the 
North West Passage in the 1840s.  Despite Inuit 
legend reporting a large wooden ship had sunk in 
the area of Queen Maud gulf, extensive searches 
failed to trace the wrecks or missing seafarers 
for over 150 years.  In 2008, the Canada 
government launched a multi-million pound 
search programme.  A combination of traditional 
Inuit knowledge and state-of-the-art technology 
discovered the wrecks of HMS Erebus and HMS 
Terror in the relatively shallow waters south of 
King William Island in 2014 and 2016 respectively, 
just as Inuit legend had recorded.  In 2017, the 
UK Government agreed to transfer ownership 
of the wrecks and the majority of their contents 
to the Government of Canada.  This exceptional 
arrangement recognised the historical significance 
of the Franklin expedition to the people of Canada 
and will conserve the wrecks and artefacts for 
future generations.

Environment
The UK Government recognises the importance 
of the Arctic environment for a wide variety of 
species and for the livelihoods of the people who 
live there.  The world-renowned BBC programme 
Blue Planet II opened the eyes of millions of 
people to the problems facing our oceans and the 
effects on the fragile ecosystem.  Safeguarding 
the environment from unnecessary pollutants 
and chemicals is essential if we are to ensure a 
healthy, safe and productive Arctic.  

Given the vast majority of litter and pollutants 
impacting the Arctic originate outside of the 
region it is essential for us all to take action. 
The UK has consistently been at the forefront of 
international regulatory developments that aim to 
protect the Oceans and we will continue to be so.  

Marine Conservation
Conserving the Arctic’s biodiversity remains 
a UK priority, for example, the nutrient-rich 
waters of the Arctic are critically important for 
as many as 17 different species of whale.  The 
UK Government considers that the best way to 
ensure the protection of those species reliant on 
the Arctic environment is to continue our active 
involvement with international agreements.  Two 
such agreements, the International Whaling 
Commission and the Conservation of Migratory 
Species work to mitigate the major threats 
facing these species and their habitats.  The UK 
Government continues to support strongly the 
global moratorium on commercial whaling.

The UK Government considers that the best way 
to deliver universally accepted marine protected 
areas in areas beyond national jurisdiction would 
be through the new Implementing Agreement 
under the UNCLOS.  In support of this, the UK will 
continue to work with other Contracting Parties 
and the Arctic States through OSPAR to improve 
and extend the protection offered by marine 
protected areas in the Arctic region.

Through its commitment to create a Blue 
Belt around the UK Overseas Territories and 
Antarctica the UK has access to a growing 

body of information relating to management 
and enforcement capability in marine protected 
areas.  As individual Arctic States and the Arctic 
Council consider a pan-Arctic network of marine 
protected areas, we will share our knowledge 
and experience to help support effective project 
implementation.

Ocean acidification is another significant impact 
of climate change.  Since the beginning of the 
industrial period the oceans have absorbed about 
30% of carbon dioxide emitted from the burning 
of fossil fuels.  This has caused the ocean pH to 
drop by 0.1 over the past 100 years, equivalent 
to a 26% increase in acidity.  This current rate 
of ocean acidification is unprecedented and 10 
times faster than anything seen in the last 65 
million years and perhaps even 300 million years9. 

Increasing ocean acidity decreases the 
concentration of carbonate ions which, in 
combination with ocean warming, presents risks 
to marine ecosystems including the productivity 
of fisheries and aquaculture.  In particular marine 
calcifying organisms such as corals, which use 
carbonate ions to form their skeletons are at high 
risk.  In European seas cold-water corals provide 
nursery grounds for endangered species such 
as deep-sea sharks.  However, the majority of 
this habitat is expected to be lost under a high 
emissions scenario. If we follow a low emissions 
scenario consistent with the Paris Agreement the 
majority of cold-water corals would be saved from 
extinction. 

The five year, £12million UK Ocean Acidification 
Research Programme funded by NERC, 
Department for Energy and Climate Change (now 
BEIS) and Defra provided valuable information 
to increase our understanding of the processes, 
reduce uncertainties in estimating future impacts, 
and improve policy advice.  

Together with the United States, the UK leads the 
GOA-ON, an observatory initiative that involves 
30 countries, including five Arctic States.  The 
programme provided an extremely successful 
collaborative science partnership across the UK 

17 - Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic - 18




and at an international level.  Highlights included 
the EU European Project on Ocean Acidification 
and the German Biological Impacts of Ocean 
Acidification programme. 

There is a limited understanding of the distribution 
of noise in our seas and its impact on vulnerable 
species.  For both impulsive and continuous 
sound, the UK Government is working with 
the EU and OSPAR to establish indicators and 
potentially thresholds for the effects of noise on 
the marine environment.  OSPAR coordinates 
the Intersessional Correspondence Group on 
Underwater Noise, a group of technical and 
policy experts who work together to develop and 
implement policy and action on underwater noise.  
One aspect of this work has been to develop 
a European Noise Registry, hosted by ICES, to 
record the location and dates of impulsive low to 
mid frequency noise generating activities.  In 2017, 
OSPAR published an assessment of the status of 
our seas in relation to underwater noise10.  

There is no systematic recorded information 
on noise events or ambient noise in the Arctic, 
despite concerns on the potential vulnerability of 
species and impacts of noise from shipping and 
seismic surveys.  Potential further reduction in 
sea ice in the region may lead to increases in both 
sources of noise.

Understanding when and where noisy activities 
take place will help define a baseline level for 
impulsive noise in our seas and will inform our 
research on the impacts of noise, particularly on 
vulnerable species like cetaceans.

The UK Government also engages with other 
international forums on underwater noise to 
review and propose monitoring methods, share 
best practice and recommend further research 
or action.  For example the IMO has also issued 
guidelines for the reduction of underwater noise 
from commercial shipping to address adverse 
impacts on marine life11, which will apply to newly 
built ships.

Marine Litter
Marine litter, particularly marine plastic pollution is 
a serious and growing threat to our environment.  
An estimated 12 million tonnes of plastic enter 
our oceans every year12.  Larger items can 
entangle animals and smother habitats, while 
marine animals can consume smaller items, 
including micro plastics, reducing their growth 
and reproduction.  However, the impacts at the 
ecosystem level and the potential impacts on food 
security are largely unknown. 
Momentum for positive change is growing 
across governments and the public.  The UK 
has committed to improve the situation through 
domestic and international action.  
The UK Government and the devolved 
administrations have introduced litter reduction 
strategies, such as reducing the volume of 
single use plastic bags.  A ban on microbeads in 
cosmetics and personal care products – stopping 
billions of tiny pieces of plastic from entering our 
seas every year – came into force on 9 January 
2018.  We want to go further to encourage 
responsible practices, using appropriate incentives 
and regulation.  As such, the UK Government’s 
25-year Environmental Plan commits us to achieve 
zero avoidable plastic waste by the end of 2042. 
OSPAR coordinates the Intersessional 
Correspondence Group on Marine Litter, a group 
of technical and policy experts who work together 
to develop and implement policy and action on 
marine litter.  Through OSPAR, the UK and other 
Contracting Parties have developed and are 
implementing a Regional Action Plan on Marine 
Litter.  In 2017, they published an assessment of 
the status of our seas in relation to marine litter13.  
The UK engages with other international forums 
on marine litter, such as the G7 and the UN 
Environment Programme to review and propose 
monitoring methods, share best practice and 
recommend further research or action.
There is a growing body of research on the 
sources, distribution and impacts of this plastic, 
particularly at an individual level.  Monitoring and 
further research into marine litter is underway; our 
evidence will be available to the Arctic Council and 
its working groups to help inform future policies on 
marine litter in the Arctic Ocean. 

Pollution
There are a range of chemicals and pollutants 
that are having a harmful effect on the Arctic 
environment.  For example, the contamination 
of the environment from mercury is not new, 
for thousands of years mercury has been used 
in various human activities.  It enters the global 
systems through natural sources and human 
activities.  Recent research has determined that 
mercury presents risks to Arctic wildlife and 
humans.  

The UN Minamata Convention on Mercury is 
an important global treaty to protect human 
health and the environment from the adverse 
effects of mercury.  Action includes a ban on 
new mercury mines, reduction in mercury use 
in several products and processes, and control 
measures on emissions into the atmosphere and 
on releases to land and water.  The UK is working 
on domestic mercury legislation in order to ratify 
the Convention in early 2018.

In maritime, the UK Government maintained a 
strong involvement in finalising the environmental 
aspects of the Polar Code, through the IMO and 
PAME.  Lloyd’s Register will continue its strong 
association with the Arctic maritime industry 

by hosting the Arctic Shipping Information Best 
Practice Forum for the second time in May 2018.  

We have also long implemented the Anti Fouling 
Convention and were strong proponents of recent 
proposals to extend the Convention to include 
additional products.  We are developing the 
necessary legislation to incorporate the Ballast 
Water Convention into UK law and strongly 
supported the reduction of the global cap on the 
sulphur content of fuel used by shipping, we are 
ready to implement this cap in 2020.

In a clear indication of our intent, the UK Minister 
for Shipping has announced a commitment 
to develop low and eventually zero emissions 
shipping, to address the environmental impact of 
this sector.  We continue to work proactively in the 
current IMO negotiations on reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions from shipping. 

We participate in discussions regarding the 
impact on the Arctic of emissions of black carbon 
from international shipping.  We also intend to be 
a prominent voice in the discussion at the IMO on 
the development of measures to reduce risks of 
use and carriage of heavy fuel oil as fuel by ships 
in Arctic waters.

19 - Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic - 20




Migratory Birds
The links between the UK and the Arctic are not 
limited to our climate systems and marine.  Due to 
its proximity to the Arctic, our shared biodiversity 
includes many migratory birds.  The Joint Nature 
Conservation Committee (JNCC) through the 
Wetland Bird Survey has been monitoring 
breeding arctic waterbird populations in the non-
breeding seasons.  The 70 years of data and 
information collected by this scheme are available 
for research use and have been used in a large 
number of research projects and publications 
over the last five years. 

JNCC has also contributed technical input to 
the work of the Seabird Working Group, and 
the Arctic Migratory Birds Initiative (AMBI).  It 
also contributes actively to the work of the 
African-Eurasian Waterbird Agreement – a multi-
lateral environmental agreement whose mission 
overlaps significantly with that of AMBI and other 
Conservation of Flora and Fauna initiatives.  JNCC 
continues to promote and encourage the full 
implementation of international species action 
plans for relevant arctic-breeding waterbirds such 
as Greenland White-fronted Geese and plans to 
participate in the upcoming Biodiversity Congress 
in Rovaniemi, Finland in October 2018.

Safety 
All forms of tourism to the Arctic have increased 
in recent years.  As the Arctic’s climate changes 
and people’s appetite for the unique travel 
experiences the region has to offer increases, so 
does the number of visitors.  

The geography across the Arctic differs 
considerably, from the frozen tundra of Alaska 
and Canada, popular with on-shore adventurers, 
to the icy waters around Greenland, through 
the North West Passage and beyond that are 
becoming more popular for navigation by vessels 
ranging from small expedition ships to large 
conventional cruise liners.  While the majority of 
visits to the region are trouble-free, more visitors 
put greater strain on modest search and rescue 
capability, and increase the potential for harm to 
the fragile environment.  We support the work of 
the Association of Arctic Cruise Operators and its 
goal of “managing responsible, environmentally 
friendly and safe tourism in the Arctic and strive to 
set the highest possible operating standards”.

When visiting the Arctic, we want British nationals 
to be safe and to ensure that all international 
travellers and operators refrain from harming 
the Arctic environment.  The UK therefore 
supports safe, responsible and sustainable 
tourism in the Arctic that enables visitors to 
experience the uniqueness of the region, which 
respects the preserve of local communities while 
supporting their economy and protects the fragile 
environment for future generations.

The FCO supports British nationals around the 
world.  Consular support in the Arctic falls to 
the Embassy or High Commission in whose 
jurisdiction a British national is travelling.  For 
travellers considering a visit to the region the 
FCO has developed specific Arctic travel advice, 
in consultation with representatives of the travel 
industry, which is available via the GOV.UK pages.  

The Arctic is also an area of increasing 
importance for maritime transport.  The number 
of voyages between NSR ports and transits 
have rapidly increased as climate change has 
accelerated the melting of ice that had limited 
access to the area.  Although there were only 

19 transits across the entire NSR in 2016, there 
were more than 1700 voyages.  This increase 
in shipping in the Arctic has implications for 
navigational safety.  

On 1 January 2017, the IMO adopted the 
mandatory Code for Ships Operating in Polar 
Waters, commonly known as the Polar Code.  
Related amendments make it mandatory under 
both the International Convention for the Safety 
of Life at Sea and the International convention 
for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships.  The 
binding international framework sets standards for 
safe and environmentally sound shipping in Polar 
waters.  

Under the auspices of the Arctic Council, 
the Arctic States signed an agreement on 
aeronautical and marine search and rescue (SAR) 
in the Arctic.  The agreement strengthens SAR 
cooperation and coordination, including joint SAR 
exercise and training.  Despite this commitment 
and the legal regimes in place, extra caution is 
required when planning all tourism activities and 
maritime operations in the Arctic.

Defence
Securing a peaceful, stable and well-governed 
Arctic underpins all UK Government policies 
in the Arctic.   While security is not within the 
remit of the Arctic Council, the cooperative 
and collaborative approach it promotes builds 
confidence between the Arctic States and their 
international partners.  This is particularly true 
between the various coastguard agencies of 
the Arctic States and through the Arctic Coast 
Guard Forum, which provides a useful arena for 
cooperation.  In May 2017, Arctic State Foreign 
Ministers reaffirmed their commitment to maintain 
peace, stability and constructive cooperation in 
the Arctic.  

Nevertheless, increased interest and commercial 
activity in the region provides potential for 
heightened tension.  The Arctic States are well 

within their rights to protect and defend their 
area of national jurisdiction, and Arctic nations 
may want to enhance their security presence 
in the region to protect their own territorial and 
commercial interests.

However, the build-up of Arctic military capabilities 
by several Arctic States makes the future less 
certain.  The UK remains committed to preserving 
the stability and security of the Arctic region.  
We will work with our international partners and 
allies through defence engagement, bilateral 
and multilateral security cooperation.  This will 
include essential cold weather training exercises 
and participation in the Arctic Security Forces 
Roundtable.  NATO also remains a central plank 
for cooperation among its Arctic State members. 

21 - Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic - 22




Promoting prosperity
Promote the Arctic as a place where economic and commercial 
development occurs in a sustainable and responsible manner.  Where 
the people of the region benefit from the prosperity that a changing 
Arctic may bring. Support UK companies investing in the Arctic; make 
them aware, and connect them to, the opportunities available.

There is a long history of economic and 
commercial activity in the Arctic region.  As well 
as being a place of fragile beauty, many people 
in the Arctic rely on it for their livelihoods.  As 
anywhere in the world, the people who live in 
the Arctic have the right to pursue prosperity 
and economic stability for their families and 
future generations.  The UK supports that right.  
However, care should be taken to ensure that 
commercial development does not damage the 
natural environment that is fundamental to the 
prosperity of many Arctic communities. 

Changes in the Arctic have led to growing interest 
in the Arctic both from an increased number 
of industries and from a growing number of 
countries around the world.   We already enjoy 
excellent economic ties with each of the Arctic 
States.  These ties are enhanced by Mark Prisk 
MP’s role as the Prime Minister’s Trade Envoy 
for the Nordic region as well as the presence of 
established and knowledgeable DIT teams, who 
provide professional and authoritative assistance 
in each Arctic State, augmenting the UK’s ability 
to help UK-companies succeed in the Arctic.   

The decision to invest in commercial projects in 
the Arctic is a matter for individual companies 
and, as appropriate, the national authority of the 
Arctic State in whose jurisdiction they will take 
place.  

The Arctic Council established the Arctic 
Economic Council in 2014 as an independent 
organisation to facilitate business and responsible 
economic development through sharing best 
practices, technological solutions and standards.  
They work across the Arctic states to strengthen 
market connections, encourage private-public 
partnerships for infrastructure investments and 
facilitate knowledge and data exchange between 
industry and academia.  Membership of the Arctic 

Economic Council is open to any business, trade 
association or indigenous group that have an 
economic interest in the Arctic; membership is 
not limited to companies in the Arctic States.  We 
will encourage UK companies to engage through 
the Arctic Economic Council. 

Trade Routes
Currently, half of the world’s volume of trade 
travels through the South China Sea.  A 
reduction in summer sea ice cover in the Arctic 
has potential to open up new shipping routes.  
Estimates report that transporting goods between 
Asia and Northern Europe through the Northern 
Sea Route could significantly reduce travel time, 
making the journey as much as 10 days shorter 
than the Suez route, thereby reducing costs, 
the amount of fuel utilised and consequently 
pollutants emitted into the environment15.  
Transportation through Arctic waters may 
become cheaper and less impactful on the global 
environment in the long run.  

However, while it is conceivable that declining 
Arctic sea-ice could in future open new 
shipping routes, hostile conditions and a lack of 
infrastructure will make commercial operations 
difficult for some considerable time.  According 
to modelling, transit will always be easiest in 
September when ice cover is at a minimum but 
to be viable, Arctic routes will need to be open 
for a longer season.  Researchers concluded 
that after 2050, there would be very little sea 
ice left each summer.  While the decision to 
invest in commercial projects in the Arctic is a 
matter for individual companies and the relevant 
Arctic State, the UK should be prepared to take 
advantage of opportunities to reduce costs and 
speed up the transportation of its exports to 
markets in Asia.  

Prior to Finland assuming the Chairmanship of the Arctic Council in May 2017, the British Embassy in Helsinki 
ran a project to map UK prosperity opportunities afforded by the Finnish chairmanship programme.  Finland 
had identified the four priority areas of: environmental protection, connectivity, meteorological cooperation 
and education.

The subsequent 2017 report has since informed the British Embassy’s engagement with their Finnish hosts.  
It found that opportunities for cooperation existed in several sectors where both Finland and the UK have 
strong expertise.  These included Arctic environmental research, sustainable solutions, maritime, tourism, 
financial services, smart solutions and digitalisation, to name just a few.  

The report and follow-up events in Helsinki and London generated considerable interest.  As a result, the 
Embassy has facilitated several new connections between UK and Finnish organisations, particularly in 
meteorology.  The project also allowed the British Embassy Helsinki to strengthen its policy relationships with 
Finland on Arctic affairs.  This is an important area for Finland’s government and they greatly appreciate our 
increased engagement in this policy area17.

Case Study: Finland: Mapping business opportunities for the UK in the Arctic

23 - Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic - 24




China recently announced the Belt and Road 
initiative to extend into the Arctic as an additional 
economic corridor.  Also known as, the Polar 
Silk Road, it will comprise of road, rail and 
port infrastructure built in partnership with the 
Arctic States.  We recognise that the potential 
implementation risks that could be involved 
in delivering the Belt and Road Initiative.  It 
is important that projects meet international 
standards and best practice, such as responsible 
lending, sustainability and alignment with the 
objectives of the Paris Agreement, appropriate 
project design, and transparent procurement.  As 
the Initiative develops, we advocate an approach 
that minimises negative impact on the Arctic 
environment while maximising the economic 
benefit for communities, which will also suffer the 
most disruption. 

Shipping in the Arctic is already increasing, 
especially shipping originating from a destination 
within the Arctic itself.  Figures from the 
Association of Russian Sea Ports show that the 
Russian Arctic seaports in 2017 handled a total of 
74.2 million tons, an increase of 49.1% compared 
with 2016.  The growth is rooted in a major 
general increase in Russian Arctic shipments. 

The opening up of the route to increased amounts 
of shipping is not risk free.  The development by 
the IMO of the Code for Ships Operating in Polar 
Waters, commonly known as the Polar Code was 

a landmark moment for shipping in the hostile 
waters around the north and south poles.  The 
UK played an active and influential role in the 
development of the Polar Code and as Arctic 
shipping routes becomes more open we continue 
to advocate for the highest possible shipping 
standards and adherence to the Polar Code.

The UK Hydrographic Office, as a global leader 
in producing charts and publication services 
to support international maritime navigation, 
continually develops its publications to take 
account of changing shipping patterns and 
new trading routes.  To do so, UKHO maintains 
strong links with Arctic nations to ensure access 
to the best available data to serve the needs 
of the international mariner.  Furthermore, 
the UKHO is developing marine capability in 
geospatial information management to support 
the UK’s Arctic interests.  Such capability will 
ensure that UK expertise, scientific research, 
hydrographic surveying, marine cartography 
and nautical information is suitably integrated to 
provide comprehensive and efficient information 
management.

The UK will continue to seek Associate Member 
status of the Arctic Regional Hydrographic 
Commission for the UKHO, in order to maintain 
close links with other nations in the region and to 
share the UK’s knowledge and expertise of Arctic 
hydrography.

The impact of climate change on the Arctic is already marked and expected to become more pronounced, 
underlining the need for international agreement and action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

In addition to greenhouse gas emissions, the effects of climate change in the Arctic are accentuated by the 
impact of black carbon.

European Marine Energy Centre (EMEC) 
Established in Orkney in 2003, EMEC is the world’s 
first and only centre providing developers of both 
wave and tidal energy converters – technologies 
that generate electricity by harnessing the power of 
waves and tidal streams – with purpose-built, grid-
connected open-sea testing facilities.

An archipelago off the north coast of Scotland, 
Orkney provides an ideal base for the world-leading 
test facility with its excellent oceanic wave regime, 
strong tidal currents, close proximity to sheltered 
harbour facilities, and a wealth of renewable, 
maritime and environmental expertise within the local 
community. 

Orkney already generates around 120% of its 
electricity requirement from renewables each 
year, mostly from wind.  However, the regional 
infrastructure is threatening to constrain the 
development of these innovative marine energy 
technologies on the Island.  The grid connection to 
mainland Scotland is at capacity restricting future 
generation and export opportunities.  Some wind 
energy generation on the islands is already being 
constrained with economic consequences for the 
remote community.

As one solution, EMEC has invested in a rapid 
response hydrogen electrolyser.  The Centre can 
now generate hydrogen, an energy storage medium, 
from excess tidal and wind energy on the northern 
island of Eday.  The first hydrogen was generated on 
Eday in 2017; the world’s first hydrogen generated 
from tidal energy.  This will help EMEC to respond to 
the cyclical nature of tidal energy generation and for 
community wind projects to deal with the variability 
of wind turbines.  EMEC is involved in innovative 
international, national and community projects 
assessing different applications for hydrogen, 
including directly fuelling the island’s ferries and 
onshore vehicles; providing heating to local schools; 
and enabling the use of fuel cell technology to 
generate power for ‘cold-ironing’ the existing 
ferries.  These examples illustrate the potential for 
hydrogen to decarbonise the Orkney energy system.  
Hydrogen produced from Orkney’s sustainable and 
renewable resources is already in use as an energy 
carrier and will be used in future both as a fuel and in 
the manufacture of valuable chemicals.

Innovation on Orkney is driving forward the transition 
to a global low-carbon economy, demonstrating that 
climate action is compatible with economic growth.

CLEAN ENERGY

25 - Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic - 26




Energy and extractives
Even as it moves to decarbonise its economy, 
projections show the world will continue to rely 
on oil and gas for decades to come.  Supplying 
this demand will require exploration of new 
potential resources, with the Arctic, with its 
significant hydrocarbon reserves, potentially 
playing a major role.  While decisions on how 
to regulate oil and gas activities are matters for 
relevant national authorities to determine, the 
UK Government supports the use of the highest 
possible standards.  We welcome the steps taken 
by the Arctic States through the Arctic Council on 
pollution prevention, preparedness and response 
and the role of research, technology and 
community participation.  The UK Government 
will continue to support moves that promote 
collaboration to ensure to ensure robust pollution 
response arrangements are in place across the 
Arctic.

Successful mining operations that meet the 
needs of customers, investors and local 
communities require strong governance 
frameworks and clear human rights policies.  
Underpinning this governance is the need for 
effective communication at a local, regional and 
national level to ensure that the ‘Social Licence to 
Operate’ can be maintained throughout the life of 
mine and beyond.  The UK Government plays a 
leading role in shaping much of these governance 
frameworks through participation in initiatives 
such as the Voluntary Principles on Security and 
Human Rights in the Extractive Industries; and 
the Extractives Industries Transparency Initiative, 
which apply to mines in the Arctic and elsewhere.

Fisheries
The UK Government will continue to adopt a 
science-led, precautionary and ecosystem-based 
approach to the establishment and management 
of any new and emerging fisheries in the Arctic 
region.  In this respect, the UK Government 
has been supportive of efforts to develop an 
Agreement to prevent unregulated high seas 
fisheries in the Central Arctic Ocean and foster 
international cooperation on relevant research.  
Upon leaving the EU it will be important for the 
UK to have a cooperative relationship with the EU 
and other coastal States to ensure the sustainable 
management of fish stocks.  As such, the UK 
will consider joining relevant Regional Fisheries 
Management Organisations including any that 
have competence for managing fish stocks in the 
Arctic region. 

We will take opportunities to learn from the Arctic 
coastal states as we develop new policies and 
ways of managing our fisheries once we leave 
the EU.  Iceland for example has built a world-
class fisheries industry using efficient, integrated 
high-tech solutions to ensure the sustainability 
of its fish stocks, enhance the productivity of its 
fisheries and maximise the value of its catches.  
We will study and build on good practice, 
wherever it exists.  

The UK’s new Royal Research Ship the Sir David Attenborough is part of a major UK Government polar 
infrastructure investment programme, designed to keep Britain at the forefront of world-leading research in 
the Polar Regions.  The new polar ship is commissioned by NERC, built by Cammell Laird to a Rolls-Royce 
design in line with the requirements of the International Code for Ships Operating in Polar Waters (Polar 
Code), and will be operated by British Antarctic Survey. 

From 2019, the UK research 
community will have year-round 
access to state-of-the art facilities 
on this floating, multidisciplinary, 
research platform.  This new 
research platform will transform 
how ship-borne science is 
conducted in the Polar Regions.  
This £200m commitment 
represents the Government’s 
largest investment in polar science 
since the 1980s.  

Enhanced scientific capability 

The RRS Sir David Attenborough‘s 
design optimises her ability to 
support science in extreme 
environments.  A wide range 
of specialist scientific facilities, 
instruments and laboratories will 

enable scientists to conduct a 
wide range of multi-disciplinary 
sciences to study the ocean, 
seafloor and atmosphere.  

Data from the deep ocean and 
under-ice inaccessible locations 
will be captured using robotic and 
remotely operated devices.  She 
is the first British polar research 
ship to feature a moon pool – a 
vertical shaft (~4 x 4 m) running 
through the vessel and open to 
both the air (at deck level) and sea 
(at the hull).  Using the moon pool, 
enables scientific equipment to be 
deployed and recovered through 
the centre, and thus most stable 
part, of the hull.  This is both 
easier and safer than deploying 

equipment over the side or stern, 
particularly in the rough seas 
characteristic of the polar oceans.  

While the ship will have a number 
of laboratories on board, the 
increased space for containerised 
laboratories introduces a new level 
of flexibility in science support.  
As technologies and techniques 
change, the containers can be 
reconfigured to ensure research 
teams have what they need to 
conduct world-leading science.

The ship will also have the 
capability to deploy, operate and 
control a range of airborne and 
marine remotely operated vehicles 
and autonomous platforms at the 
same time in Polar Regions.

The RRS Sir David Attenborough

27 - Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic - 28




Connectivity
Digital connectivity through increased internet 
fibre cables and good broadband coverage 
already benefits developed parts of the Arctic.  
In the underdeveloped and remote parts of the 
Arctic, the technological challenge is greater.  
Facilitating research and development into 
innovative technical solutions, which have the 
views and needs of the indigenous people and 
those in remote communities at their heart will 
bridge this gap.

European Arctic States are prioritising improved 
transport links through cooperation between 
Sweden, Finland and Russia in the Barents 
Sea Transport Plan.  We will encourage UK 
companies to explore opportunities for them as 
these projects develop.  

Financial Services 
The UK is a global financial centre and world-
leader in financial and professional services, 
including insurance, risk management, financial 
and legal services.  Our financial institutions have 
a reputation for developing innovative products.  
Their significant expertise covers a range of 
sectors operating in the Arctic including, maritime, 
hydrocarbons and mineral extraction, and are well 
placed to provide bespoke services.

The UK maritime business services sector 
provides services to international shipping 
industry vital to enabling the world to trade and 

the global economy to function.  Shipbrokers in 
the UK operate at the centre of the international 
shipping business.  Shipbrokers are represented 
at the Baltic Exchange, which has the world’s 
only independent source of maritime market 
information for trading and settlement of physical 
and derivative contract16.

As implementation of global climate commitments 
grows, green finance will form an increasingly 
important part of the UK’s financial services 
sector.  The falling cost of renewable energy, 
fossil fuel diversification, increased industry and 
financial competition and high demand for green 
finance products are all driving growth.  We 
continue to be a world leader in Green Finance 
because the UK has the world’s most open 
and international financial services centre with a 
historical tradition for innovation.  

In the absence of an international standard 
for green finance products and services, the 
British Standards Institute (BSI) is developing a 
set of voluntary green and sustainable finance 
management standards to promote responsible 
investment practices globally and encourage the 
growth of the sector.  BSI hopes to have the first 
standard in production in 2018.

Through the DIT offices in the Arctic States, the 
UK Government will continue to promote the UK 
as a centre of commercial expertise.

29 - Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic - 30




References and endnotes
1. Snow, Water, Ice and Permafrost in the Arctic Report 2017, Arctic Monitoring and Assessment 

Programme,  https://www.amap.no/swipa2017

2 Credit Hugo Ahlenius, UNEP/GRID-Arendal available at  
http://www.grida.no/graphicslib/detail/states-organizations-and-strategical-issues-in-the-arctic-
people-across-borders_39d8# 

3 https://www.wiltonpark.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/WP1453-Report.pdf

4 Arctic Research publication trends: A pilot Study, August 2016 https://www.elsevier.com/__
data/assets/pdf_file/0017/204353/Arctic-Research-Publication-Trends-August-2016.pdf

5. Snow, Water, Ice and Permafrost in the Arctic Report 2017, Arctic Monitoring and Assessment 
Programme https://www.amap.no/swipa2017

6. Obbard, R.W., et al., (2014). Global warming releases microplastic legacy frozen in Arctic Sea 
ice. Earth’s Future, 2(6), 315–320

7. https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/651916/BEIS_
The_Clean_Growth_online_12.10.17.pdf

8. Expert Group on Black Carbon and Methane: Summary of progress and recommendations 
report 2017 https://oaarchive.arctic-council.org/handle/11374/1936 

9. Hoegh-Guldberg, O., R. Cai, E.S. Poloczanska, P.G. Brewer, S. Sundby, K. Hilmi, V.J. Fabry, 
and S. Jung, 2014: The Ocean. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. 
Part B: Regional Aspects. Contribution

10.  https://oap.ospar.org/en/ospar-assessments/intermediate-assessment-2017 

11.  International Maritime Organization, MEPC.1/Circ.833, 7 April 2014

12.  Eunomia, 2016

13.  https://oap.ospar.org/en/ospar-assessments/intermediate-assessment-2017 

14 https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/673203/25-year-
environment-plan.pdf

15.  NERC Arctic Research Programme: the rapidly changing Arctic environment 

16.  The City UK: Key Facts about the UK as an international financial centre 2017

17 https://www.gov.uk/government/news/british-embassy-helsinki-explores-arctic-opportunities

Acronyms
BAS British Antarctic Survey

BEIS Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy

Defra Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs

DIT Department for International Trade

EU European Union

FCO Foreign and Commonwealth Office

GOA-ON Global Ocean Acidification Observing Network

ICES International Council for the Exploration of the Seas

JNCC Joint Nature Conservation Commission

IMO International Maritime Organization

INTERACT International Network for Terrestrial Research and Monitoring in the Arctic

NERC Natural Environment Research Council

NSR Northern Sea Route

OSPAR
The Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East 
Atlantic

PAME The Protection of the Arctic Marine Environment

SAMS Scottish Association for Marine Science

SDGs UN Global Goals for Sustainable Development 

SIN Science and Innovation Network

UKHO UK Hydrographic Office

UNCLOS United Nation Convention on the law of the Sea

31 - Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic - 32

https://oap.ospar.org/en/ospar-assessments/intermediate-assessment-2017
https://oap.ospar.org/en/ospar-assessments/intermediate-assessment-2017




Canada

Kingdom of Denmark  
(including the dependencies of 
Greenland and the Faroe Islands)

Finland

Iceland

Norway

Russian Federation

Sweden

United States of America

The Arctic States 
(the Member States of the Arctic Council):

Arctic Council 
Working Groups 

ACAP  
Arctic Contaminants Action Program

AMAP  
Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme

CAFF  
Conservation of Arctic Flora and Fauna

EPPR  
Emergency Prevention, 
Preparedness and Response

PAME  
Protection of the Arctic Marine Environment

SDWG  
Sustainable Development Working Group

Expert Groups 

EGBCM  
Expert Group on Black Carbon and Methane

EBMEG  
Ecosystem-Based Management Expert Group

Task Forces

TFAMC  
Task Force on Arctic Marine Cooperation

TFICA  
Task Force on Improved 
Connectivity in the Arctic

33 - Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic Beyond the Ice - UK policy towards the Arctic - 34




Polar Regions Department
Foreign and Commonwealth Office,
King Charles Street,
London

SW1A 2AH

© Crown copyright 2018. 

You may re-use this information (not including logos or images) free of charge in 
any format or medium, under the terms of the Open Government Licence.

To view this licence, visit http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/
open-government-licence/version/3/ or write to the:

Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, Richmond 
TW9 4DU,or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.

This publication is available for download at www.gov.uk/government/publication.

Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at polarregions@fco.gov.uk.




	Foreword
	Introduction
	What is the Arctic?

	Projecting Global Influence
	Governance and Global Britain
	Arctic Council
	Bilateral Relations with the Arctic States
	Multilateral Engagement

	Science
	Support for UK Research
	International engagement




	Protecting people and the environment
	Climate
	People
	Environment
	Marine Conservation
	Marine Litter
	Pollution
	Migratory Birds

	Defence
	Safety 

	Promoting prosperity
	Trade Routes
	Energy and extractives
	Fisheries
	Connectivity
	Financial Services 




	References and endnotes
	Acronyms
	The Arctic States
(the Member States of the Arctic Council):
	Arctic Council 
	Polar Regions Department




