



Animal Welfare (Sentencing and recognition of sentience)


         

Animal Welfare 
(Sentencing and 
Recognition of Sentience) 
Draft Bill 


 

Presented to Parliament  

by the Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs 

by Command of Her Majesty 


 

December 2017 


  

Cm 9554           £x 


2             

© Crown copyright 2017 

This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 
except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit 
nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3  

Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain 
permission from the copyright holders concerned. 

This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/publications 

Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at 

Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs 
17 Smith Square 
London 
SW1P 3JR 

ISBN 978-1-5286-0149-8 

CCS1217573596        12/17 

Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum 

Printed in the UK by the APS Group on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s 
Stationery Office 


 

http://www.gov.uk/government/publications


3  

Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs 

Draft Animal Welfare (Sentencing and 
Recognition of Sentience) Bill 2017 
December 2017 

Contents 

Written Ministerial Statement       4 
Consultation Questions       6 
The Draft Animal Welfare (Sentencing and Recognition of 
Sentience) Bill          9 
Explanatory Notes         12 


   


       


  4  

SECTION 1 – WRITTEN MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 


 

Written Ministerial Statement, 12 December 2017 

Animal Welfare  

I am delighted to publish today a draft Animal Welfare (Sentencing and Recognition of 
Sentience) Bill which will reflect the principle of animal sentience in domestic law and 
increase maximum sentences for animal cruelty tenfold, from six months to five years 
in England and Wales. 

This draft Bill will embed the principle that animals are sentient beings, capable of 
feeling pain and pleasure, more clearly than ever before in domestic law.  There was 
never any question that our policies on animal welfare are driven by the fact that 
animals are sentient beings, and I am keen to reinforce this in legislation as we leave 
the EU.  

The Government is committed to raising animal welfare standards, and to ensuring 
animals will not lose any recognitions or protections once we leave the EU.  The draft 
Bill I am publishing makes our recognition of animal sentience clear.  It contains an 
obligation, directed towards government, to pay regard to the welfare needs of animals 
when formulating and implementing government policy.    

This provision does not apply to Ministers in the devolved governments of Wales, 
Scotland and Northern Ireland.  I look forward to working closely with my devolved 
colleagues and I will be exploring with them the best way forward on this important 
matter, including whether they wish to take a similar or different approach. 

In addition we will not tolerate cruelty against animals and we will give the courts the 
tools they need to deal with abhorrent acts of animal cruelty.  This draft Bill increases 
the maximum penalty for animal welfare offences in the Animal Welfare Act 2006 from 
six months to five years’ imprisonment.  

This applies to the most serious offences under the Act – causing unnecessary 
suffering, illegally mutilating an animal, illegally docking a dog’s tail, illegal poisoning 
and encouraging an animal fight.  My proposed increased maximum penalties will also 
apply to convictions relating to attacks on service animals, including guide dogs, police 
and military dogs. This provision will apply in England and Wales. 

The draft Bill that I am publishing today is subject to a seven week consultation, ending 
on 31st January. It is part of a wider programme to deliver world-leading standards of 
animal welfare in the years ahead. We are making CCTV mandatory in 
slaughterhouses, banning plastic microbeads which harm marine life, and have set 
out proposals for a total ban on ivory sales which contribute to the poaching of 


5  


elephants. This is the start of our ambition to set a global gold standard for animal 
welfare as we leave the EU. 

Michael Gove 

Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs 


  6  

SECTION 2 – CONSULTATION QUESTIONS 


 

Animal sentience 

A draft Bill has been produced which introduces a duty on Ministers of the Crown in 
relation to the welfare needs of animals as sentient beings.  

We seek your views both on the provisions within draft Bill itself, and more widely on 
the approach being taken. 

In terms of the specific provisions within the draft Bill itself: 

1. Defining ‘sentience’: The draft Bill does not explicitly define the term 
‘sentience’, and in the absence of a legal definition this term may be given its 
ordinary meaning.  The Oxford English Dictionary defines sentient as ‘able to 
perceive or feel things’.  This would include feeling both pain and pleasure.  
Do you consider that the term ‘sentience’ should be defined explicitly?  If so 
what definition should we use? 


 

2. Defining ‘animal’: The draft Bill does not explicitly define the term ‘animal’, and 
in the absence of a legal definition this term may be given its ordinary 
meaning.  The Oxford English Dictionary defines animal as ‘an organism 
endowed with life, sensation and voluntary motion.’  Do you consider that the 
term ‘animal’ should be defined explicitly?  If so what definition should we 
use? 

3. Defining ‘welfare needs of animals’: The draft Bill does not explicitly define the 
‘welfare needs of animals’.  Section 9(2) of the Animal Welfare Act 2006 
includes a list of needs, notably; a suitable environment; a suitable diet; the 
ability to exhibit normal behaviour patterns; the need to be housed with, or 
apart from, other animals; the need to be protected from pain, suffering, injury 
and disease.  Do you consider that the term ‘welfare needs of animals’ should 
be defined explicitly in the clause?  If so what definition should be used, and 
should the list of needs in the Animal Welfare Act 2006 be changed if at all? 

4. Policy scope:  The draft Bill would apply to all policy areas. Do you agree with 
this? 

5. Specifying the level of regard:  The draft Bill adopts the term ‘should have 
regard’. Do you agree with this? 

In terms more widely of the approach being taken: 

6. Overall approach:  The draft Bill presents one possible formulation for 
delivering stated policy objectives.  Views would be welcome on what you 
consider may be the consequences of this new duty and also on whether a 


7  


different formulation or approach might achieve the policy objectives.  Views 
would also be welcome on how the approaches adopted in other countries 
might apply here.  

Maximum sentences for animal cruelty  

We are seeking views on this question, in addition to other views you may have: 

7. Sentence length: The draft Bill proposes to increase the maximum penalty for 
the specified animal welfare offences from six months to five years’ 
imprisonment.  Do you agree with the new maximum sentence?  

Responses 

Citizen Space is a site that lists consultations run by the Department for Environment, 
Food and Rural Affairs. On this site you can find, share or take part in our 
consultations. Public participation is very important to the development of our policies 
so please use the following link to have your say: 

https://consult.defra.gov.uk/animal-health-and-welfare/consultation-on-the-animal-
welfare-bill  

or post your responses to: 

Animal Welfare Team  

Area 5B Nobel House  

17 Smith Square,  

London  

SW1P 3JR 


 

Please make sure your responses reach us by 31 January 2018, otherwise we will 
not be able to consider them.  

What happens next?  

This is an opportunity for all interested parties to consider the draft Bill. After the 
consultation has concluded we will publish a summary of the responses received. This 
will inform the final Bill we will lay before Parliament.  

Confidentiality and data protection  

A summary of the responses to this consultation will be published and placed on the 
Government website at www.gov.uk/defra  

https://consult.defra.gov.uk/animal-health-and-welfare/consultation-on-the-animal-welfare-bill
https://consult.defra.gov.uk/animal-health-and-welfare/consultation-on-the-animal-welfare-bill


8  

The summary will include a list of names and organisations that responded but not 
personal names, addresses or other contact details. Information provided in response 
to this consultation, including personal information, may be subject to publication or 
release to other parties or to disclosure in accordance with the access to information 
regimes e.g. Freedom of Information Act 2000 (FOIA) and the Data Protection Act 
1998.  

If you want information, including personal data, that you provide to be treated as 
confidential, please say so clearly in writing when you send your response to the 
consultation why you need to keep these details confidential. If we receive a request 
for disclosure under the FOIA, we will take account of your explanation, but we cannot 
provide an assurance that confidentiality can be maintained in all circumstances. An 
automatic confidentiality disclaimer generated by your IT system will not, if itself, be 
regarded as a confidentiality request.  

This consultation is being conducted in line with the “Consultation Principles” as set 
out in the Better Regulation Executive guidance which can be found at 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/consultation-principles-guidance If you 
have any comments or complaints about the consultation process, please address 
them to: Consultation Co-ordinator, Room 629, Millbank, 17 Smith Square, London 
SW1P 3JR Or email: consultation.coordinator@defra.gsi.gov.uk 


  

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/consultation-principles-guidance
mailto:consultation.coordinator@defra.gsi.gov.uk


9  

THE DRAFT ANIMAL WELFARE (SENTENCING 
AND RECOGNITION OF SENTIENCE) BILL 


 

Animal Welfare (Sentencing and Recognition of Sentience)  

Bill 


     


CONTENTS 


 

1 Welfare needs of animals as sentient beings 
2 Mode of trial and maximum penalty for certain animal welfare 

offences 
3 Extent, commencement and short title 


   10  

 1                              Animal Welfare (Sentencing and Recognition of Sentience) Bill 


  

DRAFT 

OF A 

B I L L 


TO 

Impose a duty on Ministers of the Crown in relation to the welfare needs of 
animals as sentient beings; and to make provision about the mode of trial and 
maximum penalty for certain offences relating to animal welfare. 


 

BE IT ENACTED by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with the 
advice and consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this 
present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:— 


 

1  Welfare needs of animals as sentient beings 

(1)  Ministers of the Crown must have regard to the welfare needs of 
animals as sentient beings in formulating and implementing 
government policy. 

(2)  In discharging that duty Ministers of the Crown must also have regard 
to matters affecting the public interest. 

(3)  In this section “Ministers of the Crown” has the same meaning as in 
the Ministers of the Crown Act 1975. 


 

2  Mode of trial and maximum penalty for certain animal welfare 
offences 

(1)  Section 32 of the Animal Welfare Act 2006 (post-conviction powers: 
imprisonment or fine) is amended as follows. 

(2)  In subsection (1) (penalty for offence under section 4, 5, 6(1), 6(2), 7 
or 8 of the Animal Welfare Act 2006), for the words from “on 
summary conviction” to the end substitute “— 


11  

2                               Animal Welfare (Sentencing and Recognition of Sentience) Bill 


 

(a)  on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term 
not exceeding 51 weeks, or to a fine, or to both; 

(b) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a 
term not exceeding 5 years, or to a fine, or to both.” 


 

3  Extent, commencement and short title 

(1)  Section 1 extends to England and Wales, Scotland and Northern 
Ireland. 

(2)  Section 2 extends to England and Wales only. 

(3)  Section 1 comes into force on a day appointed by the Secretary of State 
by regulations made by statutory instrument (and different days may 
be appointed for different purposes). 

(4)  Section 2 comes into force at the end of the period of two months 
beginning with the day on which this Act is passed. 

(5)  The amendment made by section 2 does not apply to offences 
committed before that section comes into force. 

(6)  This Act may be cited as the Animal Welfare (Sentencing and 
Recognition of Sentience) Act 2018. 


   12  

ANIMAL WELFARE (SENTENCING AND 
RECOGNITION OF SENTIENCE) BILL  
EXPLANATORY NOTES 

What these notes do  
These Explanatory Notes relate to the Animal Welfare (Sentencing and recognition of sentience) Bill 
as published in Draft on 12 December 2017 (Bill 54/1).  

• These Explanatory Notes have been prepared the Department of Environment, Food and 
Rural Affairs in order to assist the reader of the Bill and to help inform debate on it. They do 
not form part of the Bill and have not been endorsed by Parliament. 

• These Explanatory Notes explain what each part of the Bill will mean in practice; provide 
background information on the development of policy; and provide additional information 
on how the Bill will affect existing legislation in this area.  

• These Explanatory Notes might best be read alongside the Bill. They are not, and are not 
intended to be, a comprehensive description of the Bill. 


13  

Table of Contents 

Subject Page of these Notes 

Overview of the Bill 14 

Policy background 14 

Territorial extent and application 16 

Commentary on provisions of Bill 17 
Clause 1: Welfare needs of animals as sentient beings 17 
Clause 2: Mode of trial and maximum penalty for certain animal welfare offences 17 
Clause 3: Extent, Commencement and Short Title 17 

Commencement 18 

Financial implications of the Bill 18 

Parliamentary approval for financial costs or for charges imposed 18 

Compatibility with the European Convention on Human Rights 18 

Annex A - Territorial extent and application in the United Kingdom 19 

Minor or consequential effects 19 
Clause 2: Mode of trial and maximum penalty for certain animal welfare offences 19 


14  

Overview of the Bill 
1  The draft Bill explicitly recognises that animals are sentient beings and places a duty on 

Ministers of the Crown to have regard to their welfare needs when formulating and 
implementing government policy. The draft Bill specifies that matters affecting the public 
interest should be taken into account when exercising this duty.  

2  As a result there should be no diminution of animal welfare recognitions or protections when 
the UK leaves the EU.  The draft Bill presents one possible formulation which seeks to deliver 
these objectives, and other possible formulations or approaches may also exist.  

3  The duty in clause 1 applies solely to Ministers of the Crown, and therefore does not apply 
when decisions are being taken by the devolved governments in areas within their 
competence. Ministers of the Crown will wish to explore with devolved governments 
whether they wish to take a different or similar approach, and there is of course scope to do 
things differently in different parts of the UK. 

4  The Bill increases the maximum penalty for specific offences relating to animal cruelty.  It 
does so by extending the current maximum penalty, specified under the Animal Welfare Act 
2006, of six months and/or an unlimited fine to a penalty of five years and/or an unlimited 
fine.  These offences therefore become triable either-way, and may be heard in the 
magistrates' court or the Crown Court.  These provisions apply to both England and Wales, 
following the agreement of the devolved government of Wales.   

Policy background 
Animal sentience 

5  The Government has made clear its commitment to raising animal welfare standards, and to 
ensuring animals will not lose any recognitions or protections once the UK leaves the EU.  To 
ensure this, the Government is legislating to ensure that animal sentience is explicitly 
recognized in domestic law. This should provide a seamless transition when the UK leaves 
the EU. 

6  As explained, the draft Bill clauses relating to animal sentience apply solely to Ministers of 
the Crown.  Ministers of the Crown will wish to explore with the devolved governments 
whether they wish to take a different or similar approach, and this will be a matter for their 
consideration. 

7  The draft Bill presents one possible formulation for delivering the policy objectives.  We are 
seeking views on whether this is the best approach for achieving the stated policy objectives  
We also welcome views on the perceived consequences such a duty may have. 

Maximum sentences for animal cruelty 

8  This draft Bill amends the Animal Welfare Act 2006, which sets out a maximum penalty of six 
month's imprisonment and an unlimited fine for the more serious 'prevention of harm' 
offences. There are five such offences under section 32(1) of the Animal Welfare Act 2006:  

• Causing unnecessary suffering (section 4, Animal Welfare Act 2006); 

• Carrying out a non-exempted mutilation (section 5, Animal Welfare Act 2006); 

• Docking the tail of a dog except where permitted (section 6(1) and 6(2), Animal 
Welfare Act 2006); 


15  

• Administering a poison to an animal (section 7, Animal Welfare Act 2006); and 

• Involvement in an animal fight (section 8, Animal Welfare Act 2006). 

9  There have been a number of recent cases related to these offences in which judges have 
expressed a desire to impose a higher penalty than that currently provided for under the 
Animal Welfare Act 2006. There is a particular desire to increase the penalties available in the 
case of crimes that relate to deliberate, calculating and sadistic behaviour.  Particular concerns 
have also been raised that increased penalties should be available for attacks on service 
animals, including guide dogs, police dogs and military dogs.  The Bill meets these needs by 
increasing the maximum penalties for the most serious offences listed above. 

10  The majority of the relevant legal background is explained in the Policy Background section 
of these Notes and is not replicated here.  This section provides further legal clarity around 
the current maximum sentences which may be applied.   

11  The current drafting of section 32(1) of the Animal Welfare Act 2006 lists the maximum 
penalty as imprisonment for a term not exceeding 51 weeks or a fine, as opposed to the 
maximum imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months as discussed above. This 
discrepancy is explained by section 32(5) of the Animal Welfare Act 2006.  Section 32(5) 
provides that in relation to an offence committed before the commencement of section 281(5) 
of the Criminal Justice Act 2003, the reference in section 32(1)(a) to 51 weeks is to be read as a 
reference to six months.  As at the date of the publication of the Bill, section 281(5) of the 
Criminal Justice Act 2003 has not been commenced.  The maximum imprisonment term for 
offences under section 32(1) of the Animal Welfare Act 2006 therefore remains as six months. 

12  Under section 78 of the Powers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000 magistrates' courts 
do not have the power to impose penalties greater than six months. As a result of increasing 
the maximum penalty available for the offences under section 32(1) of the Animal Welfare 
Act 2006 to a period of five years the Bill must also change the mode of trial available for 
these offences. 


   16  

Territorial extent and application 
13  Clause 3 sets out the territorial extent of the draft Bill, i.e. the jurisdictions which the draft Bill 

forms part of the law of.  The extent of a draft Bill can be different from its application. 
Application is about where a Bill produces a practical effect.  There is a convention that 
Westminster will not normally legislate with regard to matters that are within the legislative 
competence of the Scottish Parliament, the National Assembly for Wales or the Northern 
Ireland Assembly without the consent of the legislature concerned. 

14  Clause 1 of this draft Bill, relating to animal sentience, extends to the United Kingdom as a 
whole, however the duty contained therein only applies to Ministers of the Crown.  This 
means that the animal sentience provisions do not apply to policies which have been 
devolved to the Scottish parliament, the National Assembly for Wales and the Northern 
Ireland Assembly. The application of these animal sentience provisions to Ministers in the 
devolved governments of Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland is a matter for their 
consideration. 

15  Clause 2 of this draft Bill both extends and applies to England and Wales, following the 
agreement of the Welsh government. 

16  See the table in Annex A for a summary of the position regarding territorial extent and 
application in the United Kingdom. The table also summarises the position regarding 
legislative consent motions and matters relevant to Standing Orders Nos. 83J to 83X of the 
Standing Orders of the House of Commons relating to Public Business. 


  17  

Commentary on provisions of Bill  
Clause 1: Welfare needs of animals as sentient beings 

17  The Policy Background and Legal Background sections of these Notes provide an explanation 
of the policy intent and of how this has been applied in the draft Bill.   

18  In summary Section 1 contains the following the key elements: 

• Animals are explicitly recognised as sentient beings. 

• Ministers of the Crown are required to have regard to their welfare needs when 
formulating and implementing policies. 

• This duty applies to all areas of Government policy that are not devolved  

19  In addition Section 2 requires the Ministers of the Crown, in discharging the duty, to have 
regard to matters affecting the public interest. 

Clause 2: Mode of trial and maximum penalty for certain animal welfare offences 
20  Section 32(1) of the Animal Welfare Act 2006 provides that particular offences should carry a 

maximum penalty of 51 weeks imprisonment and/or a level 5 fine.  In practice, this has effect 
as a maximum penalty of 6 months and an unlimited fine, as explained in the Legal 
Background section of these notes. This clause changes the maximum penalty available for 
the following offences: 

• Causing unnecessary suffering (section 4, Animal Welfare Act 2006).  

• Carrying out a non-exempted mutilation (section 5, Animal Welfare Act 2006). 

• Docking the tail of a dog except where permitted (section 6(1) and 6(2), Animal 
Welfare Act 2006. 

• Administering a poison to an animal (section 7, Animal Welfare Act 2006). 

• Involvement in an animal fight (section 8, Animal Welfare Act 2006). 

21  The existing maximum penalty, outlined above, is retained if the offender is tried in a 
magistrates' court. However offenders may now receive a higher penalty of 5 years 
imprisonment and/or an unlimited fine where they are convicted on trial by indictment. 

Clause 3: Extent, Commencement and Short Title 
22  This clause provides that: 

• Clause 1 of the draft Bill extends and applies to the United Kingdom as a whole, and 
will come into force on a day appointed by the Ministers of the Crown by regulations; 

• Clause 2 of this draft Bill extends and applies to England & Wales and will come into 
force two months after Royal Assent. 

23  The clause provides that the application of revised maximum penalties is not retrospective 
and does not apply to offences committed before the Bill comes into force.  

24  The clause also specifies the short title of the Bill. 


 18  

Commencement 
25  Clause 1 of the draft Bill comes into force on a day to be appointed.  Clause 2 of the draft Bill 

will come into force two months after Royal Assent.   

Financial implications of the Bill 
Animal sentience 

26  The compliance costs of the animal sentience provisions take two broad forms: 

• Administrative resource costs to government from the activity of taking animal 
sentience into account in policy formulation and implementation, in the ways 
specified in the draft Bill.  This includes demonstrating (or being able to) that 
Ministers had regard to animal sentience in formulating and implementing 
government policy, including in relation to any information requests or challenges.  

• Resource costs from government policies and the implementation of those policies 
differing as a result of Ministers having had regard to animal sentience.   It is worth 
noting that other existing domestic legislation, especially the Animal Welfare Act 
2006, already provides animals with significant protections and requires their welfare 
needs to be taken account of. 

27  The consultation period will enable the extent of any new burdens to be explored further.  
The final position will depend upon the provisions contained in the final Bill. 

Maximum sentences for animal cruelty  

28  Clause 2 of the Bill, on the maximum sentences for animal cruelty, has a limited impact on 
costs to the criminal justice system. The increase in maximum penalties will not result in an 
increase in the number of offenders being sent to prison, but only in the length of time served 
by the most serious offenders. The increase in costs to the criminal justice system is estimated 
to be £465,000 per year. This includes provision for an increase in court costs, legal aid, and 
offender management services.  

Parliamentary approval for financial costs or for 
charges imposed 

29  This draft Bill does not require a a Ways and Means resolution, in which the Commons give 
consent to parts of a Bill that involve taxes or other charges being made on the public. 

Compatibility with the European Convention on 
Human Rights 

30  Defra does not consider that the provisions of the draft Bill engage convention rights. 


  19  

Annex A - Territorial extent and application in the 
United Kingdom 
As currently drafted, clause 1 of the Bill, on animal sentience, extends and applies to the United 
Kingdom.  At the same time clause 1 applies specifically to the Ministers of the Crown and not to the 
Ministers of the devolved governments of Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.  The application of 
these animal sentience provisions to Ministers in the devolved governments of Wales, Scotland and 
Northern Ireland is a matter for their consideration. 

Clause 2, on maximum sentences for animal cruelty, extends and applies to Wales as well as to 
England, following a decision by the devolved government in Wales that the Bill should also apply 
there.  It is the view of the UK government that the subject matter of the Bill is within the legislative 
competence of the Welsh Assembly. Therefore on the basis of the current draft Bill, the UK 
Government intends to seek a Legislative Consent Motion in the National Assembly for Wales.  


 

Provision Extends 
to E & W 


and 

applies to 
England? 

Extends 
to E & W 


and 

applies to 
Wales? 

Extends 


and 

applies to 
Scotland? 

Extends and 
applies to 
Northern 
Ireland? 

Would 
corresponding 
provision be 
within the 
competence of 
the National 
Assembly for 
Wales? 

Would 
corresponding 
provision be 
within the 
competence of 
the Scottish 
Parliament? 

Would 
corresponding 
provision be 
within the 
competence of 
the Northern 
Ireland 
Assembly? 

Legislative 
Consent 
Motion 
needed? 

Clause 1 


 

Clause 2 


 

Clause 3  



Yes  Yes  Yes 




Yes  Yes  Yes 




Yes  No  Yes 




Yes  No  Yes 




Yes  Yes  Yes 




Yes  Yes  Yes 




Yes  Yes  Yes No  

Yes (W) 


 

Yes (W) 


 

Minor or consequential effects1 
The provisions of the Bill have no minor or consequential effects outside England and Wales. Subject 
matter and legislative competence of devolved legislatures 

Clause 2: Mode of trial and maximum penalty for certain animal welfare offences 
As the draft Bill currently extends and applies to both England and Wales. We consider this draft Bill 
to be within the legislative competence of the National Assembly for Wales because it falls within the 
area of 'agriculture, fisheries, forestry and rural development' devolved under Schedule 7, Part 1 of 
the Government of Wales Act 2006. By convention, previous legislation relating to animal welfare has 
fallen under this area. For example, welfare legislation has been considered devolved in the case of 
both the Welfare of Farmed Animals (England) Regulations 2007 (England only) and the Animal 
Welfare (Breeding of Dogs) (Wales) Regulations 2014 (Wales only). 

                                            
1 References in this Annex to an effect of a provision being minor or consequential are to its being minor or consequential 
for the purposes of Standing Order No. 83J of the Standing Orders of the House of Commons relating to Public Business. 


20                                 


CCS1217573596 

978-1-5286-0149-8 


 

	Overview of the Bill
	Policy background
	Territorial extent and application
	Commentary on provisions of Bill 
	Clause 1: Welfare needs of animals as sentient beings
	Clause 2: Mode of trial and maximum penalty for certain animal welfare offences
	Clause 3: Extent, Commencement and Short Title

	Commencement
	Financial implications of the Bill
	Parliamentary approval for financial costs or for charges imposed
	Compatibility with the European Convention on Human Rights
	Annex A - Territorial extent and application in the United Kingdom
	Minor or consequential effects0F
	Clause 2: Mode of trial and maximum penalty for certain animal welfare offences




