



Female Offender Strategy




Female Offender Strategy 


               

June 2018 

Cm 9642 


  

Female Offender Strategy 
Presented to Parliament  
by the Lord Chancellor and Secretary of State for Justice  
by Command of Her Majesty 


 

June 2018 


                 


Cm 9642 


 


© Crown copyright 2018 

This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where 
otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-
licence/version/3 

Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission 
from the copyright holders concerned. 

This publication is available at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications 

Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at the following email address: 
cjwst@Justice.gov.uk 


 

ISBN 978-1-5286-0562-5 

CCS0618901868 06/18 

Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum 

Printed in the UK by the APS Group on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office 


    

http://nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3/
http://nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3/
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications
mailto:cjwst@Justice.gov.uk




Female Offender Strategy 

Contents 

Foreword 3 

Introduction 5 

Chapter One: Early Intervention 11 

Chapter Two: Community Solutions 17 

Chapter Three: Better Custody 26 

Chapter Four: Framework for Implementation 35 

Conclusion 43 

Annex A: Lord Farmer Review Terms of Reference 45 


    1 


Female Offender Strategy 


  2 


Female Offender Strategy 

Foreword 

As a Government, we are committed to doing all we can to protect and support the most 
vulnerable in our society. Nowhere is that more imperative than in the criminal justice 
system, where many vulnerable people find themselves in crisis either as victims, 
offenders or both.  

People make choices and behave in ways which cause hurt and harm to others and wider 
damage to our society. It is right that we punish those behaviours and expect individuals 
to take responsibility for their actions. However, that is only part of the story. Offenders are 
part of our society and we must take steps to understand and address the underlying 
causes of offending, if we are to improve the lives of victims and support offenders to turn 
their own lives around. 

The evidence shows us that vulnerability is not just a consequence of crime.  It can also 
drive offending behaviour and prevent people from breaking out of a cycle of reoffending.   

This is particularly stark when we look at female offenders. We know that there is a higher 
prevalence of need amongst female offenders, such as mental health problems, and 
self-harm. Many experience chaotic lifestyles which are often the product of a life of abuse 
and trauma; almost 60% of female offenders have experienced domestic abuse.  

I am convinced that if we take the right approach to female offenders – one that 
addresses vulnerability, follows the evidence about what works in supporting them to turn 
their lives around, and treats them as individuals of value – it could have substantial 
benefits for victims, families, and wider society, as well as for female offenders 
themselves. 

This strategy sets out the Government’s commitment to a new programme of work for 
female offenders, driven by three priorities: earlier intervention, an emphasis on 
community-based solutions, and an aim to make custody as effective and decent as 
possible for those women who do have to be there. It also sets out our framework for 
taking this forward: it is only through effective partnerships, at national and local level, that 
progress can really happen. In particular, I know that the role of third sector partners, such 
as women’s centres, working with local statutory bodies, will be key to taking this forward. 

Underpinning this approach are some significant truths. 70.7% of adult women and 62.9% 
of adult men released from custody between April to June 2016 following a short custodial 
sentence of less than 12 months reoffended within a year. There is persuasive evidence 
that short custodial sentences are less effective in reducing reoffending than community 
orders. Short sentences generate churn which is a major driver of instability in our prisons 
and they do not provide sufficient time for rehabilitative activity. The impact on women, 
many of whom are sentenced for non-violent, low level but persistent offences, often for 
short periods of time, is particularly significant. The prevalence of anxiety and self-harm 
incidents is greater than for male prisoners. As more female offenders are primary carers 
than their male counterparts, these sentences lead to a disproportionate impact on 
children and families and a failure to halt the intergenerational cycle of offending.  


3 

Female Offender Strategy 

Today there are 3,850 women in our prisons. I want to see this fall, with fewer women in 
prison for short sentences. The way forward is through shifting our focus from custody to 
the community.   

This strategy outlines the immediate measures we are taking to achieve this, including 
cross-Government investment and plans to test new residential options for diverting 
women entering and re-entering custody on short custodial sentences.  

We are setting out our commitment and direction of travel for female offenders. We 
acknowledge that making a meaningful change will be a substantial and ongoing task. 
We are committed to undertaking this journey in partnership across Government, by 
supporting locally-led approaches and building upon the evidence base about what works. 


   


Rt. Hon David Gauke MP  
Secretary of State for Justice  


4 

Female Offender Strategy 

Introduction 

A strategy for female offenders 

1. To reduce crime and make a difference to victims, we need to consider the 
underlying causes of offending and reoffending, and take an evidence-based 
approach to rehabilitating offenders.  

2. We know that many offenders are amongst the most vulnerable people in society and 
that these vulnerabilities can often contribute to their offending behaviours or how 
they engage and respond to interventions.1,2 Female offenders can be amongst the 
most vulnerable of all, in both the prevalence and complexity of their needs. Many 
experience chaotic lifestyles involving substance misuse, mental health problems, 
homelessness, and offending behaviour – these are often the product of a life of 
abuse and trauma.3 

3. Although the proportion of women in the criminal justice system (CJS) is small – 
approximately 5% of the prison population and 15% of offenders in the community– 
the positive impact of addressing their needs is significant. 4   

4. On average female offenders commit less serious offences than male offenders and 
often pose a low or medium risk of serious harm to the public.5,6 Yet the reoffending 
rate among women is 22.9% for the April to June 2016 cohort, often committing non-
violent, low-level but persistent offences, such as shop theft.7,8 Furthermore, chaotic 
lives and complex needs often mean female offenders have repeated needs for 
services and a disrupted family life. Female offenders cost the Government 
approximately £1.7bn in 2015/16, including estimated police costs of c.£1bn.9 This 
excludes wider social costs, such as the cost of intergenerational offending. 

5. It is clear, therefore, that tackling and reducing the cycle of offending amongst women 
could have significant benefits to victims, families, and Government, as well as to 
female offenders themselves. 

6. Outcomes for women in custody can be worse than for men: for example, the rate of 
self-harm is nearly five times as high in women’s prisons.10 This disparity is highly 
troubling and it is right to seek to create equal opportunity for men and women in the 
CJS to rehabilitate themselves. Baroness Corston’s seminal report, A review of 
women with particular vulnerabilities in the Criminal Justice System (2007), 
highlighted that the factors that can lead men and women to commit crime, and to 
reoffend, can vary significantly, as can the way men and women respond to 
interventions.11 Our own evidence review suggests that ensuring interventions are 
tailored appropriately to the particular needs of women can be more effective than 
applying a generic approach to men and women alike.12 

7. There is a clear opportunity to take an entirely different approach to this cohort – one 
that addresses vulnerability, acknowledges the role of gender, treats female 
offenders as individuals with the potential to make a positive contribution to wider 
society, and ultimately breaks the cycle of reoffending with all the benefits that brings 
for families and society as a whole. 


5 

Female Offender Strategy 

The Case for Change: 

Criminalising vulnerable individuals has broader negative social impacts  
8. Coming into contact with the criminal justice system, and in particular custody, can 

undermine the ability of women to address the issues that have caused their 
offending. In particular, many have difficulty maintaining employment and 
accommodation whilst in the CJS. This can contribute to these women entering crisis, 
or failing to come out of it, ultimately requiring greater support from services and 
leading to reoffending. Furthermore, the criminalisation or incarceration of parents 
has a significant impact on families and children.13 The incarceration of women may 
also have a disproportionate impact on intergenerational offending as they are more 
likely to be living with their children prior to custody.14 

Short custodial sentences do not deliver the best results for female offenders 
9. Custody is intended as a last resort, to protect the public and to punish and 

rehabilitate offenders. Over three quarters of women sentenced to custody receive 
sentences of fewer than 12 months.15 56.1% of adult women released from custody 
between April and June 2016 reoffended within a year, with 70.7% of women 
reoffending following a short custodial sentence (<12m).16 There is persuasive 
evidence that short custodial sentences of less than 12 months are less effective in 
reducing reoffending than community penalties.17  –Custody results in significant 
disruptions to family life. We also know that custody can be particularly damaging for 
women, whose rates of self-harm are nearly five times higher than those of men.18 
Women are also twice as likely to report suffering from anxiety and depression and 
more likely to report symptoms indicative of psychosis.19 

Good community management works 
10. Many female offenders could be more successfully supported in the community, 

where reoffending outcomes are better.20 Community orders also offer the 
opportunity to support female offenders to engage in employment, and secure stable 
accommodation. They can be used effectively to address other underlying causes of 
offending, such as substance misuse problems. The third sector network of women’s 
services, such as women’s centres, play an important role in supporting us to meet 
women’s needs, minimise disruption to families and more effectively maintain female 
offenders within their community as productive citizens, at less cost to Government 
and greater benefit to themselves and society. 

Our vision and strategic priorities: 

Fewer women coming into the criminal justice system  
11. We want to see fewer women offending in the first place. Intervening earlier to 

address the needs of vulnerable women could prevent offending for some, and 
interrupt the cycle of reoffending for others. We want to see more support for 
vulnerable women in the community and more measures to divert women from 
coming into contact with the CJS, where appropriate.  


6 

Female Offender Strategy 

Fewer women in custody (especially on short-term sentences) and a greater 
proportion of women managed in the community successfully 
12. We want to reduce the female prison population, with fewer offenders sent to custody 

for short periods. We will therefore shift our emphasis from custody to the community, 
and as part of this we will not be building the five new Community Prisons for 
Women.21 Instead, we want to ensure that the public and judiciary have confidence in 
non-custodial sentences - such as effective community orders - which directly tackle 
the causes of reoffending, including alcohol or drug abuse. We will be looking at what 
more we can do to emphasise that short custodial sentences should be viewed as a 
last resort.  

Better conditions for those in custody  
13. We want to see a custodial environment that continues to protect the public, but 

which also enables rehabilitation and delivers better outcomes for female offenders. 
This includes improving family ties. We want to drastically reduce the rates of self-
harm and self-inflicted deaths. We want women to be supported on release to 
transition back into the community by securing stable accommodation and education 
and/or employment; along with the necessary support to manage and overcome 
other needs, such as mental health problems and substance misuse. This will help 
more women to step out of the cycle of reoffending and become productive citizens.  

A Framework for Implementation: 

14. Our strategic priorities must be underpinned by a clear framework for all partners 
within and outside the CJS to deliver real progress. We want to support an approach 
that is: 

Locally-led 
15. We want local areas across England and Wales to feel empowered to design 

approaches tailored for the specific needs of their populations and local 
circumstances. We will continue to support them with evidence of what works. We 
believe that the development of Whole System Approaches (WSA) that offer holistic 
support through joined-up local service provision are key to delivering better 
outcomes. 

Partnership-focused 
16. We want to ensure a joined-up approach across Government at a national level and 

between services at a local level, including the third sector, to deliver a holistic 
response to women. We will set a clear structure to help partners work together 
effectively to address the drivers of offending and the needs of female offenders. 

Evidence-based 
17. Working with local areas and providers, we will continue to develop the evidence 

base to better understand what works. Interventions will be tested for sustainability, 
scalability, and to ensure the best use of the available funding.  


7 

Female Offender Strategy 

Our Commitment: 

18. This strategy marks the launch of a new programme of work to improve our collective 
approach to female offenders and make society safer by tackling the underlying 
causes of offending and reoffending.  

19. Our commitments today are a first step on which we will build going forward. We 
commit today to: 

• Invest £5 million of cross-Government funding over two years in community 
provision for women. As part of this, today we are launching an initial £3.5m 
grant competition for 2018/19 and 2019/20, which includes £2 million of funding 
explicitly for female offenders who have experienced domestic abuse. We 
recognise that the availability and sustainability of these services, such as 
women’s centres, is essential for ensuring that we can deliver the vision we have 
outlined. An additional £1.5m will be invested to support the development of 
community-based provision for female offenders, such as residential support. 

• Work with local and national partners to develop a pilot for ‘residential 
women’s centres’ in at least five sites across England and Wales. This 
supports our vision to see fewer women in custody by developing more options 
for supporting women in the community. We know that many women, particularly 
on short custodial sentences, can be better supported in the community on robust 
and effective community sentences. We consider that the availability of intensive 
residential support options, both at the point of sentencing and on release, is key 
for achieving the changes we want to see. The pilot will enable us to test models 
which provide safe accommodation and holistic support for women in the 
community so that they can address the underlying causes of their offending.  

• We are committed to reducing the number of women serving short 
custodial sentences. If we can successfully divert women from crime so as to 
close one or more prisons, we want to see at least part of the revenue used to 
further the aims of this strategy, subject to the wider context at that time. 

20. To support implementation, we are publishing alongside this strategy: 

• Guidance for the police on working with vulnerable women, developed in 
partnership with the National Police Chiefs Council (NPCC). If we are to 
intervene successfully at an earlier stage, the police must be able to assess and 
identify the most appropriate outcome for these women and refer them to sources 
of support. Across England and Wales there are promising local examples of 
where models are in place to triage vulnerable women and support them in to Out 
of Court Disposals (OOCDs) where appropriate. 

• Guidance on the development of whole systems approaches, which sets out 
the emerging evidence base for a holistic, multi-agency approach to addressing 
the needs of female offenders. 


8 

Female Offender Strategy 

21. We want to improve outcomes for women at all stages in the CJS. With that in mind, 
we have: 

• Asked Lord Farmer to continue his work on the importance of family ties in 
improving outcomes for offenders, by undertaking a further piece of work to 
review his recommendations through the lens of the needs of female 
offenders. We expect this to report by the end of the year. We know that there is 
an impact on families and children when a woman is involved in the CJS and that 
children of imprisoned mothers may be particularly affected by a custodial 
sentence. This review will enable us to understand what specific measures we 
can take to strengthen family ties, especially with their children, whilst serving 
sentences in the community, in custody and after they are released.  

• Begun the process to replace Prison Service Order (PSO) 4800 with a 
Women’s Policy Framework. We will aim to publish a final version by the end of 
Autumn 2018. This will expand the focus from working with women in prison to 
guidance for working with women throughout the CJS. 

22. Finally, we know that we will only make progress in tackling the often complex needs 
of female offenders by adopting a partnership approach at both a national and local 
level. Therefore, we will: 

• Work across Government and with other national and local partners to 
develop a National Concordat on Female Offenders. This will set out how local 
partners and services should be working together in partnership to identify and 
respond to the often multiple and complex needs of women as they journey 
through the CJS. We aim to publish this by the end of 2018.   

Scope: 

23. The geographical scope of this strategy covers England and Wales. The UK devolved 
administrations have their own approaches towards the healthcare of offenders 
where responsibility is devolved. Some of the policy areas covered by this strategy 
such as health and social care therefore only cover England. Any mention of areas 
relating to the work of Her Majesty’s Prisons and Probation Service (HMPPS) and the 
MoJ apply to England and Wales. We, the Ministry of Justice, work with the devolved 
administrations to ensure a coordinated approach to the care and management of 
prisoners in all areas of the UK. The population referenced in this strategy includes all 
adult female offenders in England and Wales. 

The Welsh Context 
24. The Welsh Government shares the broad ambitions set out in this strategy, including 

fewer women in prison, earlier and more appropriate intervention, diversion, strong 
partnership working, and rehabilitative support that enables women to turn their lives 
around and stop offending. 

25. However, Wales has its own legislative and policy landscape in areas such as health, 
social care, substance misuse, housing and accommodation, education and skills 
and violence against women, domestic abuse and sexual violence.  Further, Wales 
does not have a women’s prison.  As a consequence, it needs a distinct approach to 
Welsh women both within, and at risk of entering the Criminal Justice System.  


9 

Female Offender Strategy 

26. Her Majesty’s Prison and Probation Service Wales (HMPPS), part of the Ministry of 
Justice, and the Welsh Government are working in partnership to develop a joint 
“blueprint” for Wales, for the delivery of appropriate provision for Welsh women in, 
and at risk of entering the Criminal Justice System.  This will take account of both the 
devolved (Welsh Government) and non-devolved (Ministry of Justice) landscape. The 
blueprint will set out a shared ambition to establish and embed a Whole System 
Approach within Wales, from prevention and early intervention through to 
resettlement and reintegration.  It will also address the question of alternatives to 
custody for Welsh women, as well as a distinct approach to supporting offenders, 
their families, and women at risk of offending. 

27. The blueprint, and ongoing partnership working, will ensure that the diverse and 
complex needs of female offenders in Wales will be met in the best ways possible. 


10 

Female Offender Strategy 

Chapter One: Early Intervention 

Chapter Summary:  

28. A significant proportion of women who come into contact with the criminal justice 
system (CJS) commit offences that are low-level.22 In some cases, their offending 
could have been prevented by addressing their vulnerabilities at an earlier stage. 
Many experience chaotic lifestyles involving substance misuse, mental health 
problems, homelessness and offending behaviour – as the Violence Against Women 
and Girls (VAWG) Strategy has acknowledged, these are often the product of 
histories of abuse and trauma.23 Often these offenders will have repeated demands 
on services and go on to reoffend. Contact with the CJS can often cause these 
women to go into crisis or prevent them from coming out of it. Conviction can mean a 
loss of accommodation and employment, disruption to families and children and the 
beginning of a cycle of intergenerational offending.  

29. There are clear benefits to intervening earlier to reduce the number of women coming 
into contact with the CJS. For victims, prevention and reduced reoffending would lead 
to a reduction in crime; for wider society, there would be less cost and less pressure 
on services; for offenders and their families, they might avoid a crisis experience and 
instead begin a path towards more stable living. 

We will reduce the number of women coming into contact with the CJS by: 
Intervening earlier to address vulnerabilities that can lead to offending, by: 

• Funding community provision and domestic abuse services for women 

Diverting offenders from the CJS, where it is appropriate to do so, and addressing their 
needs to prevent reoffending, by: 

• Optimising Liaison & Diversion schemes  

• Supporting the Police to work with vulnerable women  

• Improving use of Out of Court Disposals 

• Working with non-police prosecutors 

• Promoting Retail-Based Diversion 


 

The Challenge 

30. We know that in many cases vulnerabilities can be a contributing factor in female 
offending, whether substance misuse issues, experience of abuse, relationship 
issues, housing issues, employment or financial issues.  

31. We recognise the major part that domestic abuse can play in female offending. This 
abuse can take different forms, including coercive and controlling behaviour. Being a 
victim of domestic abuse is a predictor of violent reoffending among women.  Almost 


11 

Female Offender Strategy 

60% of female offenders supervised in the community or in custody, who have an 
assessment, have experienced domestic abuse.24,25 

32. The Prison Reform Trust report, “There’s a reason we’re in trouble,” examined 
domestic abuse as a driver to women’s offending.26 It found that the response of 
criminal justice agencies to female offenders affected by domestic abuse can be key 
to breaking the cycle of victimisation and offending, and that identification of domestic 
abuse at the earliest opportunity is critical. The Government’s VAWG Strategy 
acknowledges that the cost of domestic abuse to health, housing and social services, 
criminal justice and civil legal services is estimated at £3.9 billion.27 Supporting these 
women at an early stage, either before they commit an offence or when the offence is 
very low level, can prevent them from (re-)entering the CJS. 

33. Prosecutions against women are far more likely to be for low-level non-violent 
offences than those against men.28 Shop theft is one of the most common offences 
for which women and men are given a custodial sentence, and the most common 
offence for which women are given a Penalty Notice for Disorder, community 
sentence or suspended sentence.29 In 2017, shoplifting accounted for 43% of adult 
females sentenced for indictable/triable either-way offences. Women are also over-
represented in prosecutions for TV licence evasion and child truancy. For TV 
licensing, about 70% of prosecutions are against women.30 In some cases, it may be 
more appropriate to divert these women from prosecution and address the causes of 
their offending. 

34. Contact with the CJS can also have very negative outcomes for the families, 
particularly children of offenders. International evidence has found that children with 
incarcerated parents are at increased risk of antisocial and offending behaviour.31 
Given that a higher proportion of imprisoned mothers are living with their dependent 
children prior to imprisonment than imprisoned fathers (~60% vs. ~45%), the 
imprisonment of mothers has a greater impact on the living arrangements of 
dependent children than the imprisonment of fathers.32 

35. These risks are compounded by patchy provision of gender-informed community 
services to support them, particularly those run by the third sector such as women’s 
centres, which we know can be effective at reducing reoffending. Even where 
services do exist, the level of provision does not always match local demand, such as 
in London, which accounts for the highest volume of female offenders by area in 
England and Wales. 

Intervening earlier to address the vulnerabilities that can lead to offending 

The role of local areas, third sector and other Government Departments 
36. We want local areas, whose service structures vary, to take a joined-up, multi-agency 

approach to addressing the barriers that prevent women with multiple and complex 
needs from accessing services effectively. To be effective, these approaches should 
bring together agencies such as the Police & Crime Commissioners (PCC), heath 
services, criminal justice agencies and third sector providers. To deliver this, we want 
to see sufficient, gender-informed provision in local areas to meet the needs of 
female offenders.  


12 

Female Offender Strategy 

37. Services commissioned by PCCs, the third sector network of women’s centres and 
women-specific services provide valuable early support to vulnerable women, many 
of whom have complex needs, before they reach crisis point. Given the women these 
services work with, we would like to see local agencies and commissioners working 
with us and investing in women’s centres and other women-specific services. We 
recognise the critical role that have played in supporting the sustainability of women’s 
community services such as women’s centres. We want to ensure that our approach 
instils  

38. Many other services, such as health or education, may encounter at-risk women 
before they enter the CJS. We want services to identify and engage these women to 
address issues that could be factors in their offending.  

39. We are grateful for the role which charitable trusts and foundations have played in 
supporting women’s community services, often providing a critical lifeline for third 
sector providers. We are keen to work with these organisations and to ensure local 
services can continue to build on their expertise, experience and support.  

Funding community provision and domestic abuse services for women 
40. As part of our shift in emphasis from custody to the community, we are launching a 

grant competition alongside this strategy which will award £3.5m of funding between 
2018-2020 (£2m in 2018/19 and £1.5m 2019/20) for community provision for female 
offenders or those at risk of offending. Funding will be provided to develop provision 
for women with an experience of domestic abuse, to maintain and develop 
community services for women, and to support local areas to develop and embed 
Whole System Approaches (WSA) for female offenders (see chapter four for further 
detail on WSA). 

41. Given the overrepresentation of Black, Asian, and minority ethnic (BAME) women in 
the CJS, we want to see funding used to address the needs of this cohort, as well as 
those of other cohorts of women with protected characteristics who find it difficult to 
access services.33 Applications to the grant competition will be required to show how 
they will increase engagement with such cohorts, and support them. 

42. We will invest an additional £1.5 million capital funding to support the development of 
community-based provision for female offenders. 

43. The Government consultation on domestic abuse, Transforming the Response to 
Domestic Abuse closed on 31 May 2018. £20 million in funding was announced by 
the Prime Minister in the Spring Budget 2017 to tackle domestic abuse, of which £2 
million has been dedicated to female offenders. The consultation sought views on 
how we can work better with female offenders and vulnerable women at risk of 
offending identify their domestic abuse earlier. We are considering the responses to 
the consultation to determine how best the remaining funding can support victims and 
at-risk families. The Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government 
(MHCLG) will also announce further significant funding for domestic abuse services, 
including refuges, as early as possible this financial year. This will include launching a 
new fund which will be open to all local areas across England to bid for a share. 


13 

Female Offender Strategy 

Diverting offenders from the CJS, where it is appropriate to do so, and 
addressing their needs to prevent reoffending 

Optimising Liaison and Diversion 
44. NHS-commissioned Liaison and Diversion (L&D) services are on the frontline of the 

effort to divert women from the CJS. They place clinical staff at police stations and 
courts across England to provide assessments and referrals to treatment and 
support. Offenders may be diverted away from the CJS altogether, away from 
charge, or to a community sentence with a treatment requirement. Health is devolved 
in Wales and they have developed a similar but separate Criminal Justice Liaison and 
Diversion service. L&D started in April 2014 and is being rolled out across England. 
Coverage is currently at 82% of the population of England, with full coverage to be 
delivered by March 2020. Wales are developing similar plans. 

45. These services will be most effective when they can respond to women in a gender-
informed way, as many women struggle to disclose details about their circumstances. 
They often fear the negative consequences of any admissions of mental health 
problems or substance misuse issues, particularly if they have dependents or are in 
an abusive relationship. NHS England are currently enhancing ‘women’s pathways’ 
across all L&D services, with a women’s lead appointed in each service to lead this 
work. These pathways are being co-designed with women with lived experience of 
the CJS. Services will allow women coming into police custody to choose the gender 
of their practitioner, offer gender-sensitive tools for screening and provide effective 
onward referrals to gender-informed services. Consideration will also be given to 
addressing the barriers that particular groups, such as sex workers and foreign 
national women, face in accessing services. MoJ will continue to work with the 
Department for Health and Social Care and NHS England to support roll-out and 
ensure that these services are best placed to meet the needs of women.   

Supporting the Police to work with vulnerable women 
46. The earlier a woman’s vulnerabilities are identified, the more can be done to 

intervene in the cycle of offending.34 Contact with the police is an opportunity to offer 
a single needs assessment that identifies and addresses the full complexity of an 
individual’s circumstances, including protected characteristics.  

47. We are launching alongside this strategy comprehensive guidance on working with 
vulnerable women which we have developed in partnership with the National Police 
Chiefs’ Council (NPCC). This includes needs assessments for women who come into 
contact with the police, whether or not they are arrested. This may enable police to 
divert women from the CJS altogether, or support courts to give women a community 
order rather than a short custodial sentence by supplying them with a fuller picture of 
the woman’s circumstances. The MoJ, Home Office, NPCC and Association for 
Police and Crime Commissioners (APCC) have jointly committed to advocating and 
driving forward use of the guidance across police forces in England and Wales.  

48. Additionally, the College of Policing have developed a vulnerability and risk training 
programme, which equips staff to work in a trauma-informed way. This has been 
delivered to 9,500 police officers and staff, and the course has recently become 
available for local delivery under licence from the College. 


14 

Female Offender Strategy 

Improving Out of Court Disposals 
49. Once women come into contact with the police, an Out of Court Disposal (OOCD) 

can be administered to deal proportionately with low level offending without recourse 
to the courts. Whilst this could be an effective tool for maintaining women in the 
community, under the current system, too many disposals are simply warnings not to 
reoffend and fail to address underlying causes of the offending behaviour through 
attaching conditions. This is not sufficient if we are to provide the holistic support that 
will effectively divert women from the CJS in the long-term. 

50. To explore the potential of this mechanism, we piloted an OOCD framework in three 
police forces (West Yorkshire, Staffordshire and Leicestershire) in 2014-15 that 
emphasised reforming offenders. 44% of all conditional cautions attached conditions 
that were rehabilitative.35 Some of these pilot areas also referred female offenders to 
women’s centres to address their offending behaviour alongside their OOCD.  

51. More broadly, many police areas are working to develop quality diversion options for 
women. We will look to support the replication of this approach through our support of 
police leadership by the NPCC, who published a Charging and Out of Court 
Disposals Strategy in January 2018. 

Police Assessment and Out of Court Disposal Case Study 
Checkpoint, a deferred prosecution scheme in Durham, saw positive outcomes working 
with female offenders out of court. Using a multi-agency approach, Checkpoint supports 
those eligible with a ‘navigator’ who conducts an in-depth needs assessment based on 
their risk of reoffending, sets the conditions and manages the woman throughout a four 
month period. The offender must agree and engage with the contract or risk prosecution 
for the offence. Over 90% of those who participated completed the scheme successfully 
and did not receive a criminal record. 

The example below sets out one female offender’s journey (referred to below as CM). 

Arrested for shoplifting, police identified that CM had been exploited in many ways to 
commit the offence. Well known to police, she was categorised as a vulnerable offender, 
with a history of being a victim of crimes such as domestic abuse, violence and damage, 
and arson. A risk assessment was undertaken which looked at her accommodation, 
finances, health, family and relationships. Navigators identified issues with domestic 
abuse, methadone and alcohol addiction, and mental health.  

CM agreed to, and engaged with, the pathway conditions: to attend a drug reduction 
programme and alcoholic anonymous group, schedule a GP appointment to address 
depression and anxiety issues, accept a referral to Harbour (a charity that works with 
individuals affected by abuse) and make right with the victim through a face to face 
apology. 

In the four-month period, navigators worked to provide a support system and build a 
relationship of trust. The interventions improved her drug and alcohol dependencies, and 
helped the client distance herself from her abusive partner. Without Checkpoint, CM 
would have been processed in the CJS, potentially continuing the offending cycle and 
neglecting to address the underlying cause of the offending behaviour. CM has not 
offended since the conclusion of her pathway. 


15 

Female Offender Strategy 

Working with non-police prosecutors 
52. The 2015 Perry Review into TV licence evasion recommended that the BBC and 

Government should explore ways to investigate and consider the gender disparity in 
TV licence prosecutions.36 We have been working closely with the Department for 
Digital, Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) and the BBC on their work to consider this 
issue. In response to a key recommendation to the review around flexibility of 
payment, legislation was introduced on 9 March 2018 which allows TV Licensing to 
test a new payment plan. The Simple Payment Plan is for those who find it most 
difficult to pay the licence fee and the plan offers flexibility if payments are missed. 
The BBC have also conducted research into the reasons for the gender disparity and 
published their findings in December. We will continue to monitor their response 

Promoting Retail-based Diversion 
53. Given the prevalence of shop theft offences amongst women, retail-based diversion 

schemes offer an important opportunity to divert women from prosecution and 
address the needs that lead to their offending. A ‘women’s retail triage’ pilot in Bury is 
diverting women caught shoplifting to their local women’s centre or women’s service 
rather than to the CJS. We will be looking to gather further data from this pilot, and to 
promote its approach in other areas. 

Bury Retail Diversion Scheme Case Study 
April was referred to the Women of Worth centre via the Bury retail diversion scheme, in 
place of prosecution. A mother of one and a mature Student, April had a history of an 
eating disorder, and suffered with chronic pain, panic attacks and low self-esteem. She 
was identified as having both mental and physical health needs, and also issues relating 
to time management and offending. 

As part of the support April received at the women’s centre, April had five 1-2-1 sessions 
in which she explored how her mental health was affecting her behaviour, and the triggers 
for her offending, and learnt how to modify her negative actions. She was also supported 
to develop techniques to help manage panic attacks, to address her eating disorder, and 
to improve her time management. As a result, April had better self-awareness, including 
understanding why she offended. She gained more self-control, was able to manage her 
panic attacks and had higher self-esteem. April re-engaged with appropriate services and 
successfully completed her college course & qualification. 


16 

Female Offender Strategy 

Chapter Two: Community Solutions 

Chapter Summary 

54. Custody is intended as a last resort, for the protection of the public and the 
punishment and rehabilitation of the offender. However, short sentences offer limited 
public protection, and fail to offer time for meaningful rehabilitative activity. In some 
cases, short sentences can aggravate vulnerabilities and raise the risk of reoffending. 
Going into custody often causes huge disruption to the lives of offenders and their 
families, causing crises in employment, housing and contact with dependents. 

55. This issue disproportionately affects women: 77% of women sentenced to custody in 
2017 were given sentences of under 12 months, compared with 62% of men.37 
Furthermore, there is a considerable population of women sentenced to custody for 
non-violent low-level but persistent offences, who have only a low or medium public 
protection risk. In 2017, almost half (47%) of women sentenced to a short custodial 
sentence had committed shop theft.38 The majority (94%) of women in custody 
serving a short sentence of under 12 months are a low or medium public protection 
risk.39 

56. By contrast, good community management of offenders can in many cases be far 
more effective and produce better reoffending outcomes.40 Community orders also 
support offenders to engage in employment and secure stable accommodation, both 
of which are factors in reducing reoffending. Disruption to families is significantly less 
and women can be more effectively maintained within their community as productive 
citizens at less cost to Government and greater benefit to themselves and society. 

57. We would like to see fewer female offenders sent to custody for short periods. We will 
be looking at what more we can do to emphasise that short custodial sentences 
should be viewed as a last resort. We want to ensure that the public and judiciary 
have confidence in non-custodial sentences - such as effective community orders – 
which directly tackle the causes of reoffending, including alcohol or drug abuse and 
factors that influence how women engage and respond to interventions, such as 
mental health. We will aim to reduce female prison places and provide more options 
in the community for women that address the causes of offending and support more 
effective rehabilitation. 

58. To address the prevalence of short custodial sentences, we are putting in place a 
number of measures to foster an environment that encourages the use of community 
sentences instead of custodial ones where appropriate. 


17 

Female Offender Strategy 

We will support a greater proportion of women to serve their sentence in the 
community successfully and reduce the numbers serving short custodial 
sentences by: 
Ensuring that courts have better and more comprehensive information about female 
offenders to inform sentencing decisions by: 

• Engaging with courts 

• Improving Pre-Sentence Reports 

Developing more options for managing women in the community by: 

• Piloting Residential Women’s Centres  

• Improving Accommodation Provision 

• Increasing use of Community Sentence Treatment Requirements 

• Piloting Electronic Monitoring, including new technologies such as location monitoring 

Providing more support for those offenders managed in the community by: 

• Developing a more gender-informed probation service 


 

The Challenge 

59. Given the low and medium risk profile of the majority of female prisoners serving 
short sentences, it may be more appropriate, in many cases, to manage them in the 
community rather than in custody.41 However, we know most women sentenced to 
immediate custody are given short custodial sentences, with over half sentenced to 
three months or less.42 On 31 March 2018, 15% of women in prison were held on 
remand.43 This can be due to a lack of available appropriate accommodation for 
them, rather than because their risk profile or offence type necessitates it. For 
example, almost 9 in 10 women held on remand are low or medium risk of serious 
harm.44 

60. There has been a fall in the use of community orders for women and men.45 This may 
be correlated with an observed increase in Suspended Sentence Orders, which put 
women at risk of recall to custody if they breach. However, recently published 
evidence also demonstrates that, among similar offenders, court orders (which 
includes Suspended Sentence Orders) can reduce reoffending compared to short 
custodial sentences.46 

61. Community orders with treatment requirements attached are in some cases a better 
option for offenders who might otherwise serve a custodial sentence. For dependent 
drug and alcohol users and offenders with mental health problems these orders can 
address the vulnerabilities which are a factor in their offending or how they engage 
and respond to interventions. The proportion of offenders with such vulnerabilities is 
substantial, but in 2017, fewer than 1% of all offenders starting a court order had a 
Mental Health Treatment Requirement, 4% had an Alcohol Treatment Requirement, 
7% had a Drug Treatment Requirement and fewer than 1% received a residential 
requirement.47  


18 

Female Offender Strategy 

62. Sentencing is a matter for the courts, and the severity of sentencing decisions should 
not be impacted by the consideration of the gender of the offender, but should 
instead take into account their particular circumstances. Yet HMI Probation’s 2016 
thematic review of community provision for women who offend found that pre-
sentence reports did not differentiate the needs of women from those of men.48 

63. Community provision of the services that would support women are inconsistent, 
particularly around homelessness, which is both a factor in offending behaviour and a 
significant need for those on release from custody. Controlling for other factors, 
prisoners who were rough sleeping or in temporary accommodation prior to custody 
had higher odds of being reconvicted within one year of release.49 Homelessness is a 
significant problem for the female prisoner population: from April to December 2017, 
39% of women allocated to Community Rehabilitation Companies (CRCs) and the 
National Probation Service (NPS) were released into unsettled accommodation, with 
18% released homeless.50,  

64. For those who are being managed in the community under supervision post-release, 
lack of access to supportive community services can contribute to recall to custody. 
In an internal review of recall case files, lack of safe accommodation and substance 
misuse were found to be driving the two most common reasons for recall to prison: 
failure to keep in touch and non-compliance.  

65. HMI Probation’s 2016 thematic inspection identified a lack of focus on outcomes for 
women both strategically and operationally.51 Across probation services, including 
Community Rehabilitation Companies (CRCs) and the National Probation Service 
(NPS), they found an inconsistent approach to recognising and addressing the 
gender-specific needs of women who have offended. The review also found fewer 
than one in four responsible officers had received training and guidance in relation to 
female-specific case management, and the national offer on this today is very limited.  

Ensuring that courts have better and more comprehensive information about 
female offenders to inform sentencing decisions 

66. Courts need to have comprehensive information to impose sentences that will 
effectively punish and rehabilitate offenders. Pre-sentence reports (PSRs) that 
capture the complexity of an offender’s circumstances and demonstrate how 
offenders can be supported to comply with a community order, can support courts to 
keep offenders in the community rather than send them to custody.   

67. We want all PSRs, whether on the day oral reports or written reports, to include 
details of an offender’s circumstances, such as any dependents, and mental health or 
domestic abuse issues. They should also set out locally available gender-informed 
community sentencing options, so that courts are appraised of the full range of 
options for sentencing an offender and options to divert women from custody.  

Engaging with courts 
68. Sentencing is a matter for the courts, and any shift in emphasis from custody to 

community sentences must be led by the judiciary. The MoJ will work with judges to 
develop our understanding of what more might be done to ensure that the particular 
risks and needs of female offenders are addressed effectively in the court, and to 


19 

Female Offender Strategy 

ensure that courts receive all necessary information to inform the sentencing process. 
Building on previous work with Crown Court judges, we will interview district judges 
and magistrates in the Magistrates’ Court, where the majority of female offenders are 
sentenced, to better understand how we can further support them when sentencing 
women.  

Improving Pre-Sentence Reports 
69. As part of work already underway to improve the quality of information the court 

receives when sentencing, we have delivered nationally the Effective Proposal Tool 
which captures the range of interventions available, including those designed 
specifically for women, to provide staff developing PSRs with the sentence options for 
which an offender is suitable and eligible. The tool contains comprehensive 
information on the local provision of community sentencing and treatment options, 
which will support courts to understand what community interventions are available. It 
will also assist in identifying good practice in community interventions for women and 
gaps in local services. 

70. Many women find disclosing details about their circumstances to criminal justice 
system (CJS) staff very difficult. They often fear the negative consequences of any 
admissions of mental health or substance misuse problems, particularly if they have 
dependents or are in an abusive relationship. Assessment of women’s needs for 
PSRs must take account of the difficulties they face and support women to disclose. 
Working with Liaison & Diversion (L&D) services, we will ensure that, where consent 
is given, relevant information from these assessments is shared with relevant criminal 
justice partners so that information can be used to inform decisions on charging and 
sentencing.  

71. To improve our own assessment processes, we have developed a new PSR 
interview checklist (built upon the Republic of Ireland gender-informed tool and the 
NPS North East divisional pilot) for probation court staff, which aims to ensure that 
the right questions are asked so that good assessments are made. The checklist will 
be rolled out nationally from Summer 2018 starting with pilots in the NPS North West 
division and South East and East divisions. Alongside this, a report template and a 
training package for all PSR writers will ensure that we have a workforce that can 
assess and respond to the specific needs of female offenders. Given the negative 
impacts on families of imprisoned mothers and the heightened risk of 
intergenerational offending, we have also supported the roll out of the, ‘Safeguarding 
Children When Sentencing Mothers’ training material developed by Dr Shona 
Minson. This training raises awareness of the diverse implications of maternal 
imprisonment for children. 

Developing more options for managing women in the community 

72. Supporting women in the community enables them to maintain their ties with their 
families and supports them to stay in employment and stable housing. This helps 
reduce both reoffending and demand on services.    

73. To ensure fewer women go into custody, we must improve the range and robustness 
of the options for managing women in the community successfully. This will give 


20 

Female Offender Strategy 

courts greater flexibility to respond to the specific factors that can contribute to their 
offending behaviour.  

Piloting Residential Women’s Centres 
74. We know that many women at risk of, or having served, short custodial sentences, 

have particularly complex needs and prolific offending histories compared to women 
supervised in the community.52,53 Without support, many of those given a community 
order or under supervision on release will breach and be recalled to custody. Stable 
accommodation is a critical need for this cohort to reduce this risk and support them 
to gain employment or training, but this is often not available to them. From April to 
December 2017, 39% of women allocated to CRCs and the NPS were released into 
unsettled accommodation (35% of men).54 We want to provide more residential 
support options in the community that offer the accommodation and holistic support 
that will allow these women to successfully complete community orders as a 
diversion from custody and prevent them from being recalled to custody. This should 
help reduce their reoffending in the long term and could be linked to existing women’s 
community service provision such as women’s centres.  

75. Although there are some promising small-scale models already in place for female 
offenders which are centred upon residential-based support such as Willowdene 
Farm, Anawim, Threshold Housing First and Scotland’s 218 Centre, we need to 
understand better the effectiveness of these types of models.  

76. We are committing to work with partners to develop a ‘residential women’s centres’ 
pilot in at least five sites across England and Wales. The aim of the pilot will be to 
develop a robust evidence base about what could be effective, sustainable and 
scalable models for improving outcomes for female offenders and reducing the 
numbers and frequency of women entering and re-entering custody on short 
custodial sentences. 

77. We want the residential women’s centre models we test to offer an intensive 
residential support package in the community for women at risk of, or having served, 
short custodial sentences, supporting them to address the underlying causes of their 
offending behaviour. We want them to identify, encourage and coordinate service 
users to access services that will address their offending behaviour, such as 
substance misuse, and allow them to establish a positive lifestyle in the community. 

78. We will take a consultative approach for designing and delivering the pilot sites, 
engaging with potential providers, partners, including CRCs, and investors, both 
nationally and locally, to ensure that the models taken forward are sustainable, 
credible and appropriate for the local context of each site. Shortly after the publication 
of this strategy, we will commence a process of engagement to develop the detail on 
how the pilots could be designed and delivered. 

Improving Accommodation Provision 
79. There are a number of other accommodation options for women in the community 

who are on supervision after release, being managed in the community or at risk of 
offending. We will be working with our providers and other Government departments 
to ensure these options are responsive to the specific needs of female offenders, and 


21 

Female Offender Strategy 

are offering them the best chance to rehabilitate themselves and remain in the 
community. 

80. The Bail Accommodation Support Service (BASS) is one such Government contract 
that provides accommodation to those on bail, released on Home Detention Curfew 
(HDC) and, in a very few cases, when released at the end of a custodial sentence. 
BASS allows more of those who are eligible to be bailed or released on HDC, 
reducing loss of liberty and its negative impacts on family life, employment and 
housing. A new BASS contract commenced on 18 June 2018. The service 
specification has been expanded to provide access to prisoners released on licence 
without accommodation, including women, when demand from Bail and HDC is lower 
than current volumes. The service has around 17% of its property designated for 
female offenders and can respond to additional demand. 

81. We want to provide a closer integration of BASS with established women’s centres. 
A model for this is currently being piloted in Greater Manchester where women 
placed in BASS properties will benefit from high-quality holistic support provided by 
the Women’s Support Alliance. The pilot, which started in March 2018, is due to last 
for 12 months with consideration for potential expansion across further sites within 
Greater Manchester and other national locations. 

82. Approved Premises (AP) are another valuable resource to support female offenders 
on release. APs are available to provide enhanced levels of protection to the public 
and reduce the likelihood of further offending of high-risk offenders (e.g. serious 
violent and/or sexual offenders) released on licence. We are conducting a review into 
the AP capacity for women to ensure there is provision for women where it is needed. 
We are seeking to identify suitable AP provision for women in London and Wales, 
where we have recognised that need is pressing.  

Increasing use of Community Sentence Treatment Requirements 
83. There are three Community Sentence Treatment Requirements (CSTRs) currently 

available to the courts – Mental Health Treatment Requirements, Drug Rehabilitation 
Requirements and Alcohol Treatment Requirements – but their use is low.55 This is 
despite the high prevalence of mental health, drug and alcohol issues amongst the 
female offender cohort. Of those with an assessment, 22% of women supervised 
under a court order have a mental health issue, 29% an alcohol misuse issue and 
32% a substance misuse issue.56 

84. For some of these women, a CSTR may produce better outcomes than a custodial 
sentence. Recently published MoJ research suggests that sentences including 
mental health treatment, where mental health issues are identified, are associated 
with significant reductions in reoffending compared with similar cases without such 
treatment.57 The reoffending rate was around 3.5 percentage points lower over a 
one-year follow up period. MoJ and Public Health England (PHE) linked data showed 
that among those who committed an offence in the two years prior to engaging with 
community-based substance misuse treatment, there was a 33% reduction in the 
number of offences committed in the following two years, and 44% did not go on to 
reoffend in the subsequent two years. This was especially striking for those engaging 
in alcohol treatment only, with 59% of these not reoffending in the two years after 
treatment, while for opiate treatment this figure was 31%.58 


22 

Female Offender Strategy 

85. The MoJ is working with the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC), NHS 
England and PHE on a protocol to increase the use of CSTRs in England. This is 
currently being tested across five sites, one of which began as a women-only site 
operating out of a women’s centre in Northampton. We will use the findings from the 
evaluation of this programme later in 2018 to explore the potential for further national 
roll-out, and to inform further work on gender-informed approaches for community 
sentences with treatment requirements. 

Community Sentence Treatment Requirement Case Study 
Julie is a woman in her late 20’s with long standing substance misuse and mental health 
problems and a history of abuse. She has recently been sentenced in one of the 
Community Sentence Treatment Requirement Protocol areas to two of the three 
Treatment Requirements – a Mental Health Treatment Requirements and a Drug 
Rehabilitation Requirement. 

Julie was taken into care before she was 10 years old due to parental neglect, and 
physical and sexual abuse. On leaving care, Julie quickly lost her accommodation and 
came into contact with the CJS for possession of class A drugs. Julie’s offending 
continued, and she served two custodial sentences and a number of community orders. In 
her mid-twenties, Julie had a child who was taken into care. Julie found this very difficult 
to cope with, and was diagnosed with emotionally unstable personality disorder, as well as 
suffering a series of self-harm incidents and suicide attempts. 

Shortly after, she was arrested and charged with possession of a small quantity of a 
controlled drug along with shop theft. At court, Julie was assessed as being eligible for a 
Mental Health Treatment Requirement, although she was at high risk of receiving a 
custodial sentence. Julie pleaded guilty and was recommended for a 6-month Mental 
Health Treatment Requirement and a Drug Rehabilitation Requirement. Julie also 
received 10 Rehabilitative Activity Requirement days to support her accessing finance 
services, housing and other support. 

The Community Order was sequenced so that her drug issues were addressed first. She 
successfully completed this part of the order and was then able to engage with the mental 
health treatment. Julie received weekly treatment, focusing on her experiences of trauma, 
and how this contributed to her offending behaviour. She was supported to understand 
her earlier diagnosis and develop coping strategies to intervene in the distressing 
emotions that caused her to abuse substances and offend. Julie successfully completed 
the order, and is currently being supported by her local women’s centre to complete a 
course at college. 

Piloting Electronic Monitoring, including new technologies such as location 
monitoring  
86. Electronic Monitoring (EM) has the potential to provide greater support for women in 

the community. Evidence suggests that electronic monitoring is most likely to improve 
outcomes when used in conjunction with interventions that contain rehabilitative 
components.59 Whilst EM is already an option for the courts, and is mostly used to 
monitor curfews, we believe where used more creatively it could further support 
offenders’ rehabilitation and, where appropriate, divert women away from custody, 
including remand. There are a number of pilots looking at the use of different EM 


23 

Female Offender Strategy 

technologies.  We will take learning on how appropriate or effective these can be for 
female offenders, including as an alternative to custody 

87. In particular, location monitoring using GPS tags could provide new and innovative 
ways to manage women in future. The MoJ recently piloted the use of GPS and an 
evaluation, due to be published this summer, will inform how location monitoring can 
be used to manage defendants and offenders in the community more effectively, both 
before and after conviction. The Mayor’s Office for Police (MOPAC) is leading the 
way on these measures, and we are working with them to test the use of mandatory 
GPS tagging for prolific offenders through the Gripping the Offender (GtO) pilot. This 
is the first time mandatory use has been piloted.  

88. We are also piloting the use of alcohol monitoring tags to evaluate whether a 
continuous period of sobriety has any effect on rehabilitation and reducing the risk of 
reoffending. As problematic drinking is a risk factor more strongly associated with 
reoffending for women than for men, there is clear scope for interventions that 
address alcohol misuse to be particularly suitable and beneficial for this cohort.60 The 
findings from these pilots will be available from the end of 2018 onwards. We will 
continue to work closely with the Home Office and the Department of Health and 
Social Care (DHSC) in exploring and delivering suitable criminal justice options to 
reduce harmful drinking and reoffending as part of the Government’s new alcohol 
strategy. 

Providing more support for those offenders managed in the community 

89. Provision of adequate services in the community and a gender-informed probation 
service are vital to supporting women to stay in the community either instead of 
custody or after release. 

Developing a more gender-informed probation service 
90. We will continue to consider improvements we can make to the probation services 

and the support they provide to female offenders, including building stronger links 
with the third sector women’s centres. A central part of this will be work to improve 
the delivery of Through the Gate (TTG) services. We are discussing with CRCs how 
they can do more to help offenders overcome barriers to resettlement, including 
developing a tiered approach to services based on need. Given that many female 
offenders in custody have complex needs, this new approach should particularly 
benefit female offenders.  

91. Building on HMI Probation’s findings that service provision for women was better in 
areas where there was dedicated leadership for women’s offending, NPS will appoint 
(for an initial one-year pilot) a dedicated senior probation officer into this role in each 
NPS region.61 This person will be a dedicated women’s champion, responsible for 
monitoring and driving up performance, supporting training, problem-solving service 
issues and implementing gender-informed practices. They will be in post from 
September 2018. All CRCs have an identified women’s strategic lead and we will 
encourage them to focus on similar issues. 

92. We will build upon the work that we have already commenced in providing gender-
informed guidance to probation practitioners. In addition to last year’s publication of 
Working with Women Offenders, a guidance document outlining how probation 


24 

Female Offender Strategy 

practitioners working with women in the CJS can deliver services to them in a way 
that captures and reflects best practice, we are reviewing the overarching operational 
instruction covering the management of women offenders. We will also look to 
collaborate with our custodial workforce on gender- and trauma-informed training, 
so that we can create a CJS-wide approach to female offenders that acknowledges 
their vulnerabilities and addresses their needs. 

93. To professionalise the probation workforce further, we intend to create a professional 
register thereby enhancing assessment and offender management of female 
offenders.  

94. We will provide one training package, which replaces existing and out of date 
material, for prison staff and NPS staff. We want to ensure all staff across the 
probation system have access to the most up-to-date training, that is why we will offer 
this training to CRCs also. The training will be aimed at assessing and managing 
women with a range of complex needs, which will equip staff to work effectively with 
women in a trauma informed way thereby maximising their compliance with their 
Community Orders and licences and reducing the risk of reoffending. 

95. We want to support offenders to complete the requirements imposed on them to 
reduce unnecessary recall. To do this, we will equip our probation staff with better 
information so they can make more informed decisions about the common causes of 
recall. For example, childcare issues are often a barrier to complying with 
requirements; we will be updating instructions to probation staff on Offender 
Childcare so they can support female offenders to complete the requirements 
imposed upon them where childcare issues were previously a barrier. 

96. We are aware that there are unique challenges for Black, Asian, and minority ethnic 
(BAME) and foreign national female offenders in the CJS, both in custody and the 
community. This is why we will be looking closely at what further action can be taken 
to identify and address needs specific to these groups. We will be working closely 
with voluntary sector and other organisations who work with BAME and foreign 
national female offenders to improve their capacity to share best practice and form 
networks through facilitated events and more structured communication of policy 
developments. Her Majesty’s Prison and Probation Service (HMPPS) is already 
committed to working with BAME oriented organisations on implementing the Lammy 
Review’s recommendation 31 to overcome barriers to subcontracting between CRCs 
and BAME communities to help share good practice. We will provide more culturally-
informed training for staff in offender management and rehabilitation. This will 
increase staff awareness of the impacts of culture, faith and sustaining family 
relationships for women in the criminal justice system. 


25 

Female Offender Strategy 

Chapter Three: Better Custody 

Chapter Summary 

97. Although we want to reduce the female prison population, we recognise that diverting 
women who might otherwise be serving short custodial sentences to the community 
will not necessarily equate to significant reductions in the female prison population in 
the short term. Whilst a substantial proportion of women that go to prison serve short-
term sentences, women on longer sentences make up the majority of the prison 
population at any given time.62 Moreover, there will remain some women who, for 
reasons of public protection or due to the severity of their offending, must be in 
custody for a period of time. Whilst our aim is to reduce female prison places, we 
acknowledge that this will be a long-term project. 

98. Almost all of the women sentenced to custody will one day be released into the 
community. Reforming and rehabilitating these offenders must be a priority if we are 
to reduce crime, reduce reoffending and protect victims. Yet outcomes for female 
offenders in custody are poor and can be worse than for men. Women suffer higher 
rates of self-harm and a greater proportion of women in prison have experienced 
domestic abuse and have mental health problems than men.  On release a smaller 
proportion have settled accommodation to support their transition back into the 
community.63, 64 The impact on children and families of the incarceration or 
criminalisation of parents is also significant. Having a convicted parent is a risk factor 
for offending – and some studies have found that this risk appears to be greater when 
the parent is imprisoned.65 Given the higher proportion of women whose dependent 
children live with them prior to imprisonment, incarceration of women may have a 
disproportionate impact on intergenerational reoffending.66 There is some evidence 
that while gender-neutral interventions have sometimes been effective, it is likely that 
gender-informed approaches will be more successful.67 If we are to achieve equal 
outcomes for women, we should adopt a gender-informed approach and an adapted 
environment, that meets their gender-specific needs. 

99. We will create a custodial environment that enables rehabilitation and delivers better 
outcomes, and which supports women on release to break the cycle of reoffending 
and successfully reintegrate themselves into society. 

We will deliver better custody by: 
Adapting the custodial environment to meet the needs of female offenders by: 

• Focusing on better links with children and families 

• Improving Safety 

• Becoming Trauma-Informed 

• Improving Health & Wellbeing 

Offering comprehensive rehabilitative support by: 

• Empowering the Prison Workforce 

• Developing Education & Employment 


26 

Female Offender Strategy 

The Challenge: 

100. Our evidence shows that women do not respond well to the custodial environment. 
We know that women are more than twice as likely to report needing help for mental 
health problems than male prisoners (49% compared with 18% of male prisoners). 
They are twice as likely as male prisoners to suffer from anxiety and depression (49% 
compared with 23%) and more likely to report symptoms indicative of psychosis (25% 
compared with 15%).68 

101. The purpose of prisons is both to protect the public and support offenders to reform 
so that they do not reoffend. Women – like all other prisoners – should expect to be 
safe throughout their time in custody. This is especially true for those at risk of suicide 
and self-harm, yet the incidence of these issues amongst the female offender 
population remains too high. Though the rate of self-inflicted deaths in women’s 
prisons reduced to one in the 12 months to March 2018, down from 10 in the 
previous 12 months, that is still one too many.69 The rate of self-harm among women 
was 2,093 per 1,000 in 2017, nearly 5 times higher than the rate for men, of 445 per 
1,000.70 

102. Several studies have found that having a parent with a criminal conviction is a strong 
risk factor for offending.71 Some studies have found that this risk factor appears to be 
stronger when the parent is imprisoned as opposed to just having a conviction. 
Research also suggests that children may be more affected by parental imprisonment 
if parents are imprisoned more frequently or for longer periods of time, and if parents 
are held in more punitive conditions. 

103. The 2017 Lord Farmer Review found, in spite of this evidence, that “there is an 
unacceptable inconsistency of respect for the role families can play in boosting 
rehabilitation and assisting in resettlement across the prison estate”.72 Whilst the 
focus of Lord Farmer’s Review is the role of family in preventing reoffending and 
intergenerational crime for male prisoners, its findings have great saliency for female 
offenders and their families. Findings from MoJ’s post custody resettlement surveys 
found that far more female prisoners report living with their children before going into 
custody than male prisoners; around 60% of women compared with about 45% of 
men in prison who have children.73  

104. Over half of women (56.1%) released from custody between April to June 2016, 
reoffend within a year.74 A contributing factor may be the poor outcomes on release 
for female offenders around housing and employment. From April to December 2017, 
39% of women allocated to Community Rehabilitation Companies (CRCs) and the 
National Probation Service (NPS) were released into unsettled accommodation, with 
18% released homeless.75 Just under two thirds of women released from prison in 
2010/11 were claiming out-of-work benefits one month after release.76 

Adapting the custodial environment to meet the needs of female offenders 

105. The wider prison reform agenda has produced a comprehensive programme of work 
to improve conditions in custody across the prison estate, much of which will benefit 
female offenders. However, this cohort also requires interventions that respond to 
their particular needs, in order to secure the same outcomes for them as those in the 
male estate.  


27 

Female Offender Strategy 

106. The necessity for tailored approaches is even more acute for those with protected 
characteristics, such as Black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) women, or women 
with experience of trauma.77 Given the overrepresentation of BAME women in the 
criminal justice system (CJS) and the proportion of female offenders with experience 
of domestic abuse, our workforce, environment and interventions must become more 
alive to their experiences and responsive to their individual needs. 

Focusing on better links with children and families 
107. Last year the MoJ launched the report from the 2017 Lord Farmer Review on the 

importance of strengthening male prisoners' family ties to prevent reoffending and 
reduce intergenerational crime. We have asked Lord Farmer to undertake a further 
piece of work to review his recommendations through the lens of the needs of female 
offenders, given that many women in prison are primary carers of their children. The 
original Review focused exclusively on men serving custodial sentences.  However, 
this new work will look more widely at how to strengthen family ties, especially with 
their children, for women serving sentences in the community and after they have 
been released, as well as for those women in custody. Lord Farmer will publish the 
findings of this by the end of 2018. 

108. The 2017 Lord Farmer Review recommended that ‘Virtual visits… should be available 
for the small percentage of families or individual family members who cannot visit 
frequently or at all’.78 We are currently looking at Internet Based Video Systems 
(platforms similar to Skype) across both the men’s and women’s estates, allowing for 
family contact individuals would otherwise be unable to have.  

109. From January 2018, a centralised visits booking system was rolled out across the 
Women’s Estate with the aim of providing a better and more consistent service for 
families and women. We are also enabling better communication between families, 
and facilitating family days alongside courses and programmes to promote family 
engagement and parenting. 

110. In responding to the 2017 Lord Farmer Review, we have introduced a requirement for 
all Prison Governors from April 2018 to produce local strategies, which will set out 
how they will support prisoners to improve the level of engagement with their friends 
and families. We will publish a new Family Policy Framework in Autumn of 2018, 
providing support to Governors for meeting new requirements and standardising the 
quality of services provided across all prisons, helping to strengthen relationships 
between prisoners, their family and friends. Her Majesty’s Inspector of Prisons 
(HMIP) has also appointed a lead inspector for Children and Families and included 
this within its schedule of prison expectations. 

111. For female offenders who are mothers to very young children and need to be in 
custody, it is often in the interest of the child to have them with them during the 
important period of bonding. Mother and Baby Units (MBUs) enable women to stay 
with their babies and young children up until the age of 18 months and provide 
parenting support. The best interests and safety of children on the unit are the 
primary consideration. To ensure that the existing provision responds to need and 
offers the best support to women and their children, we will be reviewing the 
operation of MBUs and our management of complex cases.  


28 

Female Offender Strategy 

Improving Safety 
112. Every death in custody is a tragedy, and we will do our utmost to prevent them and 

keep prisoners safe. 2016 saw a particularly high number of self-inflicted deaths, and 
we have commenced a review to understand why this happened and how we might 
prevent it in future. The Independent Advisory Panel (IAP) on Deaths in Custody 
undertook a rapid information gathering exercise on how best to prevent suicide and 
self-harm and keep women safe in custody. This review has submitted evidence and 
recommendations to Ministers, which we are implementing alongside this strategy.79 
The Prison and Probation Ombudsman (PPO) also issued a bulletin of 
recommendations which drew on a review of several of its investigations between 
2013 and 2016, most of which echoed those of the IAP. We are focusing on mental 
health and drugs misuse service provision and the importance of the exchange of 
information about risk and care planning. We continue to address their 
recommendations, in partnership with Departments across Whitehall and 
representatives from both the academic and voluntary sectors.  

113. Alongside the recommendations of the PPO review, we are implementing several 
other initiatives in the custodial estate to better protect and support offenders. The 
“Challenge, Support and Intervention Plan” (CSIP) has been rolled out across all 
prisons as a new management tool to help staff establish clear principles for risk 
management and risk reduction. CSIP emphasises the importance of supporting and 
developing change in individuals and ensures individualised support plans around the 
offender’s particular circumstances. We are working to ensure that CSIP is 
implemented in a responsive way for women in custody by conducting a literature 
review on how such interventions can be most effective for women. 

114. Recognising that there are specific safety needs in the Women’s Estate, a dedicated 
Group Safety Lead has been appointed. They will help Governors to address the 
particular challenges to safety in their establishments, identifying effective practice 
that is bespoke to women and sharing it across the Women’s Estate.  

115. We are improving prison staff training so that staff are better supported to manage 
vulnerable women in custody. We have introduced female specific training around the 
Assessment, Care in Custody and Teamwork (ACCT) case management system to 
ensure that staff better understand the behaviour and needs of vulnerable women. 
We have rolled-out a revised and improved Introduction to suicide and self-harm 
prevention training for all prison staff, which over 7000 staff had completed in full by 
March 2018.  

116. Improvements to safety in custody must also take into account the complex needs of 
the most high-risk women. The Centralised Case Supervision System (CCSS) has 
been in place since September 2015 to enable a needs-led approach to the 
supervision of such women, whilst also making women’s prisons safer for other 
prisoners and staff. Women assessed as ‘Restricted Status’ are automatically 
referred to the CCSS and those who present with complex needs are referred by 
individual establishments. Each case is then assessed by the Case Referral and 
Review Board (CRRB), which brings together staff responsible for operational issues, 
mental health case work, psychology and high security. The Board works 
collaboratively to provide support to prisons managing women with complex needs 
and may offer alternatives to current arrangements and suggest different routes for 
progression, if that seems appropriate. The aim of the additional support is to ensure 


29 

Female Offender Strategy 

that establishments are doing all that is possible to stabilise the individual and 
develop an appropriate and timely re-integration plan.  

Creating a trauma-informed environment to tackle self-harm case study 
Prisons and prison staff need to understand the impact of histories of trauma in their 
population. One such case of where this has worked well is at HMP Styal, where a 
woman, Sally, is currently serving a four year or more sentence. Sally had a history of 
childhood sexual abuse, but did not disclose this until she worked with staff at HMP Styal. 
Whilst in custody, Sally was highly distressed and displayed very high levels of self-harm. 
Staff at Styal engaged with Sally to give her more control over her own wellbeing. Sally 
was supported to cook a meal for her family when they visited her in prison. She also 
experienced high levels of anxiety when locked in her cell on the wing at lunch times, so 
Sally was supported to spend lunch times on the house block of her choice, which she 
was eventually moved into. Sally’s self-harm incidents have reduced in number from 
almost 70 to fewer than 10 in six months.  

Becoming Trauma-Informed 
117. We are committed to developing a trauma-informed approach to working with 

women, given that a high proportion of them will have experienced some degree of 
trauma during their lives and its links with offending behaviour. We are grateful to the 
generosity of Lady Edwina Grosvenor and her charity, One Small Thing, which 
champions trauma-informed practice with criminalised women.  This work has been 
done in partnership with Dr Stephanie Covington, an American clinician and author, 
who specialises in the development and implementation of gender-responsive and 
trauma-informed services. 

118. One Small Thing delivers Becoming Trauma-Informed (BTI) training, which provides 
a greater understanding of the behaviours that often occur from a history of trauma, 
allowing for the development of new skills for staff when responding to these 
behaviours. The aim of the training is to reduce conflict and make the workplace safer 
for staff. 

119. The charity has run free training events on trauma-informed practice since 
September 2015 for those working in prisons and women’s community service 
providers. This has included a series of training workshops, some led by Dr 
Stephanie Covington, and delivered to staff across the women’s custodial estate as 
well as a train the trainer course in June 2017 that included National Probation 
Service (NPS) colleagues. Training now covers all senior management teams in the 
women’s custodial estate, with prisons continuing to embed this approach and train 
staff across all grades. 

120. Healing Trauma is the next important phase, where women prisoners are being 
trained to conduct peer led training themselves. The Healing Trauma course consists 
of six sessions which help women to cope with trauma. This peer led training has 
been established over the majority of the female estate. The leading establishment is 
HMP Send with other establishments following on. 


30 

Female Offender Strategy 

Becoming Trauma Informed case study, HMP Send  
HMP Send has worked alongside the charity One Small Thing to train all operational and 
non-operational staff in Becoming Trauma Informed (BTI). HMP Send also offer the 
Healing Trauma intervention. Before the Healing trauma intervention started in 2017 there 
was no single gender-informed intervention that helped enable the women to manage the 
impact of past trauma. This would often result in the women attempting to manage their 
trauma by acting out violence upon themselves or upon others as a way to disassociate or 
‘manage’ their trauma. HMP Send was the first setting in the female estate to run this 
successful programme, and has now been followed in the rest of the Women’s Estate.  

Since running the intervention at HMP Send, the prison has been able to assist 64 women 
and has an ever growing waiting list of 43 women.  This has been achieved by word of 
mouth and promotion by the women who have completed the course and found it 
beneficial to them.  

How BTI has supported one of the prisoners at HMP Send: 
Miss X is a foreign national female offender who is currently serving a custodial sentence 
of more than four years. She has no previous convictions recorded from her time in the 
UK and she informed HMP Send that she has no previous convictions from abroad. 

At the time of the intervention, Miss X informed staff that she did not know why she had 
been placed on the intervention and was not willing to take part as she felt she had 
suffered no trauma in her life. Staff spoke briefly with her about her journey through the 
legal system into custody and how that alone was a traumatic experience. Subsequently 
Miss X agreed to attend the sessions but stated that she would not actively participate.  

By the end of session two, Miss X was very emotional and she spoke openly about the 
domestic abuse she had suffered, resulting in her engagement with crime. Miss X’s 
offender supervisor has stated that she believes the Healing Trauma intervention has 
positively supported the offender and reduced her risk in terms of future relationships.  
Staff believe that it has encouraged Miss X to recognise the trauma that she has been 
through in her life and enabled her to identify ways of coping with this. 

Miss X has now been relocated on the resettlement unit  at HMP Send and has actively 
sought support from staff regarding her deportation. Before her transfer to HMP Send, 
Miss X had been placed on Assessment, Care in Custody and Teamwork (ACCT) 
monitoring for support at difficult times. Since completing the Healing Trauma intervention 
Miss X has displayed no behaviour that would lead staff to believe that she is a risk of 
harm to herself or others.  

Improving Health & Wellbeing  
121. Recommendations from self-inflicted death in custody reviews show unmet mental 

health, drug and alcohol treatment needs in prison which increase the vulnerability of 
women in custody. We are working with NHS England and Public Health England to 
set out clear standards which prison health services should meet. We are joining up 
services in order to tackle the comorbidity of mental health and substance misuse 
issues. We are also undertaking a review of the interventions that are available 
across the Women’s Estate, to ensure we are delivering the most effective treatment 
options for this cohort, and responding to the full spectrum of their needs. 


31 

Female Offender Strategy 

122. Many women find the process of being transported from prison to court for a short 
hearing highly stressful. We are working with Her Majesty’s Prison and Probation 
Service (HMPPS), Her Majesty’s Courts and Tribunals Service (HMCTS), and the 
Judiciary to support the use of video links more often and more reliably across the 
female estate. These will reduce the requirement for defendants to travel for short 
hearings and offer greater flexibility and efficiency. 

123. The women offender personality disorder pathway is an integrated network of 
services for women offenders managed by the NPS (in custody and the community) 
with a diagnosis of ‘personality disorder.’ The pathway’s aim is to improve public 
protection and mental wellbeing, and address women’s offending behaviour. 
Interventions are psychologically-informed, gender-informed and trauma-informed. 
We have been working with NHS England to promote the delivery of this pathway, 
and services have increased threefold since 2013. We will work with our health 
partners to replicate these holistic care models across prison healthcare in the 
Women’s Estate. 

Options – A Personality Disorder Intervention Service Case Study, HMP Downview 
‘Options’ service is embedded into the Offender Disorder Pathway and has been 
operational in HMP Downview since it re-opened 2016. Previously the service was 
operational in HMP Holloway for over a decade.  

Options is a treatment service, offering modified Dialectical Behaviour Therapy (DBT) to 
female offenders who meet criteria for Borderline and/or Antisocial Personality Disorder. 
Options also provides staff training, as part of the Workforce Development initiative. To 
date, Options has trained over 150 members of staff at HMP Downview, including prison 
and probation officers. 

Options also offers fortnightly formulation sessions. There are collaborative 
psychologically-informed meetings between multi-disciplinary staff whereby complex 
needs of women are considered and recommendations for management and treatment 
are shared and outlined. 

The service also offers a consultation role to all staff working at HMP Downview who 
require advice and support in the management and understanding of the women. 

Testimonials from women at HMP Downview on the Options Programme: 
“I completed the Advanced DBT Options programme earlier this year. It has made a great 
impact on my thinking patterns and mindfulness is now central to my daily life. I’m an over 
tariff IPP [Imprisonment for Public Protection] and as, I believe, a direct result from the tool 
box that DBT and Options has provided me with, I will shortly have a parole hearing for 
release.” 

“I have gone on to become an Options Peer Mentor. A big part of this, is that a team of us 
are writing an offender-led DBT manual for offenders who do the programme so that they 
will be able to relate. As a peer mentor I also assist with the training on the Options 
programme of Prison officers, telling them both how it helped me and how it helps to 
enable them to have a greater insight from a prisoner’s perspective.” 


32 

Female Offender Strategy 

Offering comprehensive rehabilitative support 

124. If we are to rehabilitate female offenders successfully and reduce reoffending, our 
prison workforce must understand the factors that drive women’s offending 
behaviour, and the greater likelihood that gender-informed interventions will be 
effective.80  

125. We must also give female offenders the best possible support whilst they are in 
prison so they can successfully transition back into the community after release. As 
noted in the MoJ’s Education and Employment Strategy, prison can serve as an 
impetus to help set offenders on a path to a better life.  

126. People leaving prison who find employment are between 6 and 9 percentage points 
less likely to reoffend than those who do not, even when a range of other factors are 
considered.81 As well as reducing reoffending, moving ex-offenders off benefits and 
into work reduces the financial burden on taxpayers and the welfare state.82 

Empowering the Prison Workforce 
127. Currently, all women's prisons are required to comply with gender-informed standards 

for working with women prisoners, which are set out in Prison Service Order (PSO) 
4800. We intend to replace PSO 4800 with a Women’s Policy Framework that will 
incorporate guidance on best practice for working with female offenders. This will be 
applicable not only for prison officers but for workforce across the CJS and beyond. 
We are currently developing this Framework in consultation with other Government 
departments and external stakeholders and aim to publish a final version by Autumn 
2018. 

128. The Women’s Estate leadership team in HMPPS is also creating an ethical practice 
reference group which provides a forum for senior leaders in prisons to resolve 
practice issues, and ensure practice guidelines for the Women’s Estate are 
consistent, addressing current issues. 

129. We have designed a new Offender Management in Custody Model tailored for the 
needs of women, which considers complexity alongside risk, and introduces key 
worker time to provide more focused support to individual offenders. 

130. We will further support governor freedom to recruit prison officers to the Women’s 
Estate based on criteria which reflect the particular values and skills needed for a 
gender-informed approach. This may be distinct from the majority need and 
recruitment approach pursued for the male estate. Given the overrepresentation of 
BAME women in prison, it is vital that we provide a workforce that is not only 
conscious of the impact of protected characteristics on the experience of female 
offenders, but that is representative of the women they work with.83 The Lammy 
Review made two recommendations in relation to the prison workforce, citing the 
need for BAME recruitment and leadership targets.84 The Government accepted both 
these recommendations. It has set an objective for 14% of all recruits (across 
HMPPS) being BAME by 2020, and to increase the diversity of the senior leader 
cadre by December 2020.  


33 

Female Offender Strategy 

Developing Education & Employment 
131. As highlighted in The Education and Employment Strategy, published on 25 May 

2018, work can provide a foundation for a different kind of life.85. The strategy 
outlined our plans to reform prison education in order to give governors more 
oversight and control of their education provision. This means that governors in the 
Women’s Estate will be able to decide an education curriculum that meets the 
specific needs of the women prisoners, determine how it is organised and delivered, 
and choose who delivers it.  New contract arrangements will enable governors to 
buy-in a range of specialised services, such as peer support and coaching, to meet 
their prison’s population’s needs. The Halfords Employment Academy at Drake Hall 
is just one example, amongst a number, of a governor having built highly effective 
partnerships to deliver vocational training alongside employers. 

132. In addition, the New Futures Network is being developed to help create partnerships 
between employers, and has empowered governors to improve employment 
opportunities for prisoners on release. The network will place regional employment 
experts into regional prison groups to provide advice to governors and will also 
encourage more businesses to work with prisons. The New Futures Network will 
begin work before the end of 2018. We will ensure that this takes into account the 
specific needs of women. 

133. We are currently undertaking a review of the current rules surrounding release on 
temporary licence (ROTL). ROTL is a vital part of rehabilitation and the goal is to 
improve access to all types of temporary release, where safe to do so including 
seeing more work undertaken whilst in custody, leading to employment upon release.  

134. Before any modifications are made to aspects of temporary release, we will carefully 
consider the impact of any proposed changes on female offenders. We will also 
explore any opportunities for taking a gender-informed approach, in light of 
consultation responses. 


34 

Female Offender Strategy 

Chapter Four: Framework for Implementation 

Chapter Summary 

135. The vision proposed in this strategy requires an approach that is tailored and holistic, 
emphasising early identification, intervention and diversion (where appropriate).  

136. Many services - including those in the criminal justice system (CJS), other statutory 
agencies such as Police & Crime Commissioners (PCCs), and the third sector - are 
involved in addressing the complex needs of the female offender cohort. Measurable 
change for this group will only be achieved through a high degree of cooperation, 
coordination and committed partnership working.  

137. We are committed to providing strong leadership required to maximise the benefit of 
the many existing cross-Government initiatives that can support female offenders. 
We want to give local areas a ‘mandate’ to prioritise them, and to drive forward the 
aims and actions of this strategy. We want local areas to feel empowered to address 
the needs of female offenders in a way that meets local needs and circumstances. 
Given the constrained financial environment in which the Government is currently 
operating, all solutions should be rigorously tested to make the best use of the 
funding available. 

138. We have developed a framework for the implementation of this strategy, to set out 
clearly what can be expected of the MoJ, the Government and the services working 
with women in the CJS. We will also put in place the necessary oversight and 
governance arrangements support the implementation of the strategy. This includes 
reforming the Advisory Board on Female Offenders, continuing to liaise with the 
Criminal Justice Inspectorates and working with other government departments 
through our cross-government Female Offender Leadership Board (see Conclusion).  

Locally-led 
139. We want local areas across England and Wales to feel empowered to design 

approaches tailored for the specific needs of their populations and local 
circumstances. We will continue to support them with evidence of what works. We 
believe that the development of a Whole System Approach (WSA) that offers holistic 
support through joined-up local service provision is key to delivering better outcomes. 
We will do this by: 

• Continuing support for Whole System Approaches   

• Exploring Devolution  

Partnership-focused 
140. We want to ensure a joined-up approach across Government at a national level and 

between services at a local level, including the third sector, to deliver a holistic 
response to women. We will set a clear structure to help partners work together 


35 

Female Offender Strategy 

effectively to address the drivers of offending and the needs of female offenders. We 
will do this by: 

• Developing a National Concordat on Female Offenders 

• Strengthening cross-Government working  

Evidence-based 
141. Working with local areas and providers, we will continue to develop the evidence 

base to understand better what works. Interventions will be tested for sustainability, 
scalability and to ensure the best use of the available funding. We will do this by: 

• Sharing and supporting further data & evidence 

The Framework: 

Locally-led 
142. We want to see a higher proportion of female offenders and at-risk women being 

supported in the community. To achieve this, local communities must be equipped to 
respond to the needs of these women. We want local areas across England and 
Wales to feel empowered to design approaches tailored for the specific needs of their 
populations and local circumstances. 

Continuing support for Whole System Approaches 
143. All local areas should have a plan to address the particular circumstances of female 

offenders. We want to see the spread of multi-agency, WSA models, which bring 
together local agencies (criminal justice, statutory and voluntary) to take a joined-up, 
gender-informed approach to providing the holistic, targeted support that female 
offenders need, with shared investment and outcomes.  

144. We know a WSA approach has the potential to work. The Government has invested 
£1m seed funding since 2016 in a number of local areas developing WSA 
approaches, and early evidence from these sites shows promising success. Women’s 
centres are often central to WSAs and can be effective at reducing reoffending: a 
2015 Justice Data Lab analysis found a reduction in the one year proven reoffending 
rate of between 1 and 9 percentage points for female offenders who received support 
provided by 32 women’s centres throughout England compared with a matched 
group of similar offenders.86 

145. The WSA model will vary according to local needs and services but key elements 
include: early needs assessment at first contact with the police, a women-centred, 
problem-solving approach at court, and wraparound, gender-informed support 
alongside community orders and on release from prison. 

146. WSA models are appropriate for both at-risk women and female offenders. Where 
women do come into contact with the CJS, a WSA should divert women away from it, 
where appropriate. Providing joined up support to a woman from her first contact with 
police, should result in fewer women serving short custodial sentences or breaching 
community orders, and reoffending. This could have important social benefits 


36 

Female Offender Strategy 

including a reduction in long-term or crisis-point demands on services such as health 
and housing, more women accessing support for domestic abuse, and a reduction in 
the number of children taken into care or on the risk register.   

147. There are a number of areas including Greater Manchester, Wales, Surrey, Sussex, 
West Mercia, Lancashire and Cumbria, Norfolk and Exeter already operating WSAs. 
We will work with them to build an evidence base to support this approach and share 
best practice, supporting the wider rollout of this model.  

Manchester WSA Case Study 
Greater Manchester (GM) WSA has been fully operational since January 2015. The WSA 
includes police triage, a problem-solving court, and support alongside community orders 
and on release from prison, with women’s centres established in all boroughs in GM to 
provide women-only ‘one-stop shop’ support for women. 2015-16 MOJ funding was used 
to address the barriers to engagement for some women (e.g. Black, Asian and minority 
ethnic (BAME) women and young adults). 

Whilst we cannot conclude that the WSA has had a direct impact, there has been a 
promising reduction in the number of adult women prosecuted and in the number 
sentenced to custodial sentences in GM since 2014. 

Emerging evidence from the GM WSA shows: 

• A 40% reduction in the number of adult women sentenced to immediate custody since 
2014, compared with a 3% reduction for England and Wales.87  

• A 45% reduction in the number of adult women arrested since 2014/15, compared with 
an 18% reduction for England and Wales.88 

• 91% of those assessed in GM to end March 2017 have multiple needs.89 By end 
March 2017, 605 women had completed more than one Outcome Star assessment (of 
issues such as mental health, substance misuse and accommodation). On average, a 
positive change of 1.5 was seen against every assessed issue (on a scale of 1-10). 

• Proven re-offending was calculated at 17% for a small cohort of women referred to the 
centres 

Exeter CoLab ‘Resilient Women, Resilient System’ Initiative Case Study 
In Devon, a 2017 study revealed a fragmented offer for women with complex needs, 
particularly for those on the justice pathway. Participating stakeholders offered a snapshot 
of the challenges and strengths of the current pathway, along with their aspirations for an 
improved offer. Respondents felt that clear leadership, committed to improving outcomes 
for women on the justice pathway, was key to creating a WSA that would support this. 

CoLab Exeter is a multi-agency hub hosting 28 organisations aligned around 4 key 
strategic themes; Health & Wellbeing, Reducing Reoffending, Homelessness and 
Recovery from Mental Ill-health and Substance Misuse. The CoLab/MoJ WSA ‘Resilient 
Women, Resilient System’ Initiative aimed to improve the offer for women within or at risk 
of entering the Justice Pathway, using a model that invested in both the system and the 
woman herself. Key to this was utilising a ‘resilience’ based model that built on already 
existing assets for both. 


37 

Female Offender Strategy 

The project developed two key work streams. The first works directly with women through 
dedicated drop-in sessions offering a range of support opportunities in a women-only 
environment, along with a women’s forum and specific structured workshops delivering a 
range of topics that they identified as being key to recovery. The second has been the 
creation of a System Stewardship Group made up of senior representatives of all aspects 
of the justice pathway including Police, Public Health, CRC, Office of the Police and Crime 
Commissioner (OPCC) and local authority housing. They have worked with the evidence 
base that the project has developed to influence local and regional policy including the 
Devon Reducing Reoffending Strategy, Exeter Reducing Homelessness Strategy and the 
Devon Complex Lives Strategy and Commissioning Framework, which includes Domestic 
and Sexual Violence and Abuse and Substance Misuse, all of which now have a trauma-
informed approach to their implementation. 

From September 2017 to March 2018 they worked with 75 individual women attending the 
multi-agency ‘Resilient Women Open Sessions’ on a regular basis, with an additional 297 
individual visits from women to the building for information, advice or support.  50% of 
referrals to the service came from the Community Rehabilitation Company (CRC), with the 
majority serving community orders, whilst those referred by the National Probation Service 
(NPS) were referred for post-release support. Self-referrals increased steadily, by March 
2018 making up 33% of numbers attending. 78% had experienced trauma as a result of 
domestic and sexual violence and abuse. 32% of those attending were aged 50 and 
above. 48% of those who were mothers had their children in care. The top three needs 
women presented with upon engagement were substance misuse, mental health, and 
access to education and training. 

Session topics include developing skills for financial resilience, creative writing, skills for 
employability, and healthy relationships. The women have recently been involved in the 
co-design of an upskilling ‘pattern changing’ programme that will be developed for future 
use in a range of justice settings. 

Exploring devolution 
148. Locally-led approaches are more likely be effective if local areas have the tools to 

influence partners and change. We are keen to devolve power and responsibility from 
central Government to local areas so that they have the levers they need to deliver a 
WSA in their communities. We have signed Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) 
agreements with London and Greater Manchester, which commit us to working 
towards greater devolution of powers. Both agreements have identified female 
offenders as a cohort where areas are keen to make progress, and we are working to 
develop options.  

149. We will also work with other areas to identify and take forward options for increasing 
freedoms and working in partnership to address the needs of female offenders. This 
will involve working with Police and Crime Commissioners (PCCs) to understand how 
and whether additional powers and responsibilities may help them drive improved 
outcomes in this area.  


38 

Female Offender Strategy 

Partnership-focused 

150. There will be a joined-up approach across Government at a national level, and 
between agencies and services at a local level, to deliver a holistic response. At a 
national level we will work across Government to secure recognition of the specific 
needs of female offenders within wider initiatives. We will also set out what can be 
expected of services at a local level to deliver a joined-up approach. 

Developing a National Concordat on Female Offenders 
151. We will work across Government and with other national partners to develop and 

agree a National Concordat on Female Offenders. We want the Concordat to act as a 
joint statement of intent, agreement and understanding about how public services 
should be working together in local partnerships to identify and respond to the often 
multiple and complex needs of women as they journey through the CJS. 

152. Through the concordat, we want to establish a clear framework of best practice 
principles and guidance, that local organisations and partnerships can use to 
commission services. We hope that this document will better support them to develop 
high quality services, as well as reflect the evidence for attaining better outcomes for 
this group of women. 

153. Our ambition is for local organisations and partnerships voluntarily to adopt the 
concordat once published, and outline how they will work together. They will then 
implement the principles of the concordat into their service planning and delivery 
where possible. We will continue to consult with the relevant Government 
departments and national and local partners to develop and agree the concordat by 
the end of 2018.  

Strengthening cross-Government working  
154. Government is increasingly recognising that the needs of individuals cannot be 

addressed in isolation by different Government departments, but that they require a 
partnership approach that straddles traditional boundaries. A number of cross-
Government groups are addressing the complex needs of vulnerable people. This 
includes the Whitehall Vulnerable Persons Directors Group, the Cross-Departmental 
Complex Needs Group and the Reducing Reoffending Group. We will work through 
each of these to ensure improved outcomes for female offenders and women at risk 
of offending, including exploring the scope for cross-departmental budgets to address 
the needs of specific cohorts, such as those with complex needs. 

155. The new Reducing Reoffending group, chaired by the Chancellor of the Duchy of 
Lancaster, will work across Government to tackle some of the main causes of 
reoffending, including employment, health and accommodation. The objectives of the 
group will include identifying opportunities to join up existing policies to address key 
drivers of reoffending, and to build up the cross-Government evidence on activities 
related to reoffending and the interventions likely to be most effective. As well as 
MoJ, the group will also be attended by Home Office, Cabinet Office, Treasury, 
Department for Work and Pensions (DWP), Ministry of Housing, Communities and 
Local Government (MHCLG), Department for Education (DfE), and DHSC. 


39 

Female Offender Strategy 

156. MHCLG is carrying out a comprehensive review of the funding and commissioning of 
domestic abuse services across England. The review will be informed by an audit 
being run by Ipsos MORI. This will give us a picture of provision across England, 
enabling Government to assess the impact that services are having and to identify 
any gaps in provision. MHCLG will draw on outcomes from the review to inform its 
approach to improving services for victims with complex needs. We will liaise with 
MHCLG to ensure that the specific needs of female offenders and at-risk women are 
considered in this process. 

157. We will work collaboratively and capitalise on existing Government initiatives, such as 
the set of Principles on gender and trauma informed care for mental health services 
for women currently being developed by the Department of Health and Social Care 
(DHSC) led Women’s Mental Health Taskforce. 

158. The Government consultation on domestic abuse Transforming the Response to 
Domestic Abuse closed on 31 May 2018. We consulted on range of non-legislative 
and legislative measures to tackle domestic abuse. The consultation also sought 
views on how we can work better to identify vulnerable women at risk of offending 
and address issues relating to domestic abuse earlier. The consultation will help 
inform the work that we take forward. We will work closely on the response to this 
consultation to ensure we capture and address the needs of female offenders.  

159. The Violence Against Women and Girls (VAWG) Strategy 2016 underpins many of 
the recommendations of the Female Offenders strategy, given the links between 
domestic abuse and offending, and the prevalence of vulnerabilities amongst the 
female offender cohort.90 A cross-Whitehall working group has been established 
to draw in the expertise of the sector, ensuring a real difference is made to vulnerable 
and marginalised women. The current VAWG Strategy Action Plan is being driven 
forward through the Home Secretary chaired VAWG Inter-Ministerial Group, which 
will also consider new proposals to tackle domestic abuse within this framework. 

160. The Government consulted on a new funding model for supported housing earlier in 
2018. A response is expected in the summer.  

161. The Government has also passed the Homelessness Reduction Act 2017, which 
came into force in April 2018, to reform England’s homelessness legislation, ensuring 
that more people get the help they need earlier to prevent them from initially 
becoming homeless. It places duties on local authorities to intervene at earlier stages 
to prevent homelessness in their areas and requires local authorities to provide new 
homelessness services to all those affected, not just those who are protected under 
existing legislation. The Act also introduces a duty to refer which requires public 
authorities in England specified in regulations to notify a local authority of service 
users, including offenders, they think may be homeless or at risk of homelessness. 
This will mean prisons and probation providers will have a duty to refer and prevent 
homelessness amongst their population from October 2018. 

162. The Government has committed to halving rough sleeping by 2022 and ending it 
altogether by 2027. To achieve this ambition, we will be publishing a cross-
Government rough sleeping strategy in July 2018. Delivery of the strategy will be 
driven through the cross-Government Rough Sleeping & Homelessness Reduction 
Taskforce.  Approximately one third of people sleeping rough in London in 2016/17 
had experience of serving time in prison and we know that significant work is needed 
to better support those leaving prison into accommodation.91 The rough sleeping 


40 

Female Offender Strategy 

strategy will take action to support particularly vulnerable groups, including female 
rough sleepers, many of which have an offending history and multiple and complex 
needs.  

163. Following the announcement of a new Rough Sleeping Initiative, MHCLG has 
recently allocated £30 million to 83 areas to boost the immediate support available to 
people living on the streets and help them into accommodation. This Initiative will 
implement measures that will have a rapid impact this year. Councils across England 
with the highest numbers of rough sleepers will receive a share of this funding to 
significantly increase the support they are able to offer people now, and also those at 
risk this coming winter. Funding will be used to provide an additional 1,750 bed 
spaces for rough sleepers and an additional 531 dedicated homelessness workers. 
The funding will also help improve the co-ordination of services available to those in 
need and at risk.  

164. Together with the Welsh Government, we are investigating how the Housing First 
pilots currently underway in both England and in Wales could help to ensure that 
offenders with complex needs, including female offenders, can secure suitable 
accommodation. The MHCLG funded pilots in England are being delivered by the 
Liverpool City Region, West Midlands, and Greater Manchester Combined Authority 
Regions, and will be subject to rigorous external evaluation to determine the 
effectiveness of this internationally proven approach in an English context. We are 
working closely with the three pilot regions to ensure that the particular needs of 
those with a history of offending are met. 

165. DWP’s roll-out of Universal Credit delivers advance payments to ex-prisoners of up to 
their first full month’s entitlement, alleviating urgent financial need. This can be paid 
back over a period of up to 12 months. All Universal Credit claimants are exempt 
from the waiting days currently served under Jobseekers Allowance. To 
accommodate the complex circumstances of many female offenders, it is possible to 
make alternative payment arrangements, either payment of housing costs direct to 
landlords, splitting payments between partners, or making payments more frequent 
than monthly. Critically, prisoners serving short sentences of 12 months or less, 
which includes anytime spent on remand, are able to retain the housing element of 
their Universal Credit claim for up to 6 months (if their total absence does not exceed 
6 months) under new temporary absence rules. This will prevent them being 
homeless on release. For those prisoners in receipt of legacy benefits, they can 
receive help with their housing costs for 13 weeks as long as their sentence is not 
expected to exceed that length. For prisoners on remand, housing benefit support 
can continue for up to 52 weeks. 

166. At present, DWP Prison Work Coaches provide employment support to prisoners 
during their sentence and support to make their claim to benefits prior to their 
release. This includes support in gathering all the details and documentation needed 
to make their Universal Credit claim and booking an appointment at the local 
jobcentre on the day of release, so they can complete their claim and access financial 
support immediately through advance payments. Recent changes to Universal Credit 
means all claimants, including prison leavers, can apply for an advance payment of 
up to 100% of their expected monthly entitlement from day one of their claim. This 
work sits within the context of a wider national partnership agreement between MoJ 
and DWP,  which sets out clear roles and responsibilities for the various bodies 
involved in getting more prisoners into employment in the future across England and 
Wales. 


41 

Female Offender Strategy 

Evidence-based 

167. We will build the evidence base on what works, testing interventions for sustainability, 
scalability and to ensure the best use of the available funding. We will share best 
practice widely, supporting collaborative training practices and building professional 
networks. 

Sharing and supporting further data and evidence 

168. We are committed to working with local areas to build a strong data and evidence 
base, and are establishing a cross-Government analytical working group on female 
offenders to share learning and collaborate. 

169. We have already taken steps to give local areas the information that they need to 
create a gender-informed approach towards the women in their area by including a 
Court Outcomes by Police Force Area data tool in our annual Criminal Justice 
Statistics publication.92 We will also develop a data toolkit alongside the Concordat 
that will enable local areas to interrogate this court data and other key local data on 
their cohort.  Our aim is to enable local areas to better understand the needs of the 
women in their area and tailor their work accordingly.  It will also allow them to track 
the success and outcomes of their work. 

170. We will make use of existing WSA models to build the evidence base for multi-
agency approaches, inform our understanding of what works, and achieve value for 
money and good practice. We will look for opportunities to bring interested areas 
together to discuss the practicalities and benefits of developing a WSA. It is 
particularly important that smaller organisations supporting BAME women and 
women with other protected characteristics can benefit from the learning of larger 
organisations and each other, and we will prioritise their engagement. We will also 
look to engage with BAME women with lived experience of the CJS to inform our 
policy development in this area. The Troubled Families Programme, which provides 
high-quality, holistic support for at-risk families and is funded by MHCLG, will share 
the findings of its evaluation and best practice to facilitate similar work in other local 
areas. We will look to integrate this learning into WSA resources. 

171. The Government is funding Clinks, a third sector coalition organisation, to develop 
and facilitate networks of support in specialist areas, providing meetings, targeted 
communication, and support. These will have a particular focus on women and 
families and BAME offenders. They will also look to improve outcomes for, and 
support people, with protected characteristics. 

172. We are subject to the Public Sector Equality Duty (Equality Act 2010) which has a 
proactive focus on eliminating discrimination, advancing equality and fostering good 
relations. All our work with women should be underpinned by Equality Analysis to 
ensure we create inclusive systems, structures and ways of working that benefit 
women of all backgrounds, consistent with our responsibilities under the Equality Act 
2010. We know that women from BAME communities are disproportionately 
represented in custody, and those who are Foreign Nationals may experience 
particular challenges. In implementing the strategy both nationally and locally, it will 
be important to consider how to tailor our work to ensure that women from all 
backgrounds stand to benefit. Monitoring of protected characteristics other than 
gender will allow us to measure progress. 


42 

Female Offender Strategy 

Conclusion 

173. To deliver meaningful change for female offenders, their families, victims and wider 
society, we must ensure that we are accountable for the priorities set out in this 
strategy. We will commit to publishing an annual update on the progress of the work 
of the strategy. To support this, the right governance processes need to be in place to 
oversee the delivery of the commitments made in this strategy. We will put in place a 
reformed Advisory Board on Female Offenders, continue to work through the cross-
government Female Offender Leadership Board, and liaise with the Criminal Justice 
Inspectorates.  

174. The Advisory Board on Female Offenders, which brings together key stakeholders, 
criminal justice agencies and officials from relevant Government Departments, has 
provided expert advice and challenge to Government on the issue of female 
offending since 2013. Its work has been invaluable in developing this strategy.  As we 
move into the next stage of implementation, we want to increase the effectiveness of 
this body even further by: 

• Giving the Board responsibility for monitoring and advising on the delivery of 
commitments in this strategy 

• Ensuring that we have relevant expert representation by regularly refreshing 
stakeholder membership through an application process 

• Securing attendance from Ministers from other relevant Government Departments 
to attend the Board, making sure that female offending remains a priority across 
Government 

• Linking the work of the Board with that of other cross-Government groups that 
impact on female offenders 

175. Delivering this strategy will not be without its challenges. The MoJ is operating in an 
environment of financial constraint, and in this context, we are clear that the 
measures we have put in place to deliver this strategy must be evidence-based and 
evaluated to test their suitability for further rollout, as well as  scalable and 
sustainable. 

176. Furthermore, as we have acknowledged throughout the strategy, the criminal justice 
system (CJS) is often ‘downstream’ of a wide range of statutory and third sector 
services that female offenders have come into contact with. Even whilst women are 
within the CJS, working effectively to rehabilitate this cohort requires cooperation 
from many other Government departments and agencies. It is imperative that we 
engage in partnership working across Government to address female offending as a 
shared priority. The cost of female offending affects all of us – and the benefits of 
implementing our vision will benefit all of us.  

177. If we achieve our vision of seeing fewer women in the CJS, fewer women in custody 
and more women being successfully managed in the community, we will have 
contributed significantly to creating a justice system that is better for everyone. 

178. In the development of our strategic priorities, we have drawn on existing work from 
across Government from which the female offender cohort may benefit. We will work 


43 

Female Offender Strategy 

to ensure that this strategy will continue to inform their work going forward, and that 
the particular needs of female offenders are recognised and addressed within their 
agendas.  

179. Finally, we would like to thank everyone who has worked on and contributed to this 
strategy document. This includes the staff and women we met at HMP East Sutton 
Park, HMP Styal and HMP Downview, who provided such candid feedback. Your 
cooperation and support has been invaluable so far, and will continue to be so going 
forward if we are to achieve the ambition set out here. It is only by working in 
partnership across organisational and institutional boundaries to secure the best 
outcomes, that we will be able to deliver the kind of justice system that will benefit 
society as a whole. 


44 

Female Offender Strategy 

Annex A: Lord Farmer Review Terms of Reference 

Building on the original Farmer Review: The importance of strengthening prisoners' family 
ties to prevent reoffending and reduce intergenerational crime, which focused on men in 
prison, a further independent review will be commissioned from Lord Farmer to investigate 
how supporting female offenders to engage with their families can lower recidivism, aid 
rehabilitation and assist in addressing the issues of addressing intergenerational crime. 

The follow-on Review will aim to learn about: 

1. What works to help female offenders, their families and especially their children, to 
maintain and even improve family ties, where appropriate, while serving a custodial or 
community sentence, or post-release. 

2. The challenges of mothering and fulfilling this primary carer role either whilst at a 
distance from their children or in the community. 

3. What works to help those prisoners who do not have any family connections, either 
because they have been through the care system, their children have been taken into 
the care system, or the nature of their offending precludes contact with their families. 

4. How this can be translated into policy and commissioning for change. 

Expert group 

• Nicola Drinkwater, Head of Female Offending, Clinks 

• Tina Parker Head of Women’s Services, Pact  

• Kate Paradine CEO, Women in Prison 

• Jenny Earle, Programme Director, Prison Reform Trust  

• Director, Women’s Custodial Estate, HMPPS 

• Deputy Director, Vulnerable Offender Policy, Ministry of Justice 

• Gabrielle Lee, Governor Low Newton 

• Carlene Dixon, Governor HMP Send  

• Julia Mulligan, Police and Crime Commissioner, North Yorkshire 

• Val Castell, Adult Court Committee, Magistrates Association 

• One or more women with lived experience of life inside prison and the difficulties of 
fulfilling primary care responsibilities while serving a custodial sentence. 


  45 

Female Offender Strategy 

1 The higher prevalence amongst offenders of issues with drugs, alcohol and mental health is well 
documented. In a 2005/06 MOJ survey, 46% of female prisoners reported having attempted 
suicide – more than twice the rate of male prisoners (21%). This is higher than in the general 
population, amongst whom around 6% have. In the same MoJ survey, 64% of prisoners reported 
using Class A drugs in the four weeks before custody compared to 13% of the general 
population, and 49% of prisoners were assessed as being at risk of suffering from anxiety and/or 
depression, compared to 16% of the general population. In the Adult Psychiatric Morbidity 
Survey of prisoners (1998), 90% of prisoners had one or more of the five psychiatric disorders 
studied (psychosis, neurosis, personality disorder, hazardous drink and drug dependence). 
MOJ (2013). Gender differences in substance misuse and mental health amongst prisoners 
Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/gender-differences-in-substance-
misuse-and-mental-health-amongst-prisoners--2 

2 Substance misuse has been linked to increased likelihood of reoffending. According to a MoJ 
survey of adult prisoners sentenced in 2005 and 2006, 62% of prisoners who reported using 
drugs in the four weeks before custody reoffended in the year after released compared to 30% 
of those who reported never using drugs. 62% of those who reported drinking alcohol every day 
in the four weeks before custody were reconvicted, compared with 49% of those who did not 
report this. Addressing mental health issues should also help offenders better address other 
needs more directly associated with offending, such as engaging in drug treatment or 
maintaining stable accommodation. 
MOJ (2013). Gender differences in substance misuse and mental health amongst prisoners 
Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/gender-differences-in-substance-
misuse-and-mental-health-amongst-prisoners--2 

3 The human cost of VAWG is high. Experiences of abuse have serious psychological, emotional 
and physical consequences and may contribute to multiple disadvantage, or a chaotic lifestyle 
involving substance misuse, homelessness, offending behaviour, gang involvement, prostitution 
or mental health problems. That 41% of the prison population have witnessed or experienced 
domestic abuse is illustrative of the wider social harms these crimes cause”. (HM Government 
(2016). Ending Violence Against Women and Girls Strategy 2016-2020, p.8.) Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fil
e/522166/VAWG_Strategy_FINAL_PUBLICATION_MASTER_vRB.PDF 

4 MOJ (2018). Offender Management Statistics quarterly: October to December 2017. Available 
at: https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/offender-management-statistics-quarterly-october-
to-december-2017 

5 MOJ (2018). Criminal Justice System statistics quarterly: December 2017. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-
2017 

6 MOJ (2018). Supporting data tables: Female offender strategy. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/female-offender-strategy 

7 MOJ (2018). Proven reoffending statistics: April 2016 to June 2016. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/proven-reoffending-statistics-april-2016-to-june-2016 

8 MOJ (2018). Criminal Justice System statistics quarterly: December 2017. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-
2017 

9 Government estimates of total costs to government in 2015/16 associated with female offenders 
[from police through to end of sentence], drawing on a combination of different data sources and 
assumptions. These are high level estimates, using a number of published and unpublished 
data, and there is major uncertainty in several cost estimates included. 

10 MOJ (2018). Safety in custody quarterly: update to December 2017. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/safety-in-custody-quarterly-update-to-december-2017 


46  

Endnotes 

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/gender-differences-in-substance-misuse-and-mental-health-amongst-prisoners--2
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/gender-differences-in-substance-misuse-and-mental-health-amongst-prisoners--2
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/gender-differences-in-substance-misuse-and-mental-health-amongst-prisoners--2
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/gender-differences-in-substance-misuse-and-mental-health-amongst-prisoners--2
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/offender-management-statistics-quarterly-october-to-december-2017
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/offender-management-statistics-quarterly-october-to-december-2017
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-2017
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-2017
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/proven-reoffending-statistics-april-2016-to-june-2016
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-2017
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-2017




Female Offender Strategy 

11 Baroness Corston (2007). A Report by Baroness Jean Corston of a Review of Women with 
Particular Vulnerabilities in the Criminal Justice System. Available at: 
http://www.justice.gov.uk/publications/docs/corston-report-march-2007.pdf 

12 MoJ conducted a Rapid Evidence Assessment (REA) 2015 to explore the evidence on the 
effectiveness of interventions for adult women convicted of crime. Relative to the gender-neutral 
initiatives, more of the gender-informed programmes reviewed led to reductions in recidivism. 
MOJ (2015). Effective interventions for Women offenders: A Rapid Evidence Assessment. 
Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fil
e/448859/effective-interventions-for-women-offenders.pdf 

13 Murray and Farrington (2008) The effects of parental imprisonment on children. In Tonry (Ed), 
Crime and justice: A review of research (Vol 3, pp 133-206). University of Chicago Press. 

14 MOJ (2014). Prisoners’ childhood and family backgrounds. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/prisoners-childhood-and-family-backgrounds 

15 MOJ (2018). Criminal Justice System statistics quarterly: December 2017. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-
2017 

16 MOJ (2018). Supporting data tables: Female offender strategy. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/female-offender-strategy 

17 MOJ (2018). Do offender characteristics affect the impact of short custodial sentences and court 
orders on reoffending? Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fil
e/706597/do-offender-characteristics-affect-the-impact-of-short-custodial-sentences.pdf 

18 MOJ (2018). Safety in custody quarterly: update to December 2017. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/safety-in-custody-quarterly-update-to-december-2017 

19 MOJ (2013). Gender differences in substance misuse and mental health amongst prisoners 
Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/gender-differences-in-substance-
misuse-and-mental-health-amongst-prisoners--2 

20 MOJ (2018). Do offender characteristics affect the impact of short custodial sentences and court 
orders on reoffending? Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fil
e/706597/do-offender-characteristics-affect-the-impact-of-short-custodial-sentences.pdf 

21 MOJ (2016). Prison Safety and Reform. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/565014/cm-9350-
prison-safety-and-reform-_web_.pdf 

22 MOJ (2018). Criminal Justice System statistics quarterly: December 2017. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-
2017 

23 HM Government (2016). Ending Violence Against Women and Girls Strategy 2016-2020, p.8. 
Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fil
e/522166/VAWG_Strategy_FINAL_PUBLICATION_MASTER_vRB.PDF) 

24 MOJ (2015). Achieving Better Outcomes for Women Offenders. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/achieving-better-outcomes-for-women-offenders 

25 MOJ (2018). Supporting data tables: Female offender strategy. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/female-offender-strategytitle tbc (supporting data 
tables) 

26 Prison Reform Trust (2017). “There’s a reason we’re in trouble”: Domestic abuse as a driver to 
women’s offending. Available at: http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/Portals/0/Documents/ 
Domestic_abuse_report_final_lo.pdf 

27 Walby, S. (2009). The Cost of Domestic Violence Up-date 2009, Lancaster University 


47   

https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/448859/effective-interventions-for-women-offenders.pdf
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/448859/effective-interventions-for-women-offenders.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/safety-in-custody-quarterly-update-to-december-2017
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/gender-differences-in-substance-misuse-and-mental-health-amongst-prisoners--2
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/gender-differences-in-substance-misuse-and-mental-health-amongst-prisoners--2
http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/Portals/0/Documents/Domestic_abuse_report_final_lo.pdf
http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/Portals/0/Documents/Domestic_abuse_report_final_lo.pdf




Female Offender Strategy 

28 MOJ (2018). Criminal Justice System statistics quarterly: December 2017. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-
2017 

29 Ibid. 
30 Ibid. 
31 Murray, Farrington, & Sekol (2012) Children’s Antisocial Behavior, Mental Health, Drug Use and 

Educational Performance After Incarceration: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. 
Psychological Bulletin 2012. Vol 138. No.2, 175-210 

32 MOJ (2014). Prisoners’ childhood and family backgrounds. 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/prisoners-childhood-and-family-backgrounds 

33 MOJ (2016). Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic disproportionality in the Criminal Justice System in 
England and Wales. Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fil
e/639261/bame-disproportionality-in-the-cjs.pdf 

34 The Prison Reform Trust’s report ‘Fair Cop? Improving Outcomes for women at the point of 
arrest’, noted in the importance and effectiveness of early assessment at point of contact with 
the police. Available at: 
http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/Portals/0/Documents/Women/Fair%20Cop.pdf 

35 MOJ (2018). Adult Out of Court Disposal Pilot Evaluation – Final Report.  
36 DCMS (2015). The TV Licence Fee and Enforcement Review. Available at: 

https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/tv-licence-enforcement-review-a-consultation 
37 MOJ (2018). Criminal Justice System statistics quarterly: December 2017. Available at: 

https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-
2017 

38 MOJ (2018). Criminal Justice System statistics quarterly: December 2017. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-
2017 

39 Of those who had an assessment at 30 September 2017. MOJ (2018). Supporting data tables: 
Female offender strategy. Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/female-
offender-strategy 

40 MOJ (2018). Do offender characteristics affect the impact of short custodial sentences and court 
orders on reoffending? Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fil
e/706597/do-offender-characteristics-affect-the-impact-of-short-custodial-sentences.pdf 

41 MOJ (2018). Supporting data tables: Female offender strategy. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/female-offender-strategy 

42 MOJ (2018). Criminal Justice System statistics quarterly: December 2017. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-
2017 

43 MOJ (2018). Offender Management Statistics quarterly: October to December 2017. Available 
at: https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/offender-management-statistics-quarterly-october-
to-december-2017 

44 MOJ (2018). Supporting data tables: Female offender strategy. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/female-offender-strategy 

45 MOJ (2018). Offender Management Statistics quarterly: October to December 2017. Available 
at: https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/offender-management-statistics-quarterly-october-
to-december-2017 

46 MOJ (2018). Do offender characteristics affect the impact of short custodial sentences and court 
orders on reoffending? Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fil
e/706597/do-offender-characteristics-affect-the-impact-of-short-custodial-sentences.pdf 

47 MOJ (2018). Supporting data tables: Female offender strategy. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/female-offender-strategy 


48   

https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-2017
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-2017
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/prisoners-childhood-and-family-backgrounds
https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/tv-licence-enforcement-review-a-consultation
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-2017
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-2017
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-2017
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-2017
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-2017
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-2017
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/offender-management-statistics-quarterly-october-to-december-2017
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/offender-management-statistics-quarterly-october-to-december-2017




Female Offender Strategy 

48 HMI Probation (2016). A thematic inspection of the provision and quality of services in the 
community for women who offend. Available at: 
https://www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmiprobation/wp-content/uploads/sites/5/2016/09/A-
thematic-inspection-of-the-provision-and-quality-of-services-in-the-community-for-women-who-
offend.pdf  

49 MOJ (2013). The factors associated with proven re-offending following release from prison: 
findings from Waves 1 to 3 of SPCR. Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/ 
system/uploads/attachment_data/file/491119/re-offending-release-waves-1-3-spcr-findings.pdf 

50 This includes bail hostel (short stay), friends/family (transient), homeless (other, rough sleeping 
and squat), transient/short term accommodation and missing data. MOJ (2018). Supporting data 
tables: Female offender strategy. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/female-offender-strategy   

51 HMI Probation (2016). A thematic inspection of the provision and quality of services in the 
community for women who offend. Available at: 
https://www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmiprobation/wp-content/uploads/sites/5/2016/09/A-
thematic-inspection-of-the-provision-and-quality-of-services-in-the-community-for-women-who-
offend.pdf 

52 For example, 62% of women in prison serving a sentence of fewer than 12 months have an 
accommodation need and 77% an employment need, compared with 33% and 45% respectively 
of women serving a court order in the community. 
MOJ (2018). Supporting data tables: Female offender strategy. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/female-offender-strategy 

53 Almost two thirds (64%) of women sentenced to immediate custody in 2017 had 11 or more 
previous convictions; 35% of those sentenced to suspended sentences; and 30% of those 
sentenced to community orders. 
MOJ (2018). Criminal Justice System statistics quarterly: December 2017. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-
2017 

54 MOJ (2018). Supporting data tables: Female offender strategy. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/female-offender-strategy 

55 Of all offenders (male and female) starting court orders in 2017: 7% had a Drug Treatment 
Requirement attached to the order, 4% had an Alcohol Treatment Requirement, and fewer than 
1% had a Mental Health Treatment Requirement attached to the order. 
MOJ (2018). Supporting data tables: Female offender strategy. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/female-offender-strategy 

56 Ibid. 
57 MOJ (2018). Do offender characteristics affect the impact of short custodial sentences and court 

orders on reoffending? Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/ 
attachment_data/file/706597/do-offender-characteristics-affect-the-impact-of-short-custodial-
sentences.pdf  

58 MOJ and PHE (2017). The impact of community-based drug and alcohol treatment on 
reoffending. Available 
at:https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/ 
attachment_data/file/674858/PHE-MoJ-experimental-MoJ-publication-version.pdf 

59 Graham & McIvor (2015). Scottish and international review of the uses of Electronic Monitoring. 
Available at: http://www.sccjr.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/Scottish-and-International-
Review-of-the-Uses-of-Electronic-Monitoring-Graham-and-McIvor-2015.pdf 

60 MOJ (2015). Achieving Better Outcomes for Women Offenders. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/achieving-better-outcomes-for-women-offenders 


49   

https://www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmiprobation/wp-content/uploads/sites/5/2016/09/A-thematic-inspection-of-the-provision-and-quality-of-services-in-the-community-for-women-who-offend.pdf
https://www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmiprobation/wp-content/uploads/sites/5/2016/09/A-thematic-inspection-of-the-provision-and-quality-of-services-in-the-community-for-women-who-offend.pdf
https://www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmiprobation/wp-content/uploads/sites/5/2016/09/A-thematic-inspection-of-the-provision-and-quality-of-services-in-the-community-for-women-who-offend.pdf
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/491119/re-offending-release-waves-1-3-spcr-findings.pdf
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/491119/re-offending-release-waves-1-3-spcr-findings.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-2017
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-2017
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/706597/do-offender-characteristics-affect-the-impact-of-short-custodial-sentences.pdf
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/706597/do-offender-characteristics-affect-the-impact-of-short-custodial-sentences.pdf
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/706597/do-offender-characteristics-affect-the-impact-of-short-custodial-sentences.pdf
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/674858/PHE-MoJ-experimental-MoJ-publication-version.pdf
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/674858/PHE-MoJ-experimental-MoJ-publication-version.pdf
http://www.sccjr.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/Scottish-and-International-Review-of-the-Uses-of-Electronic-Monitoring-Graham-and-McIvor-2015.pdf
http://www.sccjr.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/Scottish-and-International-Review-of-the-Uses-of-Electronic-Monitoring-Graham-and-McIvor-2015.pdf




Female Offender Strategy 

61 HMI Probation (2016). A thematic inspection of the provision and quality of services in the 
community for women who offend. Available at: 
https://www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmiprobation/wp-content/uploads/sites/5/2016/09/A-
thematic-inspection-of-the-provision-and-quality-of-services-in-the-community-for-women-who-
offend.pdf 

62 At 31 March 2018, 15% of women in prison were on remand and 13% were on sentences of 
fewer than 12 months, with 7% in prison for recall. Women on sentences of between 12 months 
– 4 years made up 26% of the prison population, and a further 28% were those on sentences of 
4 years or more, with 9% on life or IPP sentences. 
MOJ (2018). Offender Management Statistics quarterly: October to December 2017. Available 
at: https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/offender-management-statistics-quarterly-october-
to-december-2017 

63 MOJ (2018). Safety in custody quarterly: update to December 2017. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/safety-in-custody-quarterly-update-to-december-2017 

64 MOJ (2018). Supporting data tables: Female offender strategy. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/female-offender-strategy 

65 Murray and Farrington (2008) The effects of parental imprisonment on children. In Tonry (Ed), 
Crime and justice: A review of research (Vol 3, pp 133-206). University of Chicago Press. 

66 MOJ (2014). Prisoners’ childhood and family backgrounds. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/prisoners-childhood-and-family-backgrounds 

67 MOJ (2015). Effective interventions for Women offenders: A Rapid Evidence Assessment. 
Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fil
e/448859/effective-interventions-for-women-offenders.pdf 

68 MOJ (2013). Gender differences in substance misuse and mental health amongst prisoners 
Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/gender-differences-in-substance-
misuse-and-mental-health-amongst-prisoners--2 

69 MOJ (2018). Safety in custody quarterly: update to December 2017. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/safety-in-custody-quarterly-update-to-december-2017 

70 Ibid. 
71 Murray and Farrington (2008) The effects of parental imprisonment on children. In Tonry (Ed), 

Crime and justice: A review of research (Vol 3, pp 133-206). University of Chicago Press. 
72 Lord Farmer (2017). The Importance of Strengthening Prisoners' Family Ties to Prevent 

Reoffending and Reduce Intergenerational Crime, p. 4. Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fil
e/642244/farmer-review-report.pdf 

73 Niven and Stewart (2005) Resettlement outcomes on release from prison. Home Office Findings 
248. London: Home Office. Referenced in in MOJ (2014). Prisoners’ childhood and family 
backgrounds.  

74 MOJ (2018). Supporting data tables: Female offender strategy. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/female-offender-strategy 

75 Ibid. 
76 MOJ (2014). Statistics on women and the Criminal Justice System 2013. Available at: 

https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fil
e/380090/women-cjs-2013.pdf 

77 Protected characteristics are the nine groups protected under the Equality Act 2010. They are: 
age, disability, gender reassignment, marriage and civil partnership, pregnancy and maternity, 
race, religion or belief, sex, and sexual orientation. 

78 Lord Farmer (2017). The Importance of Strengthening Prisoners' Family Ties to Prevent 
Reoffending and Reduce Intergenerational Crime, p. 15. Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fil
e/642244/farmer-review-report.pdf 


50   

https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/offender-management-statistics-quarterly-october-to-december-2017
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/offender-management-statistics-quarterly-october-to-december-2017
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/prisoners-childhood-and-family-backgrounds
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/448859/effective-interventions-for-women-offenders.pdf
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/448859/effective-interventions-for-women-offenders.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/gender-differences-in-substance-misuse-and-mental-health-amongst-prisoners--2
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/gender-differences-in-substance-misuse-and-mental-health-amongst-prisoners--2
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/safety-in-custody-quarterly-update-to-december-2017
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/380090/women-cjs-2013.pdf
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/380090/women-cjs-2013.pdf




Female Offender Strategy 

79 IAP (2017). Preventing the Deaths of Women in Prison – initial results of a rapid information 
gathering exercise by the Independent Advisory Panel on Deaths in Custody. Available at: 
http://iapdeathsincustody.independent.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/IAP-rapid-evidence-
collection-v0.2.pdf 

80 MOJ (2015). Effective interventions for Women offenders: A Rapid Evidence Assessment. 
Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fil
e/448859/effective-interventions-for-women-offenders.pdf 

81 MOJ (2013). Analysis of the impact of employment on reoffending following release from 
custody, using Propensity Score Matching. Available at:   

82 MOJ (2018). Education and Employment Strategy 2018. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/education-and-employment-strategy-2018 

83 MOJ (2018). Offender Management Statistics quarterly: October to December 2017. Available 
at: https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/offender-management-statistics-quarterly-october-
to-december-2017 

84 Lammy (2017). Lammy Review: Final report. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/lammy-review-final-report 

85 MOJ (2018). Education and Employment Strategy 2018. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/education-and-employment-strategy-2018 

86 MOJ (2015). Justice Data Lab Re‐offending Analysis: Women’s Centres throughout England. 
Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fil
e/427388/womens-centres-report.pdf 

87 MOJ (2018). Criminal Justice System statistics quarterly: December 2017. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-
2017 

88 Home Office (2017). Police powers and procedures England and Wales year ending 31 March 
2017 second edition. Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/police-powers-and-
procedures-england-and-wales-year-ending-31-march-2017 

89 Greater Manchester (unpublished). Management information collected by Greater Manchester 
and shared with the MOJ. 

90 HM Government (2016). Ending Violence Against Women and Girls Strategy 2016-2020, p.8. 
Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fil
e/522166/VAWG_Strategy_FINAL_PUBLICATION_MASTER_vRB.PDF 

91 Greater London Authority (2017). CHAIN Annual Report Greater London April 2016 to March 
2017. Available at: https://data.london.gov.uk/dataset/chain-reports?resource=db4d244e-ab51-
44e1-96dd-c8befa65a62a   

92 This police force area breakdown is based on where the offence was dealt with rather than 
where the offence was committed. 
MOJ (2018). Criminal Justice System statistics quarterly: December 2017. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-
2017 


51  

https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/427388/womens-centres-report.pdf
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/427388/womens-centres-report.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/police-powers-and-procedures-england-and-wales-year-ending-31-march-2017
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/police-powers-and-procedures-england-and-wales-year-ending-31-march-2017
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-2017
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/criminal-justice-system-statistics-quarterly-december-2017


                        


CCS0618901868 

978-1-5286-0562-5 


 

	Contents
	Foreword
	Introduction
	A strategy for female offenders
	The Case for Change:
	Our vision and strategic priorities:
	A Framework for Implementation:
	Our Commitment:
	Scope:

	Chapter One: Early Intervention
	Chapter Summary: 
	The Challenge
	Intervening earlier to address the vulnerabilities that can lead to offending
	Diverting offenders from the CJS, where it is appropriate to do so, and addressing their needs to prevent reoffending

	Chapter Two: Community Solutions
	Chapter Summary
	The Challenge
	Ensuring that courts have better and more comprehensive information about female offenders to inform sentencing decisions
	Developing more options for managing women in the community
	Providing more support for those offenders managed in the community

	Chapter Three: Better Custody
	Chapter Summary
	The Challenge:
	Adapting the custodial environment to meet the needs of female offenders
	Offering comprehensive rehabilitative support

	Chapter Four: Framework for Implementation
	Chapter Summary
	The Framework:
	Partnership-focused
	Evidence-based
	Sharing and supporting further data and evidence

	Conclusion
	Annex A: Lord Farmer Review Terms of Reference
	Expert group




