

        

Oxfordshire 

Housing and 

Growth Deal – 

Outline Agreement 


              1        

Definitions of Terms 


  

“Oxfordshire” or “the authorities” refers collectively to six local authorities and the 
Local Enterprise Partnership with whom Government (HMG) has agreed the 
Oxfordshire Housing and Growth deal, namely: 


 

 Cherwell District Council 

 Oxford City Council 

 Oxfordshire County Council 

 South Oxfordshire District Council  

 Vale of White Horse District Council 

 West Oxfordshire District Council 

 Oxfordshire Local Enterprise Partnership (OxLEP) 


  

Interface with transport schemes 


 

This deal, and any distribution of funds via it, does not constitute HMG endorsement 
or approval to any transport scheme. In addition, it does not circumvent any design, 
development or planning processes required by HMG, or any of its 
agencies/organisations owned by HMG (for example, Highways England or Network 
Rail).  


 

Nor does it imply any favourable treatment for a transport scheme in any competitive 
bidding process should funding be requested in addition to that provided by this deal. 
HMG stands ready to advise Oxfordshire about scheme development, for example 
on the strategic road network or rail network. 


  

Interface with the planning system 


 

This deal, and any distribution of funds via it, does not constitute HMG weight or 
approval for any scheme which is subject to the planning system.  


 

In addition, it does not alter any of the statutory functions, duties and rights of HMG 
or Local Planning Authorities, and in particular the functions of the Secretary of State 
in relation to plan-making or decision-taking. Nor does it imply any favourable 
treatment for any specific scheme or plan.  


        2  

1. Introduction 


 

a) Core components of the deal  


 

1. This document contains an outline agreement for a Housing and Growth Deal 
between the Government and the local authorities in the Oxfordshire area (Cherwell 
District Council; Oxford City Council; Oxfordshire County Council; South Oxfordshire 
District Council; Vale of White Horse District Council; West Oxfordshire District 
Council) and the Local Enterprise Partnership (OxLEP) - hereafter collectively 
referred to as ‘Oxfordshire’. 


 

2. Through the deal, Oxfordshire commits to: 


 

 The submission and adoption, subject to the inspection process, of a joint 
statutory spatial plan covering all five district councils in Oxfordshire, by 2021 

 Plan for and support the delivery of 100,000 new homes between 2011 and 2031 
– backed up with a credible plan for delivery, outlining interim milestones and 
targets as agreed with the HCA and Government  


 

3. Through the deal, Government commits to: 


 

 Provide Oxfordshire with up to £215m funding – see below for breakdown 

 Explore options to grant Oxfordshire certain time-limited planning flexibilities, 
subject to consultation where appropriate   


 

b) Stages of the deal  


 

4. The deal comprises two stages. The first is the ‘outline agreement’ stage - the detail 

of which is covered by this document.  


 

5. The next stage (‘the full agreement’) will set out a more detailed delivery and 
implementation plan (see below). This will be dependent on a full council decision by 
each local authority, before being agreed between Oxfordshire and Government.  


 

c) Approving the deal  


 

6. The outline deal will be approved via an exchange of letters between DCLG ministers 

and the constituent councils of the Oxfordshire area (Cherwell District Council; 
Oxford City Council; Oxfordshire County Council; South Oxfordshire District Council; 
Vale of White Horse District Council; West Oxfordshire District Council) and OxLEP.  


 

7. Before the full agreement can be approved by either side, HMG requires Oxfordshire 

to produce a realistic delivery plan by 31 January 2018. This plan should be agreed 
with the HCA, and should demonstrate how Government money provided through the 
deal is being spent in accordance with value for money requirements, alongside 
additional information on how a longer term step-change will be made to plan for and 
support the delivery of 100,000 homes by 2031.  


 

8. Any capacity funding provided through the deal will be available to support the 
development of the delivery plan. The delivery plan should include at least the 
following pieces of information to demonstrate results achieved as a result of money 
provided through the deal: 


   3  


 Implementation plan for spending Government money provided through the deal 
that meets value for money requirements as agreed with Government  

 A clear delivery profile setting out the number of homes to be built across each 
year 

 The location of housing and employment sites to be delivered, as a result of 
money delivered by the deal 

 The types and tenure of homes that will be built  

 The locations and type of infrastructure which will be invested in 

 A spending profile for the investment provided to Oxfordshire by Government 

 A monitoring and evaluation strategy for the deal  

 A clear plan for maximising local and new private investment into Oxfordshire  

 Timescales and payment profile for funding provided against the deal 

 Further detail on any flexibilities or freedoms granted, which may be subject to 
consultation where appropriate   


 

9. This is not an exhaustive list. Government will now work closely with Oxfordshire to 

outline its needs for the delivery plan in more detail, and come to an agreement on its 
format and content.  


 

d) Oxfordshire’s plans for growth  


 

10. Oxfordshire has a strong and growing knowledge intensive economy and is a net 

contributor to the UK exchequer, delivering £21 billion per year to national output.  It 
competes on a global stage as a centre of science and innovation, with two 
universities and unique research organisations and activities. Oxfordshire is a high 
demand housing area with a house price to earnings ratio of 10.23 - well in excess of 
the national average of 7.72. Like many areas, infrastructure constraints are a major 
barrier to housing development and job creation in Oxfordshire.  


 

11. Oxfordshire’s plans for growth are focused on a long-term, comprehensive and 

integrated approach to addressing these barriers - to deliver housing and economic 
growth in high quality sustainable developments, which offer good quality of life for 
new and existing residents.  This is reflected in the strong collaborative approach at 
the heart of the Oxfordshire Growth Board: a joint committee of the six local 
authorities, together with key strategic partners - including Oxfordshire’s two 
universities and the LEP - set up to facilitate and enable joint working on economic 
development, strategic planning and growth, including housing.  


 

12. Work undertaken by the Oxfordshire Growth Board and OxLEP has resulted in an 

ambitious Strategic Economic Plan, alongside an extensive assessment and ranking 
project, taking in all of the infrastructure development required to support 
Oxfordshire’s expected growth over the next 25 years (Oxfordshire Infrastructure 
Strategy - OXIS). 


 

e) The Cambridge-Milton Keynes-Oxford arc 


 

13. In 2016, the Government instructed the National Infrastructure Commission (NIC) to 

undertake a review of the potential for growth in the geographic corridor containing 
Oxford, Milton Keynes and Cambridge. Sitting at the Western end of the arc, 
Oxfordshire has a major role to play in delivering on the Government’s ambitions for 
this area, and beyond. The NIC’s final report was published in late 2017. This 
housing deal will be an important step towards realising the housing growth potential 
of this part of the arc.  


   4  


f) Delivery and governance 


 

14. The Oxfordshire Growth Board will be accountable for the successful implementation 
of the deal as agreed with Government. Actions to be taken in each District will 
require the agreement of the host District (and the County Council where transport 
infrastructure is required). 


 

15. Political support will be driven through the leaders of Oxfordshire’s six local 
authorities – the Housing and Growth Deal is completely aligned with their local 
priorities around economic development in Oxfordshire and the wider Cambridge-
Milton Keynes-Oxford corridor. 


 

g) HCA and Other Agency Support  


 

16. The Homes and Communities Agency (HCA) has significant levels of both local and 

national capability, through its strong presence on the ground in places (enabling it to 
leverage good intelligence about local housing markets) and its central commercial or 
strategic skills and expertise. The HCA has already played a key role within the 
development of the Oxfordshire Housing and Growth Deal; this is expected to 
continue.  


 

17. The HCA will play an integral role within the deal process as it moves forward. By 

employing its wide range of powers, and deploying its expertise in managing large 
scale and multi-site infrastructure and development programmes, the HCA will 
support and enhance the potential of the Oxfordshire deal to bring forward stalled 
sites and ensure that the volumes of land needed for development across the county 
are brought forward in good time. Specifically, the HCA will work closely with the 
Oxfordshire authorities on the production of a delivery plan, which will be submitted 
by Oxfordshire to Government on or before 31 January 2018.  


 

18. Both Government and Oxfordshire will also give consideration as to how other 
agencies and departments could take a more joined up role, recognising the aims of 
this deal, and the need for engagement to enable effective outcomes through both 
the planning and development process.   


 

h) Summary  


 

19. This deal will support Oxfordshire’s six local authorities to produce a county-wide 
joint statutory spatial plan, and to plan for and support the delivery of 100,000 new 
homes by 2031. 


 

20. Government and Oxfordshire are committed to working together to pursue a 

comprehensive approach to growth and will work together to explore opportunities 
arising from investment in the Cambridge-Milton Keynes-Oxford corridor, potential 
major transport schemes that could unlock major new developments and the key part 
Oxfordshire plays in critical sectors identified in the Government’s industrial strategy.  


         5  


2. Oxfordshire commitments 


 

a) The submission and adoption, subject to the inspection process, of a joint 
statutory spatial plan covering all five district councils in Oxfordshire, by 2021 


 

21. The Oxfordshire authorities are committed to allocating land for development through 

their current Local Plans. There are adopted Local Plans in place in Cherwell and for 
Vale of White Horse, a recently examined Plan in the case of West Oxfordshire and 
new Local Plans underway for Oxford City and South Oxfordshire.  


 

22. Oxfordshire’s plans are focused on placing economic growth at the heart of a drive to 

provide more housing – meeting both current and projected need. And housing 
delivery across the county is up over 75% in the last three years (up to 2015/16). 
However, sustaining this level of increase will not be possible without greater 
collaboration to support delivery of a county-wide programme of infrastructure 
investment.  


 

23. With support from the county council, Oxfordshire’s five district councils will enter into 

an agreement to work together to produce a joint statutory spatial plan to be adopted 
by March 2021, subject to examination. The following milestones will need to be met, 
with funding contingent on achievement of each milestone: 


 

Action Date  

Statement of Common Ground 31 March 2018 

All Local Plans submitted for examination  1 April 2019 
Draft joint statutory spatial plan 30 October 2019 

Submission of joint statutory spatial plan 31 March 2020 

Adoption (subject to examination.) 31 March 2021 


 

b) Delivery of 100,000 new homes by 2031 – backed up with a credible plan for 

delivery, outlining interim milestones and targets and agreed with the HCA and 
Government; 


 

24. Oxfordshire’s 2014 Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) identified that 

100,000 homes are needed across the county by 2031 to meet its trend-based 
economic and demographic growth and to ensure that people can live in affordable 
homes close to where the economic potential will be delivered.  


 

25. This is the basis for the current suite of local plans across Oxfordshire which, when 

fully adopted, will provide development plan coverage to 2036. The joint statutory 
spatial plan will build on these local plans. The ambition to plan for and support the 
delivery of 100,000 new homes by 2031 is recognised as significantly in excess of 
the Local Housing Need figures set out in the Government consultation paper 
‘Planning for the right homes in the right places’ (DCLG September 2017).  


 

26. The six local authorities across Oxfordshire commit to work with Government and its 

agencies, to agree and create a clear delivery plan outlining Oxfordshire’s ambition to 
plan for and support the delivery of 100,000 new homes by 2031. The delivery plan 
will need to be submitted by Oxfordshire on or before 31 January 2018 and approved 
by HMG, before any funding can be drawn down as part of the deal.  


 

27. We also encourage Oxfordshire to work with authorities across the Cambridge-Milton 

Keynes-Oxford corridor, together with central government, to agree a long term 
vision for the whole corridor up to 2050. 


  6   

28. It will be important to ensure the deal supports Oxfordshire’s ambitious growth 

programme and meets the needs of people who cannot afford to buy on the open 
market. Any commitments to affordable housing delivery will need to be based on 
realistic delivery profiles agreed with Government as part of the subsequent delivery 
plan. Any payment would be linked to delivery of agreed milestones and meeting 
required value for money and additionality standards. HMG and Oxfordshire will 
agree and develop an assurance framework for the deal, which will include 
provisions for clawback where appropriate. 


 

c) Pursue innovation and quality  


 

29. Oxfordshire partners are committed to ensuring that new housing and employment 

development are of high quality design and meet environmental standards in order to 
create attractive, sustainable places that offer a good quality of life for existing and 
new communities.  


 

30. Oxfordshire offers significant opportunities for innovation in design and new 

construction arising from major developments including the Northern Development 
Arc, Garden Towns at Didcot and Bicester, the West Oxfordshire Garden Village and 
the enterprise zones.   


 

31. Government and the Oxfordshire partners will work together to explore further 

opportunities to drive innovation in partnership, design and construction, including:   


 

 Promoting the growth of a locally based high quality and low cost modular 
housing construction supply chain industry across Oxfordshire.  


 

 With development partners, including the HCA, universities, health sector and 
private developers, Oxfordshire partners will look to use procurement and 
contracting influence to support the beneficial rapid development of this emerging 
sector. 


 

 Implement a programme of assessment, shared learning and applying lessons 
from emerging innovation, for example the Garden Towns at Didcot and Bicester, 
the new West Oxfordshire Garden Village and the UK’s largest Self-build 
development at Graven Hill. 


 

 New partnership models for affordable housing delivery.  


 

 Oxfordshire aims to plan and deliver housing and transport in a coordinated way, 
minimising local disruption, and ensuring that new housing is served by a range 
of integrated, sustainable transport options which suit local needs.  


 

 Working closely with neighbouring authorities where appropriate, and playing a 
key role in future work to promote and develop the Cambridge-Milton Keynes-
Oxford corridor. 


 

d) Oxfordshire’s contribution to the deal 


 

32. Oxfordshire councils are already committing in excess of £340m over the next five 

years to support the delivery of their housing and growth ambitions across the 
county. This includes implementing and rolling forward the Oxfordshire Infrastructure 
Strategy through investment in transport, social and community infrastructure 


  7  


schemes; strategic planning and delivery, investment through local housing 
companies delivering affordable and social housing as well as direct house building 
programmes and regeneration.  


 

33. The councils and their partners are also active participants in local housing and 

commercial property markets through use of their own land and property assets to 
support continued economic success and long-term place ambitions in Oxfordshire. 


 

34. Oxfordshire will be responsible for securing additional funding to plan for and support 

the delivery of the full complement of 100,000 homes by 2031. The deal does not 
preclude Oxfordshire from bidding for future sources of government funding.  


 

35. The collaborative, long term approach to planning for infrastructure investment and 
commitment to a joint statutory spatial plan are important conditions of this deal and 
may be a helpful consideration in potential future applications for funding to drive 
growth and housing in the area.  


 

e) New private investment  


 

36. Oxfordshire should seek to bring in new private investment alongside local authority 
funds. The delivery plan should set out a clear proposition for encouraging new 
market investment to help deliver the deal and ensure Oxfordshire is an attractive 
place for investment, building on its existing plans for growth.  


 

37. This deal also outlines Government’s support for encouraging more private sector 
investment in areas with high economic potential. The recent announcement that a 
fully electric version of the Mini will be built at the Cowley plant in Oxford from 2019 is 
testament to the area’s attractiveness for investment, and a reflection of 
Oxfordshire’s position as a hub for technology and innovation across the Cambridge-
Milton Keynes-Oxford arc.  


 

38. Oxfordshire should continue to look for opportunities to bring in further new private 
investment. 


 

f) Strategic infrastructure tariff  


 

39. Oxfordshire should consider introducing a Strategic Infrastructure Tariff (SIT), which 

could help to capture additional land value uplift created by the development process. 
As a first step, the local authorities should undertake a viability assessment across 
the area to determine whether a SIT would be viable across Oxfordshire and to 
estimate its potential revenues.  


 

40. In order to introduce a SIT, Oxfordshire would need to put in place the appropriate 
governance structures and mechanisms, at the appropriate time. Oxfordshire will 
now work with HMG to further explore the potential of this proposal, and the 
governance arrangements required to support it. 


         8  

3. Government commitments  


 

41. To support Oxfordshire to adopt a joint statutory plan, and to plan for and support the 
delivery of 100,000 new homes by 2031, Government agrees to: 


 

a) Provide Oxfordshire with up to £215m funding. 


 

42. Government agrees to provide Oxfordshire with a comprehensive funding package of 

up to £215m to secure this ambitious housing and growth deal, as follows: 


 

 Up to £60m for affordable housing, provided this delivers sufficient value for 
money to be agreed in the forthcoming delivery plan  

 Up to £150m funding for infrastructure to unlock key housing sites, to be 
administered £30m per annum for five years 

 £5m resource funding to boost capacity to get a joint plan in place and support 
housing delivery 


 

43. This funding will be profiled and dependent on the delivery of an agreed number of 

homes and milestones as set out in the delivery plan - to be agreed between HMG 
and Oxfordshire. Funding may be withheld or clawed back if milestones are not met.  


 

44. Delivery progress will be evaluated by the Government in accordance with the HCA.  


 

b) Explore options for certain time-limited planning flexibilities, subject to 

consultation where appropriate   


 

45. Oxfordshire’s proposals seek to align funding, transport, infrastructure and strategic 
planning locally. To improve this alignment and enable additional housing and growth 
including the agreement of a joint statutory spatial plan:  


 

 Government recognises that planning for this level of ambition takes time to result 
in increased delivery on the ground, and that these ambitions should be 
supported during the preparation of the JSSP. Therefore, we will explore options 
to help ensure that the existing housing land supply position is not undermined, 
and explore the impact of unplanned development whilst maintaining delivery as 
measured by the proposed housing delivery test. 


 

 To offer greater certainty for the adopted JSSP, we will also explore options to 
adjust the consequences of the housing delivery test that are proposed to apply 
after 2020, in the first three years following adoption of the JSSP.  


 

 Government will explore whether, as part of the move towards a joint statutory 
spatial plan, extended timescales are required for certain Oxfordshire local 
authorities to adopt their forthcoming Local Plans using their SHMA (Strategic 
Housing Market Assessment), as opposed to the transitional arrangements 
proposed by the Local Housing Need consultation.  


 

46. Any potential flexibility would be granted specifically to support delivery of the 

ambitious Oxfordshire housing deal to plan for and support the delivery of 100,000 
new homes by 2031, and to submit and adopt a joint statutory spatial plan. The detail 
and timescales of any freedoms or flexibilities granted by HMG as part of this deal 
will be shaped up during the delivery plan process, and may be subject to 
consultation where appropriate.  


   9  


c) Future collaboration between HMG and Oxfordshire  


 

47. Government is keen to understand the barriers that can hold back development and 
prevent new homes from being built. HMG wants to have strategic dialogue with local 
areas and partners about how we can work together to deliver additional homes 
faster. This includes better understanding of the barriers to increasing supply in local 
housing market areas. 


 

48. Throughout the deal process, Oxfordshire have presented a number of issues which 

they perceive as potential obstacles to growth and housing delivery. Government 
commits to work with Oxfordshire from early 2018 onwards to better understand 
these issues.  


 

49. This collaboration should feed into the development of the delivery plan which 

Oxfordshire will create in partnership with HMG and submit by 31 January 2018 (see 
above). The ongoing work may focus on a number of areas, including: 


 

 The delivery of planning consents and timely build-out  

 Social and community infrastructure, which can support housing and growth  

 Coherence and links between government departments, statutory agencies and 
other bodies involved in the development process 

 Partnerships and new ways of working – especially in the context of the 
Cambridge-Milton Keynes-Oxford corridor 

 The use of powers, such as Compulsory Purchase Orders 


      10  

4. Productivity 


 

50. Oxfordshire has a strong and growing knowledge intensive economy, and is a net 
contributor to the UK exchequer, delivering £21 billion per year to national output.  It 
competes on a global stage as a centre of science and innovation, with two 
universities and unique research organisations and activities.  


 

51. Alongside addressing housing delivery – a key constraint on growth in many parts of 

the county – Government commits to work with Oxfordshire to address other barriers 
to growth through: 


 

a)     Developing an ambitious local industrial strategy 


 

52. The Government is inviting Oxfordshire to begin the development of an ambitious 

local industrial strategy, alongside partners in the Cambridge-Milton Keynes-Oxford 
corridor. This strategy will back Oxfordshire’s world class science and innovation 
assets, as well as identifying and growing new sectors (set out in Oxfordshire’s 
Science and Innovation Audit) and business.  


 

53. It will be a long-term vision for growth, aligned to the overall corridor-wide vision, 
based on robust evidence, and focused on raising productivity and pay. It will be 
underpinned by strong cooperation between national Government and the private 
sector, local leadership and key institutions.  


 

a) Further support to grow Oxfordshire’s businesses 


 

54. Government will work with Oxfordshire to develop their Growth Hub to deliver quality 

driven targeted support, sector advice to increase SME market penetration and to 
accelerate scale up of high growth companies. Government will therefore, continue to 
provide core funding for the Growth Hub up until 2022. 


 

55. The strength and ambition of Oxfordshire’s businesses is critical to our economic 
growth and improving living standards. As part of the Cambridge-Milton Keynes-
Oxfordshire corridor, Oxfordshire will work with the Department for International 
Trade to build on its already strong international profile, with the aim of boosting 
inward investment and exports. Oxfordshire will also work with local partners across 
the Cambridge-Milton Keynes-Oxfordshire corridor to develop this work. 


 

b) Addressing skills gaps 


 

56. As part of Oxfordshire’s work to develop its local industrial strategy, DfE and 

Oxfordshire will work together to identify the specific skills needs that Oxfordshire 
faces, and encourage local providers to align their provision to address these needs. 
DfE will do this by rolling out national policies to address skills needs including Skills 
Advisory Panels, T-Levels and Apprenticeships; working with the LEP. 


 

c) Supporting Oxfordshire’s world-leading science and technology clusters 


 

57. In recognition of their national importance, Government will continue to look at ways 

of attracting further investment and expansion of the Science Vale and Didcot 
Enterprise Zones.  


 

58. As part of the Science Vale Enterprise Zone, the Harwell Campus is a beacon of the 
UK knowledge economy, a science and innovation district the size of a small town 


  11  

with outstanding people, world-class facilities and unrivalled access to open source 
national laboratories and their resources. The 710 hectare Campus is already home 
to more than 200 organisations ranging from the Diamond Light Source (the UK’s 
national synchrotron) to the newly announced Faraday Institution for batteries and 
energy storage, and includes a plethora of business involvement from SMEs to major 
global players. The site is set to mature to accommodate significant growth in 
employment, commercial and technical accommodation and supporting infrastructure 
including housing. To ensure Harwell continues to grow, Government will review the 
options available to accelerate the decommissioning programme for the Harwell site 
by June 2018. 


 

59. Oxfordshire’s Science & Innovation Audit identified that Oxfordshire has significant 

potential for growth in a number of sectors including robotics and connected 
autonomous systems, space, digital health and quantum computing.  


 

60. Oxfordshire will work with industry to explore how emerging sector deals could be 

coordinated with local plans and investment. Including on-going discussions with the 
following sectors: 


 

 Creative Industries 

 Nuclear 

 Robotics & Autonomous Systems 

 Space  


 

61. Government commits to exploring with Oxfordshire how the life sciences sector deal 
could further support the growth of Oxfordshire’s life sciences cluster. Through its 
discussions with the life sciences sector on a deal, Government will commit to ensure 
the right infrastructure is in place to support the growth of life sciences clusters, of 
which Oxfordshire is a key one.  


 

62. Oxfordshire will also have the opportunity to work with industry on further phases of 
any sector deals which complete an initial package. 


                  12  

5. Next steps  


 

63. Government seeks to secure one deal with Oxfordshire. Any future agreement will 
need to be agreed at the appropriate level with all six local authorities and the LEP 
that are signing this outline agreement.  


 

64. Should any authority/ies choose to walk away from the deal process at any point 

before full agreement is reached, then the outline agreement will need to be 
reviewed. In this instance, it is likely that Government will choose to withdraw from 
the deal.  


 

65. Unless and until the joint statutory spatial plan for Oxfordshire is produced, submitted 

and then adopted, all existing plans and national policy continue to provide the basis 
for decision-making in Oxfordshire.  


 

66. This deal does not allocate land for housing. Site allocations will be agreed through 
local plans subject to the inspection and examination process.  


 

67. As outlined above, Government and Oxfordshire now hope to agree the terms of this 

outline agreement, before exchanging letters with the six local authorities to confirm 
this agreement.  


 

68. Following this, Government expects Oxfordshire to work with the HCA to develop a 

credible, robust delivery plan – to cover both the commitment to plan for and support 
the delivery of 100,000 new homes by 2031,and the adoption of a joint statutory 
spatial plan by 2021 (subject to inspection). Oxfordshire will be responsible for the 
submission of this delivery plan by 31 January 2018.  




