



Rough Sleeping Strategy August 2018





Rough Sleeping Strategy
Presented to Parliament by the Secretary of State for Housing,  

Communities and Local Government by Command of Her Majesty

August 2018

CM 9685




© Crown copyright 2018

This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where 
otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/
version/3  

Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission  
from the copyright holders concerned.

This publication is available at www.gov.uk/government/publications

Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at:

Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government 
Fry Building 
2 Marsham Street 
London 
SW1P 4DF 
Telephone: 0303 444 0000

ISBN 978-1-5286-0763-6 
CCS0818273008  08/18

Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum

Printed in the UK by the APS Group on behalf of the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office

http://nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3
http://nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3
http://www.gov.uk/government/publications




Ministerial Foreword

We are fortunate 
to live in one of the 
most successful, 
advanced and 
fair-minded 
countries in the 
world. Yet, despite 
this, too many 
people still sleep 
rough on our 

streets on any given night in England. 

The human cost of this, in broken lives too 
often cut short, is unacceptable.  

This is why this Government – in line with 
our manifesto pledge – has made 
addressing rough sleeping a priority. 

We have committed to halve rough 
sleeping in this Parliament and to end it for 
good by 2027.

One of my first actions as Secretary of State 
was to award £28 million of funding to 
Housing First, a very impressive 
programme which tackles this issue.

Central and local government must work 
together to ensure everyone in our society 
has the dignity and security they need.

Our Strategy is based around three core 
pillars: Prevention, Intervention and 
Recovery. 

The first, Prevention, is at the heart of our 
approach, with the focus on providing 
timely support before someone becomes 
homeless. This, for example, will help us 
make sure no one leaves prison without 
suitable accommodation in place. 

The second pillar, Intervention, sets out 
how this Strategy will help people who are 
already in crisis get swift, targeted support 
to get them off the streets. 

The third, Recovery, emphasises how we 
will support people to find a new home 
quickly and rebuild their lives via a new 
rapid rehousing approach.

We cannot underestimate just how vital 
having your own front door is to 
someone’s sense of security, hope and 
recovery.

Equally important is knowing there is help 
on hand – through the new navigators that 
we are funding – to guide rough sleepers 
through support systems and get them the 
help they need. 

This vision builds on the significant 
programme of work that is already 
underway to address homelessness as a 
whole: the introduction of the 
Homelessness Reduction Act, more 
funding and support for local authorities to 
prevent homelessness and the launch of 
the Rough Sleeping Initiative.

As such, it is backed by a detailed 
programme to help people in the short and 
long term and also by £1.2 billion of 
funding to tackle homelessness. 

This includes £100 million of investment 
over the next two years to tackle rough 
sleeping. 

In everything we do, we will be led by 
evidence of what works and will provide 




annual updates, as well as developing a 
strategy to address wider homelessness. 

We will ensure that we remain focused on 
our goals: eradicating rough sleeping and 
preventing homelessness, with all 
government departments working 
seamlessly together. 

We know this is a complex issue, and we 
have more work to do, for example, to 
support non-UK nationals who sleep 
rough. This is a conversation that will 
continue. 

Which is why are committed to keeping 
this Strategy under review and continuing 
to develop our approach to respond to the 
challenges of homelessness, working in 
close partnership across government, 
frontline services, local authorities and the 
sector.

We all have a part to play and this Strategy 
also calls on businesses, communities and 
our wider society to come together and 
help make rough sleeping history. 

My thanks to everyone who has 
contributed to it, particularly the Rough 
Sleeping Advisory Panel, and the Rough 
Sleeping and Homelessness Reduction 
Taskforce.

Ultimately, the real test of its success will be 
on the ground; in not just putting a roof 
over people’s heads but helping them find 
and make a place really feel like home. 

These people, some of the most vulnerable 
in our society, deserve our full support. 

This Strategy will see that they get it. 

Rt Hon James Brokenshire MP,  
Secretary of State for Housing, 
Communities and Local Government




Contents

Executive Summary 8

Chapter 1: The scale of the problem and why we need to act 12

Chapter 2: The 2027 vision: Prevention, Intervention, Recovery 22

Chapter 3: Prevention 28

Chapter 4: Intervention 40

Chapter 5: Recovery 54

Chapter 6: Conclusion and next steps 64


8 

Executive Summary

1. The government is committed to halving 
rough sleeping by 2022 and ending it by 
2027. Ending rough sleeping will require 
central and local government, as well as 
business, communities, faith and voluntary 
groups and the general public to work 
together in new ways. This strategy shows 
the government doing exactly that, as we 
announce a range of cross-government 
initiatives which will see us working jointly in 
new ways, for instance through new health 
provision for people who sleep rough, and 
work in prisons to prevent people from 
sleeping rough in the first place. 

2. This strategy sets out our 2027 vision to 
support every person who sleeps rough off 
the streets and into a home. This is backed 
up by £100 million of funding in the next 
two years but marks just the beginning of 
our plans to meet our 2027 ambition, 
when no one has to sleep rough again. 
Rough sleeping is the most extreme form 
of homelessness and it is therefore right we 
take action to help people off the streets 
now. However, we also recognise that we 
need to look beyond rough sleeping to 
ensure the entire system is working to 
prevent all forms of homelessness. This can 
be seen in our wider work, for instance we 
have recently announced measures to 
ensure the private rented sector delivers 
secure, safe and affordable homes, which 
includes proposals for longer, more secure 
tenancies. 

3. We have already been bold in our approach 
to supporting homeless people by 
implementing the landmark legislation, the 
Homelessness Reduction Act. This Act 
fundamentally changes the way local 
authorities work to support homeless people 
in their areas, giving them new prevention 
responsibilities towards more people. 

4. Previous governments have pledged to  

end rough sleeping before. While they led 
important work to reduce rough sleeping, 
we are determined to go further and end it 
by 2027 to ensure no one has to sleep rough 
again. This means tackling the issue directly 
by helping people on the streets now and 
leading the changes needed across 
government to stop rough sleeping from 
occurring in the first place. This will not be 
easy but it is vital if we are to deliver a 
country which works for everyone.

5. Ending rough sleeping starts with secure 
and affordable housing. Successive 
governments have not built enough homes 
and the result is a broken housing market. 
This government is committed to changing 
this. Since 2010, we have delivered more 
than a million homes, including 378,000 
affordable homes and 273,000 homes for 
rent. Last year saw the biggest increase in 
overall housing supply in England for almost 
a decade: over 217,000 new homes.

6. We are investing £9 billion in affordable 
housing, including a new generation of 
council housing. We are giving £1 billion of 
funding flexibility to help ambitious councils 
borrow more to build more. We will publish 
a Social Housing Green Paper which sets out 
the vital role social housing plays in this 
country and our plans to build the social 
housing that is needed to help people get 
on in life. 

7. We also recognise the value of sufficient  
and good quality supported housing. This  
is why we have recently announced that  
we are maintaining Housing Benefit for all 
supported housing, and will work with the 
sector on oversight of quality and value for 
money. This reflects the particular needs of 
the vulnerable groups of people who access 
supported housing, and the government’s 
commitment to get the best possible 
outcomes for them.




8. Our strategy builds on these policies and the 
work of the Rough Sleeping Initiative which 
we announced in March 2018. It is based on 
the advice and evidence put forward by our 
expert Advisory Panel and brings all of 
government together to deliver a new 
system built around three core pillars: 
Prevention, Intervention and Recovery.  
This is a system that has prevention at its 
heart: it provides timely support to tackle 
mental health and substance misuse issues, 
it helps people leaving prison to find 
sustainable accommodation, and it provides 
people at risk of rough sleeping with the 
right support to find work and live 
independently. If people do find themselves 
at a crisis point and lose their home, this 
strategy sets out how they will be helped to 
find a new home quickly and supported to 
recover, as part of a new ‘rapid rehousing’ 
response to rough sleeping. 

9. We understand that rough sleeping is an 
issue that impacts different people and 
different places in different ways, so our 
approach is hardwired to recognise this 
difference. We are providing targeted 
funding to ensure that provision is in place 
for women who sleep rough as we 
recognise mainstream provision does not 
always meet their needs. This supports a 
locally driven approach, with local 
authorities leading the charge. 

10. We recognise that there are gaps in our 
understanding. We are told by the sector 
that LGBT individuals are more at risk of 
homelessness and rough sleeping. This is 
particularly the case among vulnerable 
young people. We are also told that people 
who sleep rough can be vulnerable to 
trafficking and modern slavery. We want  
to understand this better and we set out 
measures to address both of these issues  
in the strategy.

11. This strategy is the beginning of a nine year 
policy to ensure no one has to sleep rough 
again. While it sets out meaningful action 

that will help people now, it also sets out 
how we will test different approaches, learn 
from new evidence and scale up and roll out 
our programmes.

12. We will provide yearly updates which will 
show our progress on the manifesto 
commitment and outline new policies we 
plan to take forward once the evidence is  
in place to prove they work. We will also go 
on to develop a strategy to address wider 
homelessness and will be outlining our work 
in that area in the coming months. 

The scale of the problem and why 
we need to act
13. Our knowledge of who sleeps rough and 

why is imperfect. Accurately measuring the 
exact numbers of people sleeping rough is 
challenging. In autumn 2017, 4,751 people 
slept rough on a typical night. This was an 
increase of 15% on the previous year.

The 2027 vision:  
Prevent, Intervene, and Recover
14. We recognise that if we are to minimise the 

considerable harm caused by rough 
sleeping, the most important thing we can 
do is to prevent it from happening in the first 
place. This is why we set out a new ‘rapid 
rehousing’ response to rough sleeping 
which will enable us to ensure that by 2027 
no one will have to sleep rough again. 

Prevention
15. Building on our work to put prevention at 

the heart of homelessness services through 
the landmark Homelessness Reduction Act 
and our wider work to reform the private 
rented sector, we are bringing forward a 
range of new policies and programmes 
which reinforce this approach.

Key measures include:

• Embedding prevention across 
government: £3.2 million per year for two 
years for a new range of pilots to help 


  9

people leaving prison find stable and 
sustainable accommodation. New funding 
for intensive support for care leavers with 
complex needs.

• Getting the basics right: new measures  
to ensure the structures are in place to end 
rough sleeping. This includes a review of 
legislation around homelessness and rough 
sleeping, including the Vagrancy Act. We are 
clear that people who sleep rough need help 
and should not be discriminated against.

• Improving our understanding: research 
announced in the LGBT Action Plan will help 
us better understand how LGBT individuals 
experience homelessness. We will build our 
understanding of the links between modern 
slavery and rough sleeping.

• Improving oversight: ensuring that the 
deaths or incidents of serious harm of 
people who sleep rough are rigorously 
investigated, where this is appropriate.  
We will strengthen local homelessness 
strategies, and introduce a new emphasis 
on rough sleeping. 

• Work to look at affordability in the 
private rented sector, working with 
stakeholders: the government has begun 
work to look at affordability in the private 
rented sector, with a view to developing 
policy options for post-2020 when the 
current Local Housing Allowance freeze 
ends. We will work with the sector to 
develop this. 

Intervention
16. Prevention is vital, but if we are to ensure no 

one has to sleep rough again, we must act 
and intervene now to support the people 
who are experiencing it today.

Key measures include:

• Up to £45 million to continue the work 
of the Rough Sleeping Initiative: 
continuing to fund a broad range of local 
schemes which meet local need. This year 

we are funding over 500 new dedicated 
homelessness workers and an additional 
1,750 bed spaces to ensure people sleeping 
rough have a bed, while their wider needs 
are being addressed. 

• Somewhere Safe to Stay Pilots: up to 
£17 million for work in approximately 15 
areas to rapidly assess the needs of people 
at risk of rough sleeping and support them 
to get the right help. 

• Funding for rough sleeping navigators: 
new specialists who will help people who 
sleep rough to access the appropriate local 
services, get off the streets and into settled 
accommodation. 

• Mental health and substance misuse 
treatment: this year we will provide up to 
£2 million in health funding to enable access 
to health and support services for people 
who are sleeping rough. We have asked 
NHS England to spend up to £30 million on 
health services for people who sleep rough, 
over the next five years. This will be 
informed by the findings of an audit of 
health provision to be carried out this year. 

• New training for frontline staff: new 
training to ensure staff have the right skills 
to support people who sleep rough. This 
includes training on how to interact with 
clients under the influence of Spice, 
identifying and supporting victims of 
modern slavery and domestic abuse, and 
how to effectively support LGBT people. 

• £5 million new funding for non-UK 
nationals who sleep rough: new support 
for local areas to work with non-UK 
nationals who sleep rough. Additionally a 
new increased focus on rough sleeping in 
the Controlling Migration Fund.

• A Rough Sleeping Support team: 
prioritising support work and helping to 
resolve the immigration status of non-UK 
nationals who are sleeping rough. This 
includes providing a national point of 


10 

contact for local authorities through 
Immigration Enforcement’s Command and 
Control Unit, using a phased approach.

• New funding for an improved 
StreetLink: supporting the general public, 
business and communities to engage 
positively with people who sleep rough, 
through a new improved platform. 

• Confirmation that we are maintaining 
Housing Benefit for all supported 
housing: new additional oversight 
measures to ensure quality and value for 
money.

Recovery
17. We need to ensure that people have  

support in place to move into sustainable 
accommodation. A stable home is an 
essential element in a person’s recovery  
from rough sleeping and needs to go hand 
in hand with flexible support that is tailored 
to individual needs. This chapter outlines 
how government is ensuring that homes are 
in place for people who sleep rough.

Key measures include:

• Dormant Assets funding: the allocation  
of up to £135 million of dormant accounts 
funds, the majority of which will be used to 
support innovative financing for homes for 
people who sleep rough or are at risk of 
rough sleeping.

• Move On Funding: launch of a £50 million 
fund that will deliver a new supply of homes 
outside of London for people who are 
sleeping rough, as well as those who are 
ready to move on from hostels or refuges 
and might need additional support. 
Learning from this will inform plans for 
future capital funding for homes for people 
who sleep rough. This is in addition to the 
£50 million fund which was allocated to the 
Greater London Authority (GLA), who have 
been responsible for the implementation of 
the fund in London. 

• Supported Lettings: up to £19 million of 
new funding to provide flexible support in 
homes provided for people with a history of 
rough sleeping. This will provide flexible 
support funding to help over 5,000 people 
at risk of rough sleeping, over the next two 
years, to sustain their tenancies in homes 
across the housing sector. 

• Local Lettings Agencies: new funding to 
help local areas grow enterprises to support 
vulnerable people into accommodation.

• Housing First: we have already announced 
£28 million of funding for Housing First 
pilots in Greater Manchester, the West 
Midlands and Liverpool to support people 
with multiple complex needs. 

• Homelessness experts for every 
Jobcentre Plus: will offer expert advice, 
signposting and support.

• Young Futures Fund: a new Social Impact 
Bond, the Young Futures Fund, to support 
young people who are not in education, 
employment or training (NEET).

Conclusion and next steps 
18. This chapter sets out what our next steps 

will be and when our interventions will 
come online. We will keep this strategy 
under review and continue to develop work 
and further initiatives, for instance further 
work on how we support non-UK nationals 
off the streets. We are also developing a 
delivery plan which will set out how we will 
deliver the ambitious work set out in this 
strategy, to be published in the autumn. 

19. This strategy marks just the beginning of  
our plans. It focusses, rightly, on putting in 
place new programmes and structures to 
support people off the streets now. We 
recognise that embedding preventative 
approaches takes time which is why we are 
committing to updating this strategy 
annually. These updates will set out further 
progress to ensure no one has to sleep 
rough again. 



  11

Chapter 1

The scale of the problem and why we need to act




20. People’s experiences of rough sleeping vary 
enormously. Some people have a short and 
very limited experience of rough sleeping  
and, where prevention services work well, 
may only sleep rough for a few days. Other 
people may escape rough sleeping, only to 
return again to the streets when their 
housing fails or after a spell in hospital or 
prison. Other people may, very sadly,  
spend years on the street. Each person is 
different and needs a different form of help 
and assistance.

Homelessness and rough sleeping
21. This country has a strong safety net, with 

legislation in place to support families and  
the most vulnerable when they become 
homeless and new legislation to prevent 
people becoming homeless in the first place. 

22. Homelessness as a term refers to a range of 
different people and experiences. In law,  
it  means that a person or household does 
not have accommodation that is available 
for them to occupy, that they have a legal 
right to occupy, and that it is reasonable for 
them to continue to occupy. This includes 
people who sleep rough,1 people living in 
hostels, shelters and domestic abuse 
refuges, and hidden homeless people who 
have to rely on friends or family for 
accommodation in unreasonable 
circumstances. Additionally, as part of our 
strong safety net, local authorities are legally 
obliged to house many homeless people as a 
result of their needs, for example those with 
children or those who are vulnerable as a 
result of their health. 

23. This strategy focusses on people who  
sleep rough and those who are at risk of 
sleeping rough. We will be setting out  
how government is helping people  
affected by other forms of homelessness  
in a future strategy. 

The scale of rough sleeping and the 
latest trends
24. Accurately measuring the exact numbers of 

people sleeping rough is challenging. In 
2010, the Coalition Government introduced 
a snapshot method which requires every 
local authority either to count or estimate 
the number of people sleeping rough in 
their area on a single night every year. In 
autumn 2017 4,751 people were identified 
as sleeping out on a typical night. This was 
an increase of 15% (617 people) on the 
previous year.i 

25. The counts and estimates on a single night 
provide useful data and is the agreed 
method for tracking progress in tackling 
rough sleeping. However, it is extremely 
important that our understanding of who is 
sleeping rough on our streets and what their 
particular needs are becomes much more 
sophisticated if we are to find the right 
solutions to ending rough sleeping for each 
and every citizen. We expect local 
authorities and their delivery partners, 
especially in areas with high numbers of 
people who sleep rough, to develop 
improved ways of recording and assessing 
rough sleeping.

 Chapter 1 | The scale of the problem and why we need to act 13

1 Official statistics provide the following definition of people sleeping rough:  
People sleeping, about to bed down (sitting on/in or standing next to their bedding) or actually bedded down in the open air (such as on the streets, in tents, doorways, 
parks, bus shelters or encampments). People in buildings or other places not designed for habitation (such as stairwells, barns, sheds, car parks, cars, derelict boats, stations, 
or “bashes” which are makeshift shelters, often comprised of cardboard boxes).  
The definition does not include people in hostels or shelters, people in campsites or other sites used for recreational purposes or organised protest, squatters or travellers.




The Rough Sleeping Initiative will 
support work in local areas to improve 
recording and assessing rough sleeping 
by autumn 2018.

26. Of the people who sleep rough across the 
year, some will be sleeping on the streets  
for the first time, some all year and some will 
sleep rough intermittently. The number of 
people sleeping on the streets is also likely  
to be influenced by the seasons. Data  
from the Combined Homelessness and 
Information Network (CHAIN), a database 
used in London by people working in the 
sector, showed that 60% of the people 
recorded as sleeping rough in London in 
2017-18 were new to the streets.ii Over  
half (59%) were seen only once, while only 
6% were seen more than ten times.2 

27. Rough sleeping is unevenly distributed 
across the country, and it has increased not 
only in large cities, but in many different 
areas. Almost half (48%) of the people 
identified as sleeping rough in England on a 
single night in 2017 were in London and the 
South East.

28. Urban areas have seen the largest increases 
since 2010, although numbers in rural areas 
have also increased. Some seaside towns 
have also seen large increases in the number 
of people sleeping rough. The rate of people 
sleeping rough (the local figure divided by 
the resident household population) provides 
a more comparable estimate between 
areas. In autumn 2017, the rate of people 
sleeping rough per 10,000 households was 
2.0 for England, 3.1 for London, and 1.8 for 
the rest of England. iii 

The profiles of people who currently 
sleep rough

Gender, age and ethnicity

29. People who sleep rough in England tend 
to be: 
a. male;  
b. between 25 and 55 years old; and 
c. predominantly white.

30. In the 2017 counts and estimates, 83% of 
people found sleeping rough were men, 
while 14% were women (gender for the 
remaining 3% was unknown).iv While 
women and men have been found to be 
equally likely to experience hidden 
homelessnessv , these figures show that men 
are more likely to experience rough sleeping.

31. However, women who sleep rough are 
more likely to have specific support needs 
and to have experienced traumas, including 
domestic abuse, mental ill health, substance 
misuse, and to have self-harmed.vi We are 
told by the sector that when women sleep 
rough, they make themselves less visible in 
order to stay safe. This means that we often 
know less about them and their needs than 
we do about men who sleep rough.

32. In the 2017 counts and estimates, 81% of 
people found sleeping rough were aged over 
25 years.vii However, most people who sleep 
rough first became homeless at a young age, 
often in their early twentiesviii , pointing to 
the need for early, targeted intervention.

14 Chapter 1 | The scale of the problem and why we need to act

2 However, findings from CHAIN may not be representative of rough sleeping incidences across England as CHAIN only collects information on rough sleeping in London.  
In addition, CHAIN does not necessarily record all incidents of people sleeping rough. It records only those people whom outreach workers have been in contact with.  
An alternative estimate for the average length of time people sleep rough is 33 days across the year in England.




Rough sleeping rates per 10,000 households

 Chapter 1 | The scale of the problem and why we need to act 15




Lou, 47

“I became homeless just over ten years ago 
following the death of my daughter whilst I was  
in rehab. I lost my mind a bit, I didn’t try and link in 
with services but when I did it was very difficult.  
I was using drugs, it took two weeks to get a 
methadone script, when you are transient, 
sleeping under bridges and in cars, you cannot 
keep up with it, it is not possible. 

Being homeless is the worst, you are reliant on 
other people for somewhere to sleep, you need 
someone to protect you. It’s the things I had to do 
to get money, to survive from day to day. It’s the 
way people look at you, I used to hide around 
school times, because I don’t think people should 
have to explain to their children why someone is 
on the floor under a bridge. I get why people  
look down on you, I really do, but people think 
you choose to be in that position. Who would 
chose to be homeless? Nobody.

I’ve been in a number of hostels and it’s about the 
people you have to support you. Here I have a 
good key worker, everything I do is followed up 
and things seem to be working at last. When  
I came here I had over £2,000 of arrears, I’ve 
managed to get rid of it now and I am the next on 
the list. After 10 years, I am actually going to have 
my own place, this is the best position I have been 
in for such a long time. 

I don’t care what my future holds, as longs as  
I have my own front door and I can lock it behind 
me. I don’t have to deal with people I don’t want 
to, I don’t have to see anyone I don’t want to, and 
I can just be me. Once I’m in I’ll need a week or 
two to actually believe it has happened before  
I think about what I am going to do next.”

16 Chapter 1 | The scale of the problem and why we need to act

Differences between London and the rest  
of England

33. The profiles of people sleeping rough in 
London are different to the rest of England. 
For instance there is a higher migrant rough 
sleeping population in London who tend to 
have lower support needs.ix In the 2017 
counts and estimates, less than half (40%) 
of the people sleeping rough in London 
were from the UK, compared to around four 
fifths (82%) in the rest of England. Almost a 
third (30%) of people found sleeping rough 
in London were from EU countries, 
compared to 12% in the rest of England.x  

Support needs

34. Support needs often relate to health 
conditions. Of the people seen sleeping 
rough in London in 2017-18, 50% had 
mental health needs, 46% had physical 
health needs, 43% had alcohol misuse 
needs and 40% misused drugs.xi Outside of 
London, where people are more likely to 

sleep rough for longer, support needs may 
be higher.xii Evidence suggests that homeless 
people have far higher rates of 
schizophrenia, anxiety disorders, depression 
and personality disorders than the general 
population.xiii  

35. In the 2015 Hard Edges report, a study  
of severe and multiple disadvantage in 
England, Professor Glen Bramley and 
co-authors from Heriot-Watt University 
estimated that around 31% of homeless 
people have complex needs, which means 
that they have two or more support needs.xiv   
There is also evidence that a person’s 
support needs increase the longer they stay 
on the streets, and also with age. Many 
people who sleep rough will have additional 
support needs including emotional  
needs. They may have poor financial or 
interpersonal skills and will need support 
to engage more positively with society, to 
find employment or to set up and maintain 
a home.




Institutional history and interaction with 
public services

36. People who sleep rough are more likely 
to have experience of institutions such as 
prisons, the care system or the armed forces.xv  
Data from CHAIN in 2017-18 shows 11% of 
people sleeping rough were in care as a child 
and 36% had served a custodial sentence. 
This data also shows 7% were in the armed 
forces, but this figure includes a relatively 
high number of non-UK nationals. Only 3% 
of people seen sleeping rough in London had 
experience of the UK armed forces.



LGBT


37. There has been some early work from the 
sector that indicates that the causes and 
needs of LGBT individuals experiencing 
homelessness can be different from those 
who are non-LGBT. The Homeless Link 
Annual Survey of youth homelessness 
estimated that around 7% of young 
homeless people were LGBT, but also 
recognised that this was likely to be under 
reported.xvi Many may have experienced 
familial rejection, abuse and violence and 
will have been at increased risk of sexual 
exploitation. The evidence base is not yet 
sufficiently robust to draw firm conclusions 
on how this might be driving homelessness 
or the prevalence of this issue; however, we 
outline later in the strategy how we will 
address this gap.

Example of a pathway towards homelessness, characterised by multiple and complex interactions with  
public services. 

Jean’s homelessness pathway

Living with 
parents

Council fl at with 
daughter and 
partner at 16

Sleeping rough
Stays with mother 

then sofa surfs

Gets new partner and 
gets pregnant. Then 

convicted for assaulting 
police offi cer.

Using ketamine and 
begging. Mother asks 
her to return home.

Family problems persist 
and chooses to move to 
another city with cousin.

Awful childhood, 
including: alcohol abuse 

& rape. Family broke 
down. Became pregnant.

Hostel Private rented fl at Council fl at Prison

Suffers abuse. Council 
offers fl at near abuser. 

She refuses. Sent to 
prison for altercation 

with abuser.

Offered council fl at.

Council fl at is small so 
moves to private rented 
fl at. Suffers depression 

but stops drug use.

Does not trust landlord 
so leaves. Council 

will not help as she is 
intentionally homeless.

Prison for 1 year Hostel

Has psychiatric support 
and is looking for 
accommodation.

Offered temporary 
accommodation.

This diagram was reproduced with permission from Mackie & Thomas (2014) ‘Nations Apart? Experiences of single homeless people across Great Britain’.xxxi 

 Chapter 1 | The scale of the problem and why we need to act 17




The reasons why people sleep rough
38. Professors Fitzpatrick and Bramley recently 

identified poverty, particularly childhood 
poverty, as the most powerful predictor of 
all forms of homelessness. Certain groups 
are significantly more likely to become 
homeless than others, and factors such 
as ethnicity, education, adverse childhood 
experiences, gender and employment all 
play a sizeable role.xvii  

39. Early trauma and childhood abuse seem  
to be common amongst homeless people 
with more complex needs. A 2010 study  
by Heriot-Watt University surveyed single 
homeless people with multiple needs in 
seven UK cities (452 people, 77% of whom 
had slept rough). The authors found that by 
the age of 16, 24% of those surveyed had 
parents or carers with drug or alcohol 
problems, 22% had experienced sexual 
abuse, 23% had experienced physical 
abuse and 27% had witnessed violence 
between parents.xviii

40. However, homelessness and rough 
sleeping are not inevitable results of these 
drivers. Many people who experience them 
do not become homeless. Specific triggers 
can lead to people rough sleeping, 
including eviction from rented property, 
conflict with family, relationship 
breakdowns and leaving prison.xix

The impact of rough sleeping  
on the individual
41. People who sleep rough regularly over a 

long period are more likely to die young 
than the general population. In an 
international review of all available 
evidence, homeless populations, along with 
other excluded groups (including sex 
workers and prisoners), are ten times more 
likely to die than those of a similar age in the 
general population. They are also much 
more likely to die from injury, poisoning and 

suicide (eight times greater risk in men,  
19 times in women)xx . In another report, the 
average age of death for a person who dies 
whilst living on the streets or in homeless 
accommodation in England was calculated 
as 47 years old compared to 77 for the 
general population,3 and it was estimated 
that around 35% of people who die whilst 
sleeping rough or living in homeless 
accommodation died due to alcohol or 
drugs, compared to 2% in the general 
population.xxi  

42. People sleeping rough are also frequently 
victims of violence and theft. For example, in 
a survey of 458 homeless people who had 
slept rough in the past 12 months, one in 
three reported that they had been 
deliberately hit or kicked or experienced 
another form of violence, and more than 
half reported having their personal 
belongings stolen.xxii Frequently people who 
sleep rough do not report crimes to the 
police as they do not believe that anything 
will be done.xxiii  

43. Data and research only tells us part of the 
story. Understanding the day-to-day 
experiences of people who are sleeping 
rough, the impact on their lives and what 
helps them off the streets is essential to help 
us build our evidence base and to inform 
better policy design and delivery and 
making this the norm across government. 
We are committed to working with people 
with lived experience of homelessness and 
rough sleeping to inform the delivery of this 
strategy and our further work. We are 
especially eager to understand more about 
how these individuals successfully moved on 
from rough sleeping.

We will ensure that people’s lived 
experience of rough sleeping and 
homelessness will feed into future 
updates of this strategy.

18 Chapter 1 | The scale of the problem and why we need to act

3 These figures were calculated using 2001-2009 data




The cost of rough sleeping
44. Helping people before they sleep rough will 

not only reduce the human cost of rough 
sleeping, it will also help to reduce costs to 
the wider public sector. People who sleep 
rough often have a combination of needs 
which will mean that they come into contact 
with a range of public bodies. This includes 
the costs of providing health care, drug and 
alcohol treatment, emergency services and 
costs to the criminal justice system. 
However, some people who sleep rough 
may not want to interact with services 
because of their complex needs.

45. Estimates of the costs of rough sleeping to 
the public purse vary depending on the 
methodology followed and the data used. 
In the 2015 Hard Edges report, Professor 
Glen Bramley and co-authors estimated the 
costs of rough sleeping to the public purse 
to be between £14,300 and £21,200 per 
person per year, with the higher cost being 
incurred if rough sleeping occurred 
alongside substance misuse and offending. 
This is three to four times the average cost to 
public services of an average adult 
(approximately £4,600). The estimated cost 
of rough sleeping, excluding the cost of 
benefits, is therefore between £7,100  
and £15,200 per person per year.xxiv  

Estimates of the cost to the public purse of homelessness compared to the average cost per person per year, 
2014-15 prices


£0

£5,000

£10,000

£15,000

£20,000

£25,000
Cost per person 
excluding benefits

Total cost per person

Average UK public 
expenditure for 

comparable services

Homeless, 
Substance & 

Offender

Homeless & 
Substance

Homeless & 
Offender

Homeless Only

Source: Lankelly Chase, Foundation, Hard Edges: Mapping severe and Multiple disadvantage in England 2015

£14,300

£7,100

£20,200

£14,400

£16,300

£9,300

£21,200

£15,200

£4,600

£3,100

  Source: Lankelly Chase, Foundation, Hard Edges: Mapping severe and Multiple disadvantage in England 2015

 Chapter 1 | The scale of the problem and why we need to act 19




Our plans to improve our  
evidence base
46. It is essential that we use evidence to inform 

our interventions. Not only does better data 
and evidence mean we can hold ourselves 
to account as we make progress towards 
ending rough sleeping, but it also means we 
can make sure that our interventions reflect 
the needs of the people they are designed to 
help and provide value for money to 
taxpayers. This is why, across the strategy, 
we have made a number of commitments 
to piloting new approaches to inform wider 
roll-out, improving data and building the 
evidence base. We have already introduced 
the H-CLIC data collection arrangements 
through which local authorities will be 
gathering and reporting on the causes of 
homelessness, and the accommodation and 
support needs of people asking for help, 
including single people threatened with 
homelessness and those sleeping rough.

Over the next nine years, we will plug 
evidence gaps and pilot, test and 
evaluate new approaches which will 
inform our plans for wider roll-out. 

20 Chapter 1 | The scale of the problem and why we need to act




 Chapter 1 | The scale of the problem and why we need to act 21




Chapter 2

The 2027 vision:  
Prevention, Intervention, Recovery




47. Our vision is that by 2027 all parts of central 
and local government, in partnership with 
business, the public and wider society are 
working together to ensure that no-one  
has to experience rough sleeping again. 

The role of prevention
48. If we are to minimise the considerable harm 

caused by rough sleeping, the most 
important thing we can do is to prevent it 
from happening in the first place. This will 
take time but this government has already 
taken important steps to embed a culture  
of prevention into services through the 
Homelessness Reduction Act 2017. That 
Act, for the first time, puts prevention at the 
heart of the local housing authority 
response to homelessness and also puts 
new duties on other public sector bodies to 
refer people at risk of homelessness to local 
homelessness services. The Act also means 
that single people and childless couples are 
no longer excluded from assistance because 
they do not have ‘priority need.’ Instead 
they are owed duties to help prevent them 
becoming homeless or help to find 
alternative accommodation. 

49. We have also taken important steps to 
ensure the private rented sector delivers safe 
and affordable homes. For instance, we are 
consulting on how to overcome the barriers 
to landlords offering longer tenancies, 
including a proposed model for a three year 
tenancy with a six month break clause. We 
are also improving affordability for tenants 
through market reforms and legislative 
interventions like the Tenant Fees Bill, and 
educating landlords and tenants of their 
respective rights and responsibilities. 

50. Through the Troubled Families Programme, 
local authorities and their partners are 
working to mitigate some of the triggers 
that can lead people to sleep rough. By 
providing high quality whole family support 
to families with complex needs, the 

programme aims to reduce the risk and 
impact of family breakdown due to 
extraordinary reasons such as alcohol or 
drug dependency or domestic violence. We 
will ensure that we learn from the Troubled 
Families Programme and the evidence and 
good practice that it is generating.

51. The Homelessness Reduction Act lays the 
foundations for the changes we need to 
see. However, if we are to ensure no one has 
to sleep rough again then we need all parts 
of government to come together so that 
public services are working to ensure stable 
accommodation is in place for the people 
who access their services. In turn, these 
services will also provide people with the 
right support and skills so that they can 
maintain a home. This will involve local 
authorities, the care system, the health 
service, prisons and probation services, the 
police, immigration services and Jobcentres 
working together to support the most 
vulnerable. 

The 2027 Vision: central and local 
government work hand in hand with 
charities and businesses to prevent 
rough sleeping
52. Our guiding principle is that all partners  

at the local and national level will work 
together in a joined-up way, commissioning 
and building services based on evidence  
of what works. Services will offer 
person-centred support with an 
understanding of individual needs and 
recognition of their strengths. They will 
promote individual choice and create 
environments that are appropriate for 
vulnerable people. 

53. We will have effective systems in place that 
allow us to gather meaningful data to better 
understand homelessness and rough 
sleeping, to support delivery partners in 
their work, and to hold them to account 
where they are not working effectively.  

 Chapter 2 | The 2027 vision: Prevention, Intervention, Recovery 23




This will include Supported Housing, where 
we will have designed and implemented 
new oversight measures for quality and 
value for money. 

54. It is not just local and central government 
that has a part to play; there is an 
opportunity for many parts of society to 
come together to ensure that we are all 
doing our bit, so that no one has to sleep 
rough again. In chapter five we outline how 
we will enable business and communities to 
support people who sleep rough or are at 
risk of rough sleeping in their area.

55. In particular, we also believe that registered 
providers are crucial to increasing the supply 
of homes to people at social and affordable 
rent and are delivering the majority of new 
affordable homes. Housing Associations not 
only provide homes for vulnerable people 
but, in support of their charitable objectives, 
many also invest their own funding into 
supporting their residents to maintain their 
tenancies, increase their employment and 
life skills, and live more productive lives. By 
2020, we want Housing Associations to play 
an even more central role, working with 
their local partners and councils, building 

even more homes and continuing to work 
with communities and their residents to 
provide appropriate, flexible and safe homes 
for vulnerable people.  They have a 
fundamental part to play in resolving the 
current crisis, and in delivering the future 
system of informed and robust prevention. 

Intervention and Recovery in 2027:  
a rapid rehousing response
56. The earlier that a stable base can be 

established, the greater the chances that an 
individual will not return to rough sleeping. 
The Housing First model follows the 
principle that the first thing to do when 
intervening to secure a person’s recovery is 
to support them into a home, with intensive 
wrap-around support provided in tandem 
to help them address their needs. We have 
committed £28 million to pilot Housing First 
in Greater Manchester, Liverpool and the 
West Midlands.

Nottingham Community Housing Association (NCHA), Mr M

Mr M, in his early 60s, was living in private rented 
accommodation until he was evicted in January 
2018, due to anti-social behaviour (ASB) issues 
with his neighbours, which he denied. 

He was left homeless and initially slept rough for a 
month, spending a night in a winter shelter and a 
couple of nights in hospital. After a temporary 
stay in a hotel, the local authority’s housing 
department referred him to Linby Drive (short stay 
temporary housing), run by Nottingham 
Community Housing Association (NCHA).

He has been given a room with en-suite facilities, 
more suited to his medical conditions. As well as 

accommodation, he has received tailored support 
around budgeting, identification documents and 
potential courses to help him to access new 
opportunities.

When he moves into independent 
accommodation NCHA will continue to support 
him by referring him to support services, helping 
him to register for utilities, and setting up the best 
payment plan for him. 

With NCHA’s support, Mr M has improved his 
budgeting skills and pays his residents’ charge, to 
the point where he is three months in credit and 
saving up for when he is offered his own home. 

24 Chapter 2 | The 2027 vision: Prevention, Intervention, Recovery




Clearing House, Ibrahim, 53

Ibrahim became homeless for three months after 
his agency work ended. He tried to look for jobs 
that would support him to fund his 
accommodation, but with no work opportunities 
available, Ibrahim was left with no choice but to 
turn to the streets.

During this time, Ibrahim would sleep on public 
transport or try to find safe spots in the streets. He 
also had undiagnosed health issues and was 
experiencing unusual symptoms, but didn’t know 
how to get the support he needed.

After a few months he was found by a charity 
who took him to a shelter and got him the medical 
attention he needed. Unfortunately, he found out 
he had cancer which he received treatment for. 

The charity then supported him to access his own 
accommodation through Clearing House. Ibrahim 
remarked; 

“I was so happy when I walked through those 
doors. It felt good and I’m so thankful for the help 
I received. That was a day I’ll never forget. It’s nice 
and quiet here and I can relax. I am also much 
better at controlling my money now. I don’t spend 
money on alcohol so I make sure I pay my all my 
bills and rent.”

Ibrahim also volunteers as a street buddy twice a 
week as he wants to help other people who are in 
similar situations.

57. Another example is the Clearing House 
scheme, which was set up by Lord Young 
in the 1990s as part of a wider drive to 
reduce rough sleeping and demonstrates 
the security a stable home can offer. As a 
result of that scheme there are still over 
3,750 units across London which are used 
to house people who have slept rough, a 
quarter of whom come straight from the 
streets and are rapidly rehoused. A vital 
element of this offer is floating support 
provided by St Mungo’s and Thames Reach 
to help clients maintain their home. The 
evidence from this is impressive; 92% of 
tenants in these units do not return to rough 
sleeping and 15% of tenants in these units 
are now in paid work. 

58. Ensuring that the right support, tailored to 
an individual’s needs, is provided alongside a 
home, is fundamental to both the Housing 
First and Clearing House models. Particular 
examples of support which have been 
proven to be effective are key workers or 
navigators who help clients access more 
mainstream support and more specialist, 
bespoke programmes targeted at people 
who sleep rough. 

59. By 2027, we want to base our response to 
rough sleeping on a rapid rehousing 

 Chapter 2 | The 2027 vision: Prevention, Intervention, Recovery 25

approach. This means if a person is at risk of 
rough sleeping they will have their needs 
assessed quickly in line with the 
requirements of the Homelessness 
Reduction Act, be offered appropriate 
support and then helped rapidly into a 
home, with appropriate support alongside. 
This approach was endorsed by the Advisory 
Panel and we set out how we are laying the 
foundations for this new approach in 
subsequent chapters. 

The role of social investment by 2027
60. Government has been working to attract 

new sources of funding into the sector, 
which can enable more support to be put in 
place for people who sleep rough, bring 
forward new homes and empower people 
working in the sector to be more innovative. 

61. One important example of this is our work 
to stimulate social impact investment. Social 
impact investors seek to address core social 
problems including homelessness and 
rough sleeping alongside making a financial 




return. The sector is growing, driven by 
appetite amongst investors. There are 
already a significant number of social 
enterprises providing stable 
accommodation to vulnerable people who 
might otherwise be at risk. These enterprises 
include local lettings agencies that seek 
to house disadvantaged people who are 
usually poorly served by the private rental 
market and also social property funds. 

62. We are determined that social impact 
investment should become ‘business as 
usual’ for individual and institutional 
investors. We have committed to do this by: 

• making it easier for people to invest;

• improving deal flow and the ability to invest 
at scale;

• strengthening competence and confidence 
within the financial services industry; and

• developing better reporting of non-financial 
outcomes.

63. As part of this, this government has also led 
the way in testing and trialling Social Impact 
Bonds. These models provide an 
opportunity to address perennial challenges 
in society by bringing together the public, 
private and voluntary sectors to drive 

innovation with a focus on delivering 
outcomes. Social Impact Bonds allow service 
providers the freedom and flexibility to 
provide a bespoke service, while the 
taxpayer only pays for successful outcomes. 
They can also encourage early intervention 
to prevent a crisis which saves money in the 
longer term.

64. There are now over 40 Social Impact Bonds 
in the UK, including 17 aimed at reducing or 
preventing rough sleeping. The UK is 
considered a world leader in this field. The 
evidence from these Social Impact Bonds 
shows the benefit of this approach. For 
instance, the £15 million Fair Chance Fund 
Social Impact Bond was a three-year 
programme targeted at homeless young 
people aged 18 to 24 years to improve 
accommodation, education and 
employment outcomes. After two years, 
86% of the young people participating in 
the programme had entered 
accommodationxxv and more than 400 
qualifications were achieved over the course 
of the programme. Reports to date also 
show that the payment by results system 
appeared to incentivise staff to achieve 
outcomes, with no evidence of perverse 
incentives or a focus on quick wins.[i]

The St Basils Re-writing Futures programme 

The Re-writing Futures programme was a Social 
Impact Bond that supported young homeless 
people aged 18-24 who were not in priority  
need for housing, unable to access other service 
provision and were Not in Education, Employment 
or Training (NEET).

“The Social Impact Bond allowed us to work with 
a cohort of young people with the greatest needs, 
who may have been failed by other services. Each 
young person was offered intensive tailored 
support over a longer time (3 years) to obtain  
long term stable accommodation. They were  

then supported into employment, training or 
volunteering. This was provided by a team of 
Progression Coaches and Volunteers who are 
skilled and knowledgeable in a whole host of 
areas including; accommodation, NEET support, 
Mental Health, Substance Abuse and offending. 
Joint working with other agencies was crucial to 
the success of this programme and enabled us to 
offer the wrap around support needed to progress 
these individuals on in their lives more positively. 
The SIB gave us the opportunity to be flexible, 
creative and responsive to change quickly and 
efficiently.”

26 Chapter 2 | The 2027 vision: Prevention, Intervention, Recovery




65. There is a clear role for social investment to 
help bring on stream new supply of housing 
for vulnerable people and in the next 
chapters we outline additional steps we are 
taking to target social investment at people 
rough sleeping now. We believe that Social 
Impact Bonds and social investment more 
broadly are crucial tools and we are working 
to develop a new pipeline of social 
investment opportunities.

We are clear that we will deliver an 
expanded social investment market, 
including Social Impact Bonds, in our 
2027 vision.

 Chapter 2 | The 2027 vision: Prevention, Intervention, Recovery 27




Chapter 3

Prevention




66. This chapter sets out what we are doing 
now, both to help the people who are 
currently sleeping rough, but also to lay the 
foundations for the 2027 vision to Prevent, 
Intervene and Recover. 

67. This government has taken a number of 
important steps to put prevention at the 
heart of our response to homelessness. 
As well as implementing the Homelessness 
Reduction Act, we have also dedicated £20 
million to establish a network of 26 
Homelessness Prevention Trailblazer 
projects, and a further £20 million of 
funding for 48 projects providing targeted 
prevention and early intervention for those 
at imminent risk of sleeping rough. Learning 
from these programmes has shaped this 
strategy and the areas involved offer a 
blueprint for others to follow.

Getting the basics right

68. As part of the implementation of the 
Homelessness Reduction Act, we 
committed to review how the Act is working 
within two years. This will provide important 
insight and will shape our future plans.  
Given the breadth of legislation impacting 
on rough sleeping, we have decided that 
this review will go further and look at other 

relevant homelessness and rough sleeping 
legislation.

69. In particular, some people, including the 
Advisory Panel, have expressed concerns 
about how the Vagrancy Act is being used in 
relation to people who sleep rough. Those 
who find themselves sleeping rough are 
some of the most vulnerable in society and 
we are clear that people who sleep rough 
should not be discriminated against.

70. We need to understand how this Act is 
being applied to people who are sleeping 
rough. We also want to better understand 
how other legislation such as the Care Act is 
being used to help people who sleep rough.

We will launch a wider review of 
homelessness and rough sleeping 
legislation, which will include the 
Vagrancy Act. The review will ensure  
that the structures are in place to deliver 
effective services and engage with 
vulnerable people constructively.  
We expect the review to report by 
March 2020.

Nos Da Kernow

Nos Da Kernow (in English - Good Night Cornwall) 
is a rough sleeping prevention outreach service 
that helps single people or childless couples who 
would likely sleep rough if they became homeless.

It brings together the expertise of individual 
organisations – homelessness prevention; 
resettlement and assertive street outreach into 
one team applying new approaches and solutions 
alongside tried and tested ones. Partnership 
working is key and Nos Da Kernow has developed 
meaningful relationships with a range of agencies 

including Jobcentre Plus, private & social landlords 
and mental health services.

The service estimates that it is prevented over 200 
people from sleeping on the streets in the past 18 
months. This is through supporting people before 
they become homeless, helping agencies to raise 
awareness, and building their preparedness for 
when somebody is at risk of becoming homeless. 
Once the immediate threat of rough sleeping has 
dissipated, the service works with the client to 
build their resilience.

 Chapter 3 | Prevention 29




Shining a light on performance and stronger 
accountability

71. As highlighted by the Advisory Panel, 
another powerful set of tools for improving 
our response to rough sleeping is the use of 
local homelessness strategies. Local 
housing authorities are required to carry 
out a review of homelessness in their area 
and to produce a homelessness strategy 
which sets out how they will prevent and 
reduce homelessness, and provide support 
to people affected by it. They also have to 
refresh these strategies every five years. 
While some local housing authorities have 
good quality strategies developed with 
their partners, unfortunately a number 
have not been kept up to date and, 
crucially, many do not effectively address 
rough sleeping. These strategies are 
essential tools for driving performance and 
shining a light at the local level.

We will work with the Local Government 
Association and local authorities so that 
by winter 2019: 
•  all local authorities update their 

strategies and rebadge them as 
homelessness and rough sleeping 
strategies;

•  strategies are made available online 
and submitted to MHCLG; and

•  local authorities report progress in 
delivering these strategies and publish 
annual action plans.

Where necessary, we will support these 
changes by seeking to legislate at the 
earliest opportunity. 
Where local authorities do not follow 
these changes, we will take action.

72. Further, just as we intend to hold ourselves 
to account through annual updates to this 
strategy, so too do we expect local 
authorities to be transparent about their 
progress. 

73. While it is important that strategies are in 
place to set a vision, we must also be clear 
about who is responsible for delivering the 
commitments in the strategies. However, 
this can be challenging; the local delivery 
landscape is complex with a number of 
agencies with different priorities operating 
under a variety of accountability 
arrangements.

We will consult, by the end of this year, 
on ways to improve accountability at the 
local level, including the potential use of 
local Homelessness Reduction Boards.

74. There is also a clear link between 
homelessness and health and wellbeing 
which is not always being made at the local 
level, which we are keen to address. We 
suggest that a local housing authority 
representative (for example, lead member) 
sits on Health and Wellbeing Boards to 
ensure that wider homelessness issues are 
considered as part of the health and 
wellbeing agenda.

In the Rough Sleeping Initiative areas, 
through our practitioner team, we will 
support Health and Wellbeing Boards 
(HWB) to recognise and respond to the 
health needs of people who sleep rough. 
We will support them to fulfil their 
statutory duties, and to provide 
leadership in the development of 
homelessness and rough sleeping 
strategies. 

30 Chapter 3 | Prevention




75. Another vital mechanism for shining a  
light on performance is to be open and 
transparent when things go wrong. New 
arrangements will improve the recording  
of all deaths, including people who sleep 
rough. Those cases not referred to a 
coroner will be addressed by a Medical 
Examiner and will, as appropriate, be 
referred to other programmes, such as 
the Learning from Deaths programme.

76. We agree with the Advisory Panel, who 
were clear that Safeguarding Adult Reviews 
are powerful tools, which unfortunately are 
rarely used in the case of people who sleep 
rough.

We will work with Safeguarding Adult 
Boards to ensure that Safeguarding Adult 
Reviews are conducted when a person 
who sleeps rough dies or is seriously 
harmed as a result of abuse or neglect, 
whether known or suspected, and there 
is concern that partner agencies could 
have worked more effectively to protect 
the adult. Lessons learned from these 
reviews will inform improvements in local 
systems and services.

77. It is essential that local authorities, which are 
so vital to this agenda, have the right skills 
and support to deliver their duties and 
support their residents. We are therefore 
taking a number of steps to help them 
secure this. We also want to ensure that 
local authorities are able to learn from each 
other and share best practice. The Local 
Government Association has an important 
role to play here and we are interested in 
the potential of extending their peer review 
approach and developing a new ‘kite 
marking’ or awards scheme system.

We will work with the Local Government 
Association to develop a comprehensive 
package of sector-led support for 
homelessness and rough sleeping. We 
expect this to be in place by summer 
2019.

78. We also recognise the vital role of non-
commissioned organisations and charitable 
bodies. For instance, through the Rough 
Sleeping Initiative we are funding Housing 
Justice to ensure that winter shelters in 
London will provide safe and secure 
accommodation. 

79. We understand how essential a skilled 
workforce is to delivering good services and 
ultimately, meeting our commitment. We 
fund the National Housing Advice Service, 
which has provided nationally consistent, 
effective, quality homelessness and housing 
advice to a range of frontline audiences.  
It has also supported, and facilitated, 
homelessness prevention and early 
intervention for households at risk of 
homelessness and rough sleeping through 
the provision of advice, training and support 
to frontline audiences.  

80. Experience from authorities like Southwark, 
which was an early adopter of elements of 
the Homelessness Reduction Act, shows the 
importance of rigorous training and support 
for staff. We particularly want to get a better 
picture of the challenges facing Housing 
Options teams.

We will undertake research into 
workforce challenges and opportunities 
in Housing Options teams and the 
voluntary sector, with the results feeding 
into future policy approaches.

 Chapter 3 | Prevention 31




Better data 

81. As we outlined in chapter one, there are a 
number of issues that we recognise we do 
not as yet have a clear enough 
understanding of. One such area is how 
LGBT individuals are at increased risk of 
homelessness and rough sleeping, 
particularly amongst young people. In the 
LGBT Action Plan we announced that we 
will fund new research into the nature and 
scale of LGBT homelessness and individuals’ 
experience of services while homeless.

Based on findings from the new research 
into LGBT homelessness, we will set out 
further concrete steps to address the 
issues of LGBT homelessness in the first 
yearly refresh of the strategy.

82. We also want to improve the data collected 
by a wider range of services which people 
who sleep rough access, so that we can start 
to work towards an integrated approach to 
data, which was a recommendation of the 
Advisory Panel. We are keen to pilot these 
new approaches. 

We will establish data pilots by summer 
2019 to develop and test an outcomes 
framework for homelessness and rough 
sleeping.

83. These pilots will involve working with a 
number of local authorities and their 
delivery partners to better understand what 
data is currently collected at the local level, 
how robust it is and what it tells us. They will 
also help develop data standards to support 
consistent approaches to local data 
collection, and subsequently develop and 
test a multi-agency outcomes framework, 
looking across a range of services, including 

key health services. This framework would 
help to define what local authorities and 
their delivery partners are expected to 
achieve through the provision of 
homelessness services and could support 
the development of homelessness and 
rough sleeping strategies. 

84. We also recognise we need to better 
understand and monitor links between 
homelessness and health and are keen to 
work to ensure that a person’s housing 
status becomes a fundamental part of their 
treatment and recovery. 

We will test ways of including a  
person’s housing status in new NHS  
data collections to inform future policy 
and commissioning of services for 
homeless people. 

The health service

85. The cost to the health service of single 
people experiencing rough sleeping and 
other chronic homelessness is sizeable. In 
2010 this was conservatively estimated at 
£86 million each year.xxvi The Advisory Panel 
was clear in its recommendations about the 
importance of health services in preventing 
rough sleeping. They were also clear that 
moving towards a world where housing, 
health care, public health and social care 
are working together to support people 
who sleep rough would not only lead to 
better outcomes, but also bring savings 
to the NHS. We are therefore keen to 
encourage more targeted homelessness 
prevention work across the NHS.

We will request that NICE produce 
guidance to support targeted 
homelessness prevention, integrated 
care and recovery.

32 Chapter 3 | Prevention




86. We know that people leave hospital without 
accommodation in place and some of those 
go on to sleep rough. Fundamental to 
tackling this is ensuring people working in 
hospitals and primary care have the right 
skills and understand the importance of 
a person’s housing status when leaving a 
service. We are funding research to inform 
ways of working in the delivery of hospital 
discharge and primary care services, due for 
publication in 2018 and 2019. 

We will be actively promoting the 
learning from this research to feed into 
effective hospital discharge models, in 
partnership with the health service. This 
will be promoted in the 83 Rough 
Sleeping Initiative areas. 

87. Building on this, from 1st October 2018, the 
Duty to Refer will help strengthen links on 
rough sleeping between health 
organisations and local authorities.

Prisons, Probation and the Criminal Justice 
System.

88. There are already initiatives underway to 
support offenders into accommodation 
and reduce the risk of those individuals 
reoffending. The government invests 
approximately £63 million per annum into 
accommodation for offenders, housing 
nearly 2,800 people at any one time. We 
have been leading on options to improve 
the support prisoners receive from 
Department for Work and Pensions Prison 
Work Coaches and prison staff to make 
benefit claims prior to release. Despite this, 
in 2016-17 30% of adult prisoners under 
supervision from Community Rehabilitation 
Companies (excluding London)xxvii were 
discharged to unsettled or unknown 
accommodation on their first night of 
release. If we are to end rough sleeping we 
need to change the way people leaving 
prison are supported into accommodation. 
This means planning early for their release, 
working in partnership with the relevant 
housing authority and providing support to 

Stockport Homes: Lisa

Lisa attended A&E in January 2017 for a fractured 
limb and, whilst there, disclosed that she did not 
have anywhere safe to return home to. Lisa was 
visited on the same day by an advocate who got 
to know her housing and social situation. 

Lisa’s injury was the result of an abusive 
relationship. She had very poor mental health and 
was serving a prison license for drugs offences. 
Having a joint account with her partner meant 
that Lisa had no independent financial means. 

The hospital advocate worked with the hospital 
discharge coordinator to be able to find suitable 
short-term accommodation in time to prevent 
delayed discharge. 

She was discharged into temporary 
accommodation and stayed there for four months 
where she was supported by her project worker, 

alongside her hospital advocate, to access 
appropriate benefits, sign up to a GP and undergo 
a mental health assessment, as well as receiving 
support from the Psychological Medicines team. 

She struggled in temporary accommodation and 
was supported to apply for social housing, 
including her medical information so that she 
could be prioritised. She has since accepted a 
social housing property, receiving support to move 
through a volunteer removals company, cleaning 
service and furniture recycling scheme. The 
hospital advocate continued to support Lisa for 
a further month to help her to settle in, sign up to 
a new GP, set up home bills and create a positive 
attachment to her new home. The Psychological 
Medicines team are still providing outreach to Lisa 
who has been settled in her property now for 
six months. 

 Chapter 3 | Prevention 33




access benefits or maintain previous 
tenancies. Providing offenders with the right 
accommodation on release is key to 
reducing reoffending levels. We are 
therefore keen to launch new pilots which 
will support offenders who have been 
identified as being at risk of rough sleeping 
on release. We want to use any information 
gathered to inform the future provision of 
accommodation for ex-offenders.

We will invest £3.2 million per year for 
two years to launch pilots in a small 
number of resettlement prisons in 
England. The pilots will start in April 
2019 and will run for two years. 

89. The pilots will test a new partnership 
approach with prisons, the National 
Probation Service, Community 
Rehabilitation Companies, and local 
authorities working together to plan, secure 
and sustain accommodation for offenders 
on their release. Building on lessons learnt 
from the voluntary sector, the pilots will 
deliver wrap-around support, to help 
offenders sustain their accommodation and 
reduce their likelihood of reoffending. To 
ensure that the pilots are successful, we will 
introduce in-reach officers in the pilot sites. 
The in-reach officers will work with prisons 
and probation to facilitate effective 
engagement and to ensure that appropriate 
options and support are provided to help 
sustain accommodation. 

90. Another area of concern cited by the 
Advisory Panel is about offender access to 
benefits given their lack of access to the 
internet. The Department for Work and 
Pensions and Ministry of Justice are working 
together to improve prisoners’ access to 
Universal Credit (UC) on leaving prison.  

This includes:

• Increasing the level of prisoner engagement 
with Prison Work Coaches;

• Supporting prisoners to begin the UC claim 
in prison;

• Continuing our work to support prisoners to 
open bank accounts in prison; and

• Supporting prisoners to verify their identity 
for UC purposes. 

We are planning to trial this improved 
process in late August 2018 in both 
public (HMP Wayland & Norwich) and 
contracted prisons (HMP Birmingham); 
and to implement the new process in the 
autumn 2018.

91. This work sits within the context of a wider 
national partnership agreement that 
Ministry of Justice will establish with the 
Department for Work and Pensions, which 
sets out clear roles and responsibilities for 
the various bodies involved in getting more 
ex-offenders into employment and 
accessing benefits in the future across 
England and Wales. Earlier this year the 
Ministry of Justice published the Education 
and Employment strategy which sets out 
how each prisoner will be set on a path to 
employment from the outset. These reforms 
will empower governors to commission 
bespoke, innovative education provision 
which meets the needs of their prisoners 
and links to employment opportunities on 
release.  Employers will be engaged and 
persuaded to take on ex offenders via the 
New Futures Network (NFN) and governors 
and employers have been consulted on 
proposals to increase the use of release on 
temporary licence to enhance employment 
opportunities.

34 Chapter 3 | Prevention




We are further improving the support 
available to prisoners prior to release by 
providing assistance to offenders to help 
them access benefits and employment 
support.

92. Increasing accountability is also key to 
ensuring prisoners are supported into 
suitable accommodation, and will help 
to break the cycle of reoffending.

We intend to introduce an 
‘accommodation on release’ 
performance metric for prison Governors 
from 2019-20, which will be jointly 
owned with Community Rehabilitation 
Companies, who are already subject to 
this performance measure.

93. Government recently published a Female 
Offenders Strategy and we are shifting  
our focus from custody to the community. 
Across government, we are investing 
£5 million funding over two years in 
community provision for women. As part  
of this, we launched an initial £3.5 million 
grant competition for 2018-19 and  
2019-20 for community services and  
multi-agency, whole system approaches.

We will be working with local and 
national partners to develop a pilot for 
‘residential women’s centres’ in at least 
five sites across England and Wales. 

94. As part of the pilot, we want to test 
intensive residential-based support models 
in the community that can be used as 
diversion from custody and to support 
women to address the underlying causes of 
their offending behaviour.

95. The aim of the pilot is to develop a robust 
evidence base about what could be 
effective, sustainable and scalable models 
for improving outcomes for female 
offenders and reducing the numbers and 
frequency of women entering and re-
entering custody on short custodial 
sentences.

96. A process of engagement with local and 
national partners to refine how the pilot 
could be designed and delivered is being 
undertaken and is expected to continue 
until the end of the year. We are taking a 
consultative approach to identifying the 
most suitable sites, and designing and 
delivering the pilot. 

97. We also recognise that this group may often 
have multiple and complex needs which 
requires partnership work at the local level. 

We will be working across government 
and with other national and local 
partners to develop a National 
Concordat on Female Offenders. 

98. This will set out how local partners and 
services should be working together in 
partnership to identify and respond to the 
often multiple and complex needs of 
women as they journey through the 
Criminal Justice System. We aim to publish 
this by the end of 2018.

The care system 

99. Approximately 10% of people sleeping 
rough in London today were in care as a 
child.xxviii Given that fewer than 1% of 
children under 18 are in carexxix , this 
indicates how vital it is to ensure these 
young people have the right support and 
skills to live independently in later life. To 
achieve this we have already taken some 
important steps, including the successful 

 Chapter 3 | Prevention 35




Staying Put programme which has helped 
young people to stay in foster care for 
longer. We have also invested nearly £6 
million to pilot Staying Close which supports 
young people leaving care.

100. In line with this government’s commitment 
to bringing new forms of investment into 
the sector, we are committing £5 million to 
pilot three Social Impact Bonds for care 
leavers. These will include accommodation 
outcomes and be launched in autumn 2018.

101. A key plank of the support government has 
put in place for care leavers is to require local 
authorities to appoint personal advisors. 
Personal advisors help care leavers transition 
into adulthood and live independently by 
helping them access the support they need 
from mainstream services. In April 2018, we 
extended personal advisor support for all 
care leavers up to age 25, should they 
choose to access the support. We have also 
placed a duty on local authorities to publish 
information (their ‘Local Offer’) on how they 
support care leavers, including for instance 
via exemptions from Council Tax. 

102. However, we want to go further and ensure 
that areas with the highest number of 
young care leavers at risk of rough sleeping 
get more intensive support. The Advisory 
Panel also recommended this approach.

We will fund £3.2 million in 47 areas to 
employ specialist personal advisers to 
provide intensive support, appropriate  
to their needs, to the most at-risk care 
leavers in their area.

Welfare 

103. The welfare system forms an important 
safety net that helps prevent, intervene in, 
and support recovery from rough sleeping. 
This includes the provision of financial 
support from the benefits system. Support 
to help meet the cost of housing is a 
significant part of this, with the government 
spending over £24 billion a year on Housing 
Benefit. We have already made a number of 
significant changes recently to improve the 
support we provide to vulnerable claimants, 
including people who sleep rough. These 
include: 

• the abolition of housing cost restrictions for 
18–21 year olds, announced in March this 
year, to ensure that there are no unintended 
barriers to young people accessing housing 
and getting into work;

• providing around £1 billion in Discretionary 
Housing Payments to local authorities to 
support households who are in need of 
further financial assistance with their 
housing costs;

• increasing Targeted Affordability Funding  
by £125 million between 2018-19 and 
2019-20, to support benefit claimants living 
in areas where private rents have been rising 
fastest;

• a two week ‘Transition to Universal Credit 
Housing Payment’ is now awarded to 
Housing Benefit claimants who move on to 
Universal Credit. This payment comprises 
two additional weeks of Housing Benefit 
entitlement from the start date of the 
Universal Credit claim. 

104. There have been a number of reforms to the 
welfare system over recent years that have 
been designed to create a welfare system 
that supports the most vulnerable, helps 
to support people into work wherever 
possible, and is fair to the taxpayer. It is 
clear that the highly complex needs of some 
people who sleep rough can make it difficult 
for them to navigate the welfare system. 

36 Chapter 3 | Prevention




That is why we have designed a number of 
safeguards, including individualised support 
from Department for Work and Pensions 
front line staff with benefit and housing 
claims and any other problems that may 
occur. We will continue to keep this sensitive 
issue under review. 

105. We know that we need to be able to better 
assess any potential impact of future policy 
changes on homelessness. Currently, there 
is no consensus on the best way to do this.

We have committed to conduct a 
feasibility study - led by MHCLG, and 
co-funded by the Department for Work 
and Pensions. The long-term ambition 
for this research is to develop a 
quantitative, predictive model (or 
models) of homelessness and rough 
sleeping, which can be applied to various 
policy scenarios, to help assess the 
impacts of government intervention on 
levels of homelessness. This will be 
supported by an evidence review on 
the broad range of factors that might 
influence levels of homelessness, from 
the housing market to welfare systems, 
as well as individual drivers.

106. In the longer term, government has begun 
work to look at affordability in the private 
rented sector, with a view to developing 
policy options for post-2020 when the current 
Local Housing Allowance freeze ends.

In order to inform this thinking we want 
to gather evidence from stakeholders, 
including the homelessness sector and 
local authorities, regarding the 
challenges in local areas and options to 
address them.

Modern slavery 

107. Government recognises there is a clear 
potential risk of vulnerable people who are 
sleeping rough being trafficked. Equally, 
there is a risk that victims exiting 
government support through the National 
Referral Mechanism, particularly where they 
have no formalised immigration status, may 
sleep rough and be re-trafficked.

To reduce the number of modern slavery 
victims at risk of homelessness once they 
exit central government support, we will 
extend the period of move on support 
from 14 to 45 days, significantly 
increasing the time available for support 
providers to work with victims to ensure 
they have safe and secure 
accommodation to move to before 
exiting National Referral Mechanism 
support. We will also be rolling out 
drop-in hubs for victims leaving the 
National Referral Mechanism, which will 
be accessible up to six months after 
leaving National Referral Mechanism 
support, providing an opportunity to 
signpost victims at risk of homelessness 
to appropriate support. We will roll out 
these changes at pace by March 2020.

108. In addition, the government is already 
supporting six pilot local authorities in 
Birmingham, Croydon, Derby, Leeds, 
Nottingham and Redbridge with over 
£1 million in funding from the Controlling 
Migration Fund to test pathways for victims 
moving out of National Referral Mechanism 
support into local communities, and identify 
best practice that can be promoted 
nationally.

 Chapter 3 | Prevention 37




Based on the results from the pilots to 
test pathways for victims moving out of 
National Referral Mechanism support, 
we will use learning to inform a national 
roll-out.

109. To build our understanding of the links 
between modern slavery and rough 
sleeping, we will ensure that adequate 
information is collected on housing status 
and the needs of victims when they enter 
the National Referral Mechanism and assess 
evidence from the Police Transformation 
Fund on cases related to trafficking or 
exploitation of people who are homeless. 

110. We also want to work closely with the sector 
to raise awareness of the links between 
modern slavery and homelessness. 

We will host a roundtable in autumn 
2018 with homelessness and anti-slavery 
organisations to bring together experts 
on these issues at a national level and 
identify opportunities to build on the 
work of regional anti-slavery networks.

111. Victims of modern slavery may also present 
to services as victims of domestic abuse and 
the sector stress the importance of 
supporting victims of both forms of abuse. 
We are already undertaking a review of the 
funding and commissioning of domestic 
abuse services in England, which is being 
informed by an independent audit of 
domestic abuse services, led by Ipsos MORI. 
We also support Women’s Aid to run a 
project called ‘No Woman Turned Away’, 
which tracks the journeys of women who 
have struggled to access domestic abuse 
services. The data includes evidence of 
women who have ‘sofa surfed’ or slept 

rough while they waited for domestic  
abuse support. 

We will draw on all of this data to inform 
our future approach and to develop 
person-centred, bespoke interventions 
which flexibly address individual needs.

38 Chapter 3 | Prevention




 Chapter 3 | Prevention 39




Chapter 4

Intervention




112. Preventing rough sleeping is an essential 
step in meeting our commitment. Equally as 
important is ensuring that we are doing 
everything we can to support the people 
sleeping rough now to move off the streets, 
towards recovery and fulfilling lives in our 
communities. Below we set out a range of 
work, led by government, which delivers 
that rapid support and also starts to put in 
place the building blocks of our 2027 vision. 

The Rough Sleeping Initiative

113. In March this year government announced 
the launch of the new Rough Sleeping 
Initiative. The Rough Sleeping Initiative is 
focused on helping people who are rough 
sleeping now and leading conversations 
with local areas and across government to 
bring about the 2027 vision. The Initiative is 
made up of an expert team of sector 
practitioners and policy officials from across 
local and regional government and the third 
sector. It is being led by Jeremy Swain, on 
secondment from his role as Chief Executive 
of Thames Reach, a leading homelessness 
charity working with people who are 
homeless and sleep rough. 

114. This expert team is already working 
intensively with 83 local areas with the 
highest number of people who sleep rough, 
offering their expertise and guidance as well 
as driving and monitoring progress. As part 
of this work, the team has allocated £30 
million funding for 2018-19 to specific 
initiatives in those areas. This will ensure that 
services are in place quickly to get people off 
the streets before the winter period. Over 
the last few months the team has been 
working with local areas to create bespoke 
plans to help people who sleep rough in 
their areas. These plans are based on our 
evidence of what works but are diverse and 
reflect local circumstances. They include:

• A strong focus on the workforce, with 
provision for more dedicated staff focused 
on rough sleeping with detailed knowledge 
of the local population and specialist 
practitioners who help address their 
complex needs.  This includes assertive 
outreach teams, which will work in 
partnership with local agencies to 
proactively identify and work with people 
sleeping rough. In total we are funding over 
500 new dedicated homelessness workers. 
Camden, for example, will receive £870,000 
for a significant expansion of their outreach 
team to deliver targeted street interventions 
focusing on hot spot areas, as well as new 
staff to support people who sleep rough to 
maintain their own accommodation.

• An additional 1,750 bed spaces to ensure 
people sleeping rough have a bed, while 
their wider needs are being addressed. This 
includes extra emergency accommodation 
to help people quickly when they most need 
it and, crucially, also housing-led options to 
help people stay off the streets. For instance 
Cornwall will receive over £430,000 for 
crisis hostel accommodation, cold weather 
provision and support for the most 
disengaged individuals with chronic needs.  
This also includes supporting additional 
housing-led provision, so that the needs of 
people sleeping rough can be met more 
flexibly by increasing their choice and 
control over the options available. For 
instance, Leicester’s allocation of £265,043 
includes £175,000 for ‘Action Homeless’  
an innovative housing-led scheme.

• Strong partnerships with the third sector 
and charities which are fundamental to the 
delivery of rough sleeping services. 

 Chapter 4 | Intervention 41




Rough Sleeping Initiative: Bournemouth

In the November 2017 rough sleeper count, 
48 people were recorded sleeping on the streets 
of Bournemouth, a figure which is projected to 
continue to rise during 2018, without 
intervention. Bournemouth Borough Council and 
their delivery partners are committed to reducing 
rough sleeper numbers and to providing support 
and accommodation which enables routes away 
from the streets for homeless people.

The Rough Sleeping Initiative has worked with 
Bournemouth Borough Council and its delivery 
partners to co-produce a range of funded 
interventions to meet the needs of rough sleepers 
in the area and we were delighted to award a 
grant of £387,500 for 2018–19 to fund:

• A project co-ordinator – raising the 
prominence of initiatives to end rough 
sleeping and ensuring delivery of the 
programme.

• 4 assertive rough sleeping outreach workers, 
focused on engagement with people on the 

streets, enabling reconnection and access to 
sustainable, supported accommodation.

• 5 units of supported Housing First 
accommodation.

• Specialist psychological support, working 
with those who have experienced complex 
trauma, and increasing staff resilience and 
skills.

• An iInitiative to increase access to the private 
rented sector, supporting landlords to accept 
tenants with a background of homelessness 
with social needs.

• A duty to refer coordinator, increasing the 
emphasis on prevention of homelessness 
through the Homelessness Reduction Act as 
people leave hospital or prison.

Against the prevailing rise in numbers, 
Bournemouth’s aspiration is to reduce local  
rough sleeping by at least 33% this winter when 
compared with figures for those sleeping on the 
streets last winter.

42 Chapter 4 | Intervention

115. Schemes will also support a broad range  
of particular groups, for whom  
mainstream services are not always suitable. 
The Advisory Panel highlighted the 
importance of this, in particular for women. 
This includes:

• Southwark, who are receiving £615,000 
which includes funding a worker,  
through Solace Women’s Aid, who will  
work with offenders who have experienced 
domestic abuse; 

• Westminster who are receiving £534,466 
to provide contained accommodation for 
women and couples in a psychologically 
informed environment; 

• Medway, who are receiving £410,416, 
which includes a specialist mental 

health worker to work with people who 
have experienced domestic abuse, and 
other health issues, as well as additional 
housing-led approaches for women and 
couples;

• Manchester, who are receiving £418,088, 
which includes funding for specialist staff 
working with young people, as well as peer 
support for people at risk of rough sleeping 
on leaving prison; 

• Southend-on-Sea, who are receiving 
£425,325, which includes funding for  
an expansion of housing-led interventions 
for older men with complex needs, and 
additional outreach staff including 
specialists in mental health and domestic 
abuse; and




• £5,000 to pilot a new dog kennel facility in 
Portsmouth, linked to the Homeless Night 
Service, in recognition that many people 
who sleep rough with animals may be 
unwilling to use accommodation that will 
not allow pets. 

116. The work of the Rough Sleeping Initiative 
is essential to ensuring people who sleep 
rough are supported to leave the dangers  
of the streets behind them. This important 
work will need to respond to emerging 
challenges and make an immediate impact. 
We know this will need more than 
12 months to truly make an impact.

We can confirm that the Rough Sleeping 
Initiative will also receive up to £45 
million for 2019-20 to continue its vital, 
targeted, work.

117. Whilst our focus in 2018-19 has been  
on areas with the highest levels of rough 
sleeping we recognise that local 
circumstances change and that many areas 
need support. So we will work with these 
83 local areas as well as other areas with a 
rough sleeping issue and where the local 
authority and partners have the 
commitment and determination to reduce 
and end rough sleeping. Where local 
authorities are struggling to tackle rough 
sleeping in their area the Rough Sleeping 
Initiative will work with them to improve 
their approach. 

Rough Sleeping Navigators

118. Local systems can often be complex and for 
some of the people who sleep rough finding 
a way to access the support they need can 
be challenging. We want to ensure that 
everyone can access the support that they 
are entitled to and prevent people from 
falling between gaps in local services. 
Evidence from the homelessness sector and 

the heath service shows the benefit of  
a navigator approach for people with 
complex or multiple needs. For this reason 
we will be providing new funding for 
navigators who will help people who  
sleep rough get the right support to access 
local services.

We will ensure that people sleeping 
rough can access local systems by 
providing new funding for rough 
sleeping navigators.

Pilots of ‘Somewhere Safe to Stay’

119. Our 2027 vision is built around a system 
where there is a smaller amount of 
emergency accommodation, but which  
will rapidly assess the needs of the person  
in crisis. This is because in 2027 more people 
will be prevented from rough sleeping and  
if they do reach a crisis point will be rapidly 
rehoused. The person will also receive 
bespoke advice and support and be quickly 
helped into a stable home. Below we set out 
how our new Somewhere Safe to Stay 
Pilots, as recommended by the Advisory 
Panel, will test this approach. 

120. This builds on the example of the No Second 
Night Out programme which launched in 
London in 2011. This model is aimed at 
people new to the streets and offers support 
to rapidly identify the issues that led them to 
sleep rough, for instance financial issues or 
relationship breakdown. The results have 
been impressive. 84% of people who slept 
rough and accessed a No Second Night Out 
service in 2016-17 did not sleep rough again 
in the following year. We have funded 
48 rough sleeping projects through our 
£20 million Rough Sleeping Grant 
programme to get the rapid support they 
need to recover and move on from a rough 
sleeping crisis. Many of these projects are 
building on the No Second Night Out 

 Chapter 4 | Intervention 43




approach. Across the first year of the 
programme over 1,900 individuals have 
been prevented from rough sleeping and 
nearly 2,500 individuals have been 
supported into accommodation.  

121. While the longer-term outcomes are not 
known, it is clear that more of this type of 
provision is required: there are only 70 
spaces per night in London’s No Second 
Night Out hubs, yet 1,137 people sleep 
rough on London streets according to the 
nightly count. We want to understand how 
this type of provision might work in other 
parts of the country. Whilst No Second Night 
Out has delivered great results, it can only 
support people who have already slept 
rough. In line with our prevention agenda 
and as recommended by the Advisory Panel, 
we think that intervention should happen 
sooner.

We will be piloting a new Somewhere 
Safe to Stay service in 15 locations around 
the country which have high numbers of 
people who sleep rough. This will be 
backed with up to £17 million in new 
funding. We expect that by 2020, these 
will support up to 6,000 people.

122. Building on the learning from the No 
Second Night Out programme these pilots 
will support those new to rough sleeping, 
but they will also support people who have 
been identified as being at risk of sleeping 
rough. These assessment centres will offer 
bespoke support tailored to people’s needs. 
This could include advice and support on 
issues such as personal finances or 
immigration status. 

Hostels

123. Hostels are, and will undoubtedly remain, 
an important part of our response to rough 
sleeping, in particular as part of an 
emergency solution. We strongly support 
the hostel sector which is why we recently 
announced that we will maintain Housing 
Benefit for housing costs in supported 
housing, which includes hostels but also 
other vital provision such as refuges. We will 
also work with the sector on developing a 
sound and robust oversight regime, 
ensuring all vulnerable people are entering 
into a hostel or refuge that is of a good 
quality and able to meet their needs. 

124. There is an enormous variety of hostels 
which range considerably in size and 
scope, with some providing services for 
specific groups such as young people or 
women and others having more generic 
functions. We are aware that many 
providers would like to see improved and 
more rapid move on from hostels. The 
evidence we do have concerning 
movement out of hostels and back to the 
street suggests that there is room for 
improvement in this area. We want to 
understand more about what  
type of hostels achieve the best results in 
terms of helping people move past rough 
sleeping and address associated issues 
such as substance misuse and mental 
health issues which frequently contribute  
to repeat homelessness. We also want to 
understand whether there are particular 
cohorts who are particularly suited or 
unsuited to hostel type accommodation. 
We would also like to understand how 
government can support the valuable work 
of hostels, and ensure that there is an 
appropriate pathway after the immediate 
emergency is dealt with. 

44 Chapter 4 | Intervention




We will be working closely with local 
authorities, providers, hostel residents 
and other stakeholders to launch a 
review of hostels focussed on capacity, 
quality and outcomes. We will be 
working with the sector to outline this 
work this year with the full review 
commencing in spring 2019. 

125. The hostel workforce does an incredible job 
under difficult conditions. Consequently 
under the Rough Sleeping Initiative we have 
funded a number of ‘in-reach’ posts which 
are intended to give greater capacity to 
hostels through dedicated staff being linked 
to hostels who can focus on helping 
residents move on from the hostel into more 
independent accommodation. The impact 
of these posts will be carefully analysed with 
a view to rolling-out this approach, should it 
prove effective. 

126. We are determined that staff have all the 
skills and support they need - an area 
highlighted by the Advisory Panel. A key 
element of this offer is the new London 
Training Academy which will offer bespoke 
training to people working with people who 
sleep rough, with a focus on training for 
people recruited via the Rough Sleeping 
Initiative. However, we recognise the need 
for more support for people working with 
those who sleep rough and will therefore  
be working with the sector to deliver 
additional training. 

New training will include: 
•  new specific packages focussed on 

identifying and supporting vulnerable 
groups, including victims of modern 
slavery and domestic abuse;

•  training and non-statutory guidance 
around LGBT issues and how to most 
effectively support individuals; 

•  training for front-line staff on how to 
deal with unpredictable environments, 
for instance with clients under the 
influence of New Psychoactive 
Substances such as Spice; and

•  training for staff on how to support 
non-UK nationals, including ensuring 
they access the full range of support 
they are entitled to.

People who sleep rough from outside  
of the UK

127. Many non-UK nationals who sleep rough 
are in the UK lawfully, and when people are 
entitled to it – whether they are British or 
not – it is vital they can access the services 
they need. People who want to settle in  
the UK should prepare to find work and 
accommodation before they arrive here. 

128. We want to ensure that local areas have the 
tools they need to support non-UK nationals 
off the streets. Local authorities already do 
great work to ensure that the people in their 
areas have access to the right support and 
we want to help them go further. In order 
to do this we are launching a new, bespoke 
fund which will help local areas to develop 
local solutions to this issue. The types of 
activity we expect to promote through this 
new fund include support to access 
accommodation and employment or to 
return to their home country voluntarily, 
where that is the best option for the 
individual.

 Chapter 4 | Intervention 45




Gerry, 64

“My first husband was abusive but I met my 
second husband and moved to Australia with him 
to start a new life. We had a young daughter there. 
To me it was a paradise, I had my own company, a 
car, money in the bank and lived with his family. 
But then in 2001 my sister came to visit me and 
had an affair with my husband - my marriage and 
my whole world just crumbled, I crumbled.

I started drinking heavily. It got too much and I got 
sent back to the UK. I went to my council who got 
me a bed in an emergency hostel. I didn’t like it, 
the sheets were disgusting, the jam had mould all 
over it. I started drinking with some people and 
before I knew it I was rough sleeping. 

I was drinking eight cans of beer a day plus half a 
bottle of vodka, sleeping in skips. I was surviving 
to drink and drinking to survive. I’d be in A and E 
over and over, I’d end up in police cells but at least 
it was warm and I had a roof over my head. I tried 
to kill myself on my 50th birthday; luckily a doctor 
was going past and saved me. But I remember 
thinking I can’t even kill myself. After some time 
I collapsed. I went into a coma, on life support. 

I survived and got put in rehab. I started 
volunteering in Ealing, helping people in hostels 
get access to services. A commissioner mentioned 
Groundswell to me and I started working to help 
people who were homeless get back on their feet. 
I had always been ashamed of who I was and 
what I had become. But I realised that all the 
mistakes I had made, I could use them to help 
other people. It opened a whole new world to me. 
I liked myself again; I could feel the respect coming 
back to me. 

I’ve been at Groundswell for nearly 8 years now, 
I pay my own rent, my council tax, my own bills. 
Being back in normal life again, it is a wonderful 
feeling. I have a home a cat, a garden. Nobody in 
their right mind makes themselves homeless or 
addicted to a substance on purpose. I’m one of 
the lucky ones. I’m happy and I like myself. 

There is an opportunity for everyone out there 
who thinks they are rubbish. You just need 
someone somewhere to give you a hand up, 
a little bit of support, it is achievable.”

We will be launching a new £5 million 
fund to help local areas take action to 
help non-UK nationals who sleep rough 
off the streets.

129. We already fund activity of this type through 
the Controlling Migration Fund, alongside 
other schemes which ease pressures on local 
services resulting from recent migration. 
We are clear that this Fund will actively 
encourage bids from local authorities to 
support non-UK nationals away from the 
street. This will include help for EEA 
nationals to return home voluntarily, where 
they have requested support to do so. The 
two funds are designed to complement 

each other and we will provide further 
guidance to local authorities on how they 
can access the funds and the relationship 
between them shortly.

The £100 million Controlling Migration 
Fund will reopen this summer, with an 
increased focus on bids from local 
authorities to work with non-UK 
nationals who sleep rough.

130. The Rough Sleeping Initiative is providing 
funding to some local authorities to provide 
specific support to non-UK nationals –  
for example, Croydon will be providing 

46 Chapter 4 | Intervention




short term accommodation for non-UK 
nationals while they receive coaching and 
support to access employment and longer-
term accommodation, and  
Wolverhampton will provide specialist 
support to people sleeping rough who 
have immigration issues. 

131. We know that frontline staff require 
different skills and knowledge to work with 
non-UK nationals who sleep rough, many of 
whom have complex immigration cases or 
restricted eligibility for welfare and services. 
As outlined previously, we will ensure our 
new training offer equips staff to support 
non-UK nationals who sleep rough.

132. Where non-UK nationals are sleeping rough 
and would like to return to their family and 
support networks in their home country, 
local authorities and homelessness agencies 
are able to support this. Immigration 
Enforcement will continue working in 
partnership with local agencies to support 
them in individual cases of people sleeping 
rough from the EEA and the rest of the 
world. Non–EEA nationals wishing to return 
to their home country can apply for 
assistance from the Home Office’s Voluntary 
Returns Service. If eligible, support can 
include arranging and paying for tickets, 
help with travel documentation, financial 
support up to £2,000 which can be used to 
find somewhere to live, a job or start a 
business. Local authorities can make use 
of the reconnection service to facilitate 
voluntary returns and to reconnect EEA 
nationals with support services in their 
home country. 

133. Some non-UK nationals who sleep rough 
need help to resolve their immigration 
status. One of the Advisory Panel’s 
recommendations was for targeted 
casework support to help people with 
complex immigration cases. Through the 
Rough Sleeping Initiative we are also aware 
of reports of individuals who are unable to 

resolve their case, either to stay in this 
country or return home.

We will therefore provide an additional 
Rough Sleeping Support team to 
support and resolve the immigration 
status of non-UK nationals who are 
sleeping rough.

134. The team will help individuals to regularise 
their status where they establish a right to 
remain in the UK, and support them to return 
home as quickly as possible where this is 
appropriate. This includes providing a 
national point of contact for local authorities 
through Immigration Enforcement’s 
Command and Control Unit, using a phased 
approach. We will monitor its use to build our 
understanding of how the immigration 
system can support homelessness services to 
help people off the streets more quickly.

135. We are aware that people who arrive in this 
country as asylum seekers require assistance 
to access the mainstream support system if 
their asylum claim is accepted or to return 
home if it is refused. We recognise this issue 
and are providing £1.75 million from the 
Controlling Migration Fund for a two-year 
pilot to support 19 local authorities in 
England with some of the highest numbers 
of asylum seekers. This funding will provide 
local officers to help newly recognised 
refugees to transition into mainstream 
society during and after they move on from 
government-supported accommodation. 
This will complement work already 
underway to smooth their access to the 
mainstream benefits system, for example 
through arranging an early appointment 
with their local job centre and ensuring that 
they have all the documentation they need 
to access the benefits they are entitled to 
and begin their search for employment.

 Chapter 4 | Intervention 47




136. We know this a complex issue and we 
recognise there is more work to do to 
support non-UK nationals off the streets.  
We will keep this strategy under review and 
continue to develop work around how we 
support non-UK nationals off the streets. To 
do this we will need to work in partnership 
across government, front-line services, local 
authorities and the sector.

We will be setting up a cross-government 
working group to explore these issues in 
detail with the results feeding into our 
approach in forthcoming rough sleeping 
strategy updates. It will meet regularly 
from autumn 2018.

137. This group will explore the drivers of rough 
sleeping among non-UK nationals, drawing 
on evidence from external partners where 
necessary, highlight existing good practice 
and bring forward new steps to go further 
to prevent and reduce rough sleeping 
among this group. 

Victims of domestic abuse

138. We are absolutely committed to protecting 
victims of domestic abuse. Since 2014 we 
have invested £33.5 million in services that 
support victims of domestic abuse and have 
published our Priorities for Domestic Abuse 
Services outlining our expectations of local 
authorities in commissioning these services. 
Our 2016–2018 fund for domestic abuse 
services provided £20 million to 80 projects 
across the country to help support the 
creation of more than 2,200 bed spaces  
and give support to over 19,000 victims  
of domestic abuse. We recently launched  
a further £18.8 million fund for domestic 
abuse services, including refuges. This new 
fund is open to all local areas across England 

to bid for a share. Our updated priorities are 
clear that local areas should respond to the 
needs of all domestic abuse victims including 
disabled, BME, LGBT and older people. 

139. We are currently carrying out a review of 
how domestic abuse services are 
commissioned and delivered locally. To 
inform this review, we commissioned Ipsos 
MORI to lead an audit of local authority 
commissioned domestic abuse services to 
understand what impact services are having 
and to identify gaps in provision. The audit 
has now concluded and a final report of the 
findings will be published in due course.

Meeting the health needs of people who 
sleep rough now

140. The NHS has embarked on a major 
transformation of mental health services, 
with a significant programme of investment 
and expansion underway with the Mental 
Health Five Year Forward View, including 
the ambition to increase the number of 
patients being treated by one million a year 
by 2020-21 and increase the mental health 
workforce by 21,000 over the same period.

141. The Advisory Panel stressed the importance 
of targeted health support to help people 
on the streets now. They pointed to models 
of integrated care where health 
professionals, in particular those with 
mental health expertise, were working hand 
in hand with outreach teams and hostels to 
actively identify and support people who are 
rough sleeping. This included support to 
access community health services. 

48 Chapter 4 | Intervention




In 2018-19 we will provide up to  
£2 million in health funding to test 
models of community-based provision 
designed to enable access to health and 
support services for people who are 
sleeping rough. This will include services 
to support people with both mental ill 
health and substance misuse issues.

142. However, we do not have a clear enough 
view of the gaps in health provision for 
people who are sleeping rough around the 
country. To inform future commissioning 
and ensure the health and care system 
meets need, we recognise we need a clearer 
picture of any gaps there are. 

We will begin a rapid audit of provision 
targeted at people who sleep rough that 
can be used to inform future 
commissioning decisions. 

143. We also want to ensure mainstream 
provision can meet the needs of people who 
sleep rough. Access to primary care remains 
a challenge for people sleeping rough. 
Reducing inequalities in access to general 
practices is one of the seven principles of  
the General Practice Forward View and 
underpins care redesign. Resources for 
general practice commissioners and 
providers encourage organisations to 
recognise the challenges faced by people 
experiencing homelessness in accessing  
and benefiting from the care on offer.

We will host a round table in August 
2018 to discuss what further action is 
needed to improve access to primary 
care for people who sleep rough. It will 
also discuss monitoring progress 
towards reducing inequalities. 

144. We are also concerned by reports about the 
lack of quality care for homeless people at 
the end of their lives. Support for localities  
to improve end of life care for vulnerable 
groups, including people experiencing 
homelessness, has been commissioned 
from the Voluntary, Community and Social 
Enterprise Health and Wellbeing Alliance, 
due for publication in summer 2018. 

Guidance on care for homeless people 
at the end of their lives will be promoted 
through the Ambitions for Palliative and 
End of Life Care Partnership and wider 
stakeholders made up of organisations 
from across the healthcare and third 
sectors, including NHS England.

145. In developing a long-term NHS plan, 
supported by a new funding settlement 
from government, new objectives for 
reducing health inequalities are needed if 
we are to address the different life 
expectancies of people who are rough 
sleeping or experiencing other forms of 
homelessness. This will include setting out 
the barriers to accessing health services that 
exist for these vulnerable groups, and how 
reducing inequalities will be built into each 
programme. 

146. Over the early autumn, NHS England will  
be discussing options with organisations 
representing and supporting people who 
are experiencing homelessness and people 
with personal experience of rough sleeping, 
before taking decisions on funding. 

Drawing on this work, we have asked 
the NHS to spend up to £30 million on 
health services for people who sleep 
rough, over the next five years.

 Chapter 4 | Intervention 49




Tackling street activity

147. Rough sleeping is the most visible form of 
homelessness and street activity such as 
begging, street drinking, street based drug 
use and street based sex work can be more 
visible again, often causing concerns for 
local communities. People engaged in street 
activity will not always be sleeping rough, 
however as with people who sleep rough 
they will have a range of housing and 
support needs and will often be vulnerable 
or contributing to the vulnerability of others.

148. Providing effective services for people who 
are street active is challenging and complex 
but will be necessary in terms of addressing 
public perception around levels of rough 
sleeping. We want to work more closely 
with the voluntary sector, community 
groups and local authorities so that 
immediate and longer term support is 
provided to enable people to move away 
from street based life styles. 

149. This will require new partnerships in many 
areas that harness the good will, energy and 
resources available to tackle the problem 
locally. These partnerships will need to be 
based on open and honest conversations 
about the challenges of tackling street 
activity and rough sleeping, finding shared 
solutions that maximize the positive impact 
that all groups and organisations can have. 
This might mean asking a community group 
with members who have lived experience  
to engage with clients who are refusing 
interventions from statutory services or 
encouraging a faith based group to provide 
immediate support such as food and 
advocacy in a building-based setting rather 
than on the street. 

We will be working with local authorities 
and their partners to tackle street activity 
as part of the Rough Sleeping Initiative 
work.

Drug and alcohol misuse

150. Drug and alcohol misuse affects a large 
number of people who sleep rough,  
and can be both a cause and consequence 
of homelessness. One important angle is 
ensuring access to treatment services for 
people who misuse drugs and alcohol. But  
it is also essential that we take action to 
restrict the supply of harmful drugs and 
tackle anti-social practices such as street 
drinking which we know can act as a draw 
to the streets.

151. We also know the use of New Psychoactive 
Substances including synthetic cannabinoids 
such as those supplied under the brand name 
‘Spice’ is particularly prevalent amongst 
people who sleep rough. Misuse of these 
substances in particular can be challenging 
and dangerous for the people who work 
with those who sleep rough. We have 
controlled synthetic cannabinoids as Class B 
drugs under the Misuse of Drugs Act and 
given the police the powers they need to take 
action. In the 2017 Drug Strategy, the 
government committed to working with the 
homelessness sector to address the misuse  
of New Psychoactive Substances among the 
homeless population, including those in 
hostels and supported accommodation. 
We have already commissioned the Advisory 
Council on the Misuse of Drugs (ACMD) to 
provide advice on the risks and factors that 
cause vulnerable people to misuse drugs. 
When the ACMD report back later this year 
we will consider what further steps the 
government should take to protect these 
groups. We have set out how we are 
introducing new training for frontline staff 
working with people under the influence  
of these drugs. 

152. We are also tackling the issue of street 
drinking. Research by academics at 
Heriot Watt University found that 53%  
of the homeless people with other needs 
surveyed were street drinkers.xxx In recent 
years we have worked with 13 areas to 

50 Chapter 4 | Intervention




tackle problems with street drinking. For 
example, Merton in London and Hastings 
operate multi-agency case planning groups 
that include local housing providers. In 
Wisbech it is recognised that street drinkers 
often see housing as their first priority and 
so outreach workers operate in close 
partnership with the local night shelter  
and the temporary housing team. 

We want to build on learning and 
findings from our recent work in local 
areas to tackle street drinking into the 
government’s new alcohol strategy, 
currently in development. One of its 
main themes will be support for 
vulnerable people.

How the police can support people who sleep 
rough to access help

153. The police have an important role to play in 
local partnership working to prevent and 
tackle rough sleeping. The police are 
responsible for ensuring community safety 
and tackling crime that may be perpetrated 
either by or against individuals rough 
sleeping, as well as responding to 
vulnerabilities that are particularly acute 
among those at risk of homelessness.

154. The Association of Police and Crime 
Commissioners are supportive of our 
determination to help people off the streets. 
The Association of Police and Crime 
Commissioners have committed to drive this 
issue nationally through better join up of 
relevant national portfolio leads, including 
the Police and Crime Commissioners who 
coordinate activity on Local Partnerships  
and Policing, Alcohol and Substance Misuse 
and Mental Health and Custody.

Ministers and the Association of Police 
and Crime Commissioners will host a 
roundtable event in autumn 2018, to 
encourage leadership on rough sleeping 
from Police and Crime Commissioners 
and across the wider police to drive 
collaboration and sharing of best 
practice. This will initially focus on the 83 
Rough Sleeping Initiative areas.

155. The National Police Chiefs’ Council have 
also taken a strong leadership role in 
support of reducing homelessness, 
including through the appointment of a 
national lead on homelessness. Through the 
National Police Chiefs’ Council lead, police 
forces are identifying best practice of how 
police are working effectively with local 
authorities to reduce homelessness and 
manage associated crime and vulnerability 
risks. This is being trialled through a project 
in Brighton and Hove. Over the next year, 
the project will test how the police identify 
those at risk of homelessness, the action 
taken to refer individuals, and how 
information sharing can be improved to 
prevent poor outcomes for vulnerable 
individuals.

 Chapter 4 | Intervention 51




StreetLink

156. We know that rough sleeping is an issue 
that the general public feels strongly about 
and many, rightly, want to help. This is why 
we launched the StreetLink service in 2012, 
which enables members of the public to link 
people they have seen sleeping rough to 
local services. This is a vital tool for the 
outreach teams that work to connect 
people who sleep rough with services. We 
have provided £300,000 per year to fund 
the StreetLink service since it was 
established. Over this period, the service has 
received 218,422 alerts from the general 
public. As a result, over 26,000 individuals 
were found by outreach teams and over 
22,000 individuals were supported into 
accommodation or services and its reach is 
growing. Last year over the winter period 
over 100,000 new people joined StreetLink. 

157. The Advisory Panel was clear that they 
wanted to see further support for the 
platform. However we believe that there is 

potential to build on the StreetLink 
approach. We are keen to empower 
businesses to give something meaningful 
back to their communities, to help 
community groups to work together more 
easily, and to make it easier for everyone 
who wants to donate their time, skills or 
resources in a meaningful way. 

We will be launching a new online 
platform to help individuals, community 
groups and businesses support people 
who sleep rough off the streets for good. 

158. This will include StreetLink and also contain 
options for alternative giving to help 
members of the public support 
organisations that help people off the 
streets. We will continue to fund StreetLink 
in the interim and will procure the new 
platform by spring 2020.

StreetLink, Tom

Tom* had his own flat from 2011 until he was 
evicted in 2014 for not paying his rent. He was 
receiving Housing Benefit directly but spending it 
elsewhere due to lack of budgeting skills and an 
addiction to Spice. From that point, Tom started 
sleeping rough in central London, begging and 
relying on day centres for showers and food.

A member of the public noticed Tom sleeping out 
one evening and used StreetLink to send an alert 
to connect him to the local outreach team; the 
first step in the process of providing an individual 
with support to end their homelessness. The 
outreach team were able to locate Tom from the 
information given in the referral and, having 
spoken with him, set up an assessment that led  
to him being placed into a hostel.

An infection that Tom had picked up, alongside 
other health issues, resulted in a referral from the 
first hostel to another more suited to his needs, 

where he lived for two years. While in the hostel, 
Tom was able to begin his recovery, gaining a 
renewed self-confidence, and receiving support 
to arrange services and documents such as a 
passport and a new bank account. Tom also 
started attending courses, to help develop his 
skills, build his CV and gain some IT experience, 
given his interest in computers.

Tom continues to recover while receiving support 
to move away from homelessness for good. 
According to Tom “I really didn’t know how to get 
myself off the streets at the time. I’d like to thank 
the person who referred me to StreetLink because 
they really did help me out a lot. Now I have 
security and I know I have a bed to come back to 
and I don’t have to worry about being on the 
streets. If they hadn’t referred me, I’m pretty sure I 
would still be homeless at this point in time.”

*The name of the individual has been changed.

52 Chapter 4 | Intervention


.


 Chapter 4 | Intervention 53




Chapter 5

Recovery




159. In previous chapters we have outlined how 
we are putting in place new structures to 
ensure people who sleep rough are 
supported off the streets, through our new 
rapid rehousing approach. As part of this we 
are funding new outreach workers and 
emergency provision through the Rough 
Sleeping Initiative and our new Somewhere 
Safe to Stay pilots will ensure people are 
assessed quickly and supported into an 
appropriate pathway of support. This work 
goes hand in hand with new commitments 
from across government to help people 
who sleep rough overcome any issues, be 
that by addressing their health needs or 
immigration status or help to find 
employment.

160. We have been clear that at the end of this 
pathway is a safe and secure home, with 
appropriate support offered alongside. We 
know this is key to a person’s recovery. 
However, currently many people who are 
ready to move on from hostels and other 
forms of emergency accommodation are 
unable to do so because of a lack of suitable 
move on accommodation. This chapter 
outlines how we will make sure there are 
suitable homes available to people to move 
on from rough sleeping. It also outlines how 
we will ensure that individuals get the right 
support to maintain their tenancies and are 
given opportunities to sustain their recovery 
in the long term, for instance through 
employment and in their local communities. 

Work to boost supply

161. Since 2010 we have built 378,000 
affordable homes. This is more than the 
previous government built in the preceding 
seven years. Affordable housing remains the 
government’s priority which is why in June 
we announced a multi-billion pound boost 
to social housing across England. Around 
23,000 new affordable homes will be 
delivered through a £1.67 billion 
government investment deal. This will 
include at least 12,500 social rent homes 

in high cost areas. This is part of the 
government’s £9 billion investment in 
affordable homes.

162. We have also heralded a new generation of 
council housing by inviting local authorities 
to bid for a share of £1 billion extra 
borrowing to build much needed homes. 
This will be split equally between London 
and the rest of England and will focus on 
building homes where they are needed 
most.

163. This is just part of our wider work to build 
the homes this country needs. At Autumn 
Budget, we announced further reforms to 
tackle our broken housing market which 
included planning reforms to ensure more 
land is available for housing and launching 
Homes England.

164. However, beyond this we also recognise the 
need for accommodation which meets the 
specific needs of people who sleep rough, 
which is tailored, appropriate and 
sustainable. Below we outline how we are 
doing just that.

Housing First

165. For people with complex needs we have 
already shown our commitment to Housing 
First by announcing £28 million of funding 
for three pilots. International evidence 
shows this could be a vital tool to meet the 
needs of people sleeping rough with 
complex needs and we are keen to learn 
more about how this could work on a larger 
scale, within the UK’s housing system.

We will undertake an extensive and 
robust evaluation of Housing First and will 
ensure that all learning from these pilots 
will be used to inform decisions on roll-
out. We will also publish interim findings 
which will inform future work. The 
evaluation will begin in autumn 2018. 

 Chapter 5 | Recovery 55




166. We are also keen to understand more  
clearly what financial model would make 
Housing First viable in this country and how 
these models might interact with the 
benefits system.

We are exploring the introduction  
of an exemption from the Shared 
Accommodation Rate for the 
government-backed pilots of Housing 
First. Any learning from this will be 
captured through the planned evaluation 
of the pilots, and factored in to potential 
further roll-outs of Housing First.

167. It is crucial to the success of a rapid 
rehousing approach that people who sleep 
rough have access to housing which is 
suitable for their needs. This means learning 
from the evidence as we build it and 
tailoring an offer that is flexible to the 
individual. Support is already available, with 
the current approach offering an exemption 
from the Shared Accommodation Rate to 
those aged 25–34 who have been in a 
homeless hostel which specialises in 
rehabilitation or resettlement for at least 
three months cumulatively. As we learn 
from the evidence, we will explore whether 
this definition is still the right one.

As we move towards a rapid rehousing 
approach, we will learn from the 
evidence and explore whether the 
current definition of those that have 
lived in a homeless hostel is still the right 
one for the purposes of exemption from 
the Shared Accommodation Rate.

Move On Fund

168. We are aware from conversations with the 
sector that there is a demand for capital 
funding to provide homes for people who 
want to move on from sleeping rough or 
living in a hostel and who generally have 
lower needs than a Housing First client. In 
light of that, we committed £100 million to 
a Move On Fund, which is aimed at 
providing affordable housing for those 
leaving homeless hostels and domestic 
abuse refuges. £50 million of this has been 
allocated to the GLA who have been 
responsible for the implementation of the 
fund in London. One important piece of 
feedback from that fund was that providers 
also needed revenue funding to provide 
support alongside the home. We have 
listened carefully and have recently agreed 
that the GLA can use a proportion of the 
funding to pay for support costs and they 
are now working with providers to develop 
proposals. We are also reflecting this 
feedback elsewhere by helping providers 
cover the cost of support through our new 
Supported Lettings scheme, which is set out 
later in this chapter. We are now launching 
the rest of the Move On Fund, based on that 
learning.

We are launching a prospectus  
with Homes England for bids for  
the £50 million Move On Fund outside of 
London. 

169. We will invite bids for funding to deliver new 
move on units for people leaving homeless 
hostels and domestic abuse refuges. Bids 
will be both for the capital funding to build 
homes, and importantly for the funding to 
provide tenancy sustainment support 
alongside the home.

56 Chapter 5 | Recovery




170. We are clear we want to help deliver new 
homes for people who sleep rough and see 
it as critical to our 2027 vision. Learning 
from the success of the Move On Fund will 
inform our plans for future capital funding 
for homes for people who sleep rough

Dormant assets

171. We are also keen to ensure that we foster 
new parts of the market to bring forward 
additional new supply for vulnerable 
people. We have been working closely with 
Big Society Capital who have developed a 
strategy for a substantial programme of 
investment in housing for vulnerable 
people, including those most at risk of 
homelessness or rough sleeping. Big Society 
Capital have identified several opportunities 
to create innovative investment approaches 
that will build future opportunities with the 
potential for large scale impact, including 
through attracting significant amounts of 
private capital. For example, new social 
investment could enable properties for 
Housing First models.

172. Additionally there are opportunities for Big 
Society Capital to build on existing models 
of social investment funds to provide 
property to charitable and social enterprise 
organisations working with specific 
vulnerable groups including domestic abuse 
victims, ex-offenders and care leavers, to 
help them move from B&B or hostel type 
accommodation into more suitable stable 
accommodation. To illustrate the potential 
of social investment models, previously  
a £30 million investment by Big Society 
Capital in the Resonance property funds 
catalysed private co-investment enabling 
£160 million of total investment with the 
potential to finance 700 homes across 
London, Bristol, Oxford and Milton Keynes, 
with plans to grow further.

We have allocated up to £135 million 
from dormant accounts to social 
investment, with the majority going 
towards housing for vulnerable people 
and the rest being spent on new models 
of community funding. The first 
opportunities in this programme will 
be launched in autumn 2018.

173. This is part of our dormant asset strategy 
which will see up to £330 million from 
dormant bank and building society accounts 
being used over the next four years to help 
these causes, as well as to promote financial 
inclusion and help disadvantaged young 
people reach their potential.

Supported lettings

174. We previously highlighted the Clearing 
House scheme which provides over 3,750 
properties for people in London with a 
history of rough sleeping, a scheme 
supported by the Advisory Panel. As we set 
out in our announcement of the Rough 
Sleeping Initiative in March, we have been 
working with the National Housing 
Federation (NHF) to explore the possibility  
of expanding or replicating this successful 
scheme outside of London to provide 
homes for people with low needs leaving 
hostels or coming directly from the street. 
We have also spoken to a large number  
of local areas and housing associations to 
understand how we might be able to bring 
forward more homes, either in the social 
sector or the private rented sector.

175. The majority were very positive about the 
potential of such an approach in their areas. 
However, we also understand that there are 
huge variations in need across the country 
and that different areas face different 
challenges in finding the right properties for 
vulnerable people. Therefore, we want local 
areas to be free to create local schemes that 
suit their circumstances. We understand 

 Chapter 5 | Recovery 57




that a lack of support funding is a major 
barrier to landlords of all types bringing 
forward properties to those with greater 
needs, as they do not have confidence that 
tenants will receive support that will enable 
them to sustain their tenancies.

We are opening a new Supported 
Lettings Fund, of up to £19 million, 
which will fund flexible support and 
tenancy sustainment for homes provided 
exclusively for people who sleep rough.

176. This will provide flexible support funding to 
help over 5,000 people at risk of rough 
sleeping, over the next two years, to sustain 
their tenancies in homes across the housing 
sector. This funding will be for local 
authorities to support housing associations 
or private landlords. We hope that this will 
encourage more landlords to come forward, 
with the confidence that support will be 
provided for people to maintain their 
tenancies. Local areas could also set up 
schemes similar to Clearing House.

Supported Housing

177. Supported Housing offers a critical life line 
to people who sleep rough now and will 
continue to do so in future. It provides 
crucial accommodation and support for a 
range of people such as care leavers, victims 
of domestic abuse, those with substance 
misuse issues and many others, who find 
themselves without a home or at risk of 
homelessness. We are committed to this 
provision, which delivers essential support 
and accommodation. This is why we have 
recently announced that we are maintaining 
Housing Benefit for all supported housing, 
and will work with the sector on oversight of 
quality and value for money. This reflects the 
particular needs of the vulnerable groups of 
people who access supported housing, and 
the government’s commitment to get the 

best possible outcomes for them. We also 
recognise how important housing related 
support services are in this sector and are 
keen to get a full and clear picture of how 
this is currently working. We will therefore 
undertake a review of that element in order 
to better understand how housing and 
support currently fit together.

We have committed to undertake a 
review of housing related support 
services. This will commence in 
September 2018. 

The Private Rented Sector

178. For many, the private rented sector offers a 
route out of homelessness and rough 
sleeping and is a vital part of delivering the 
homes this country needs. The government 
is aware that dysfunction in the private 
rented sector can increase the risk of people 
becoming homeless. From 2010–14, Crisis 
managed the Private Rented Sector Access 
Programme with nearly £11 million in 
funding. The programme supported over 
153 bespoke schemes run by the third 
sector to support homeless people, or those 
at risk, to access private rented sector 
tenancies. The evaluation found the 
programme to be successful – the schemes 
helped create 8,000 tenancies, with 90% 
lasting beyond six months. 

179. The government is also delivering a wide 
range of reforms to rebalance the 
relationship between landlords and tenants. 
This will deliver a high-quality, fairer, more 
secure and more affordable sector for 
everyone, including those at risk of 
homelessness and rough sleeping. These 
reforms include:

• improving affordability through the Tenant 
Fees Bill which will ban unnecessary fees, 
saving tenants money and giving them 
more control over their finances;

58 Chapter 5 | Recovery




• working with the Department of Work and 
Pensions to consider the long term options 
around housing benefit;

• supporting longer tenancies through our 
model tenancy agreement, the build to rent 
sector, and consulting on the barriers to 
landlords offering longer tenancies;

• extending Houses in Multiple Occupation 
(HMO) licensing to address poor conditions 
and overcrowding in HMOs;

• launching new guidance to ensure landlords 
and tenants are aware of their rights and 
responsibilities.

180. A key recommendation from the Advisory 
Panel was to strengthen engagement with 
the private rented sector to bring online 
more homes for people who sleep rough 
and we are determined to do just that. We 
want to work with local areas to explore 
innovative models to ensure that the private 
rented sector also does its bit to support 
vulnerable people. 

181. At the 2017 Budget we announced an 
additional £20 million to fund existing or 
new schemes that support vulnerable 
people in accessing or sustaining private 
rented sector tenancies. We recognise the 
importance of ensuring that those who 
sleep rough are supported in accessing 
properties in the private rented sector. 
However, it is critical that other people who 
are homeless, who can also be at risk of 
sleeping rough, also receive the support 
they need. 

We will primarily focus the £20 million 
Private Rented Sector Access Fund on 
supporting schemes that help single 
homeless people and families. We will 
publish further details of our plans later 
this year.

Local Lettings Agencies

182. We expect the Private Rented Sector Access 
Fund, Move On and Supported Lettings to 
support a wide range of schemes. We 
expect that local lettings agencies should be 
an important part of this system and will 
help people navigate their housing options 
at a local level. Local lettings agencies 
currently provide a range of services, from 
property/tenant matching to brokering 
relationships with local private landlords, 
and leasing and renting properties directly. 
This allows individuals to understand their 
options, make informed choices and take 
on properties that they may not otherwise 
be able to access. We think that local 
lettings agencies have significant potential 
and are keen to support them to become 
important parts of our rapid rehousing 
approach.

We will be opening a new fund to 
support the set up or extension of local 
lettings agencies in order to source, 
identify or provide homes and advice for 
people who are homeless or at risk of 
homelessness.

Social Impact Bonds

183. We see Social Impact Bonds as a 
fundamental part of our 2027 vision and  
as a result are bringing forward measures to 
broaden their use now. We are keen to build 
on our successes and in particular on the 
great work of the Fair Chance Fund which 
has provided vital support to young people.

 Chapter 5 | Recovery 59




We will launch a new Social Impact Bond 
aimed at young people. The Young 
Futures Fund will be aimed at young 
people not in education, employment or 
training (NEET), who are between the 
ages of 18-24 and are at risk of 
homelessness and rough sleeping.

184. Government is continually working with local 
areas as part of our Rough Sleeping Social 
Impact Bond. As we have been assessing the 
deliverability of the projects we have made 
adjustments to the spending profile and the 
areas involved. Some local authorities are 
struggling to meet demand for their services, 
which shows the potential of this approach. 
We want to help them support more people 
through these programmes. 

To meet demand for the Rough Sleeping 
Social Impact Bond programme, we are 
now providing £1.2 million of outcomes 
payments across the programme to 
ensure that more than 150 people will 
have access to the support they need to 
secure and sustain accommodation.

The general public, communities  
and business

185. Fundamental to our 2027 vision is that all 
parts of society, including the general public, 
business, faith and voluntary groups and 
communities come together to support 
people at risk of rough sleeping, reflecting 
the vision of the government’s Civil Society 
Strategy. We know that people want to help 
us meet the challenge. Over 40% of adults 
volunteer once a year and over a quarter 
volunteer at least once a month, with many 
more who would like to but cannot fit it into 
their busy lives. The business community, 
who already support their local areas 

Nightstop, Max

“My family moved around a lot when I was 
growing up. I didn’t have a great relationship with 
my biological father. When I was 12 it got too 
much and I left.

I stayed with family and friends and only slept 
rough a few times. There wasn’t always a place  
to go. When I slept rough, things felt vacant. I had 
my own bench I used to go to. During this time  
I was still at school and, in year 12, a scholarship 
programme to attend University in the United 
States started in my year. I successfully applied. 

Family circumstances meant that I had to come 
back to London before finishing and I was sleeping 

rough a lot more. It wasn’t the same as before. I 
was older now. It was lonely and scary. I reached 
out for help. It was charities that helped me. 

I used Nightstop for a couple of months where it 
feels like you’re invited into a family home for the 
night. One of the people I stayed with was so 
welcoming. When she found out I had Jamaican 
heritage, she cooked me curry goat, rice and peas. 

These services go out of their way to help people. 
It’s because of them I am where I am now. If I 
didn’t have them and I had to sleep rough for one 
more night I don’t know if I would have made it.”

60 Chapter 5 | Recovery




through both volunteer work and more 
formal structures such as Local Enterprise 
Partnerships, Chambers  
of Commerce and Business Improvement 
Districts, tell us they want to do more. 
Schemes like Nightstop which uses 
volunteer hosts to provide emergency 
overnight accommodation for young 
homeless people show the vital role 
communities can play. 

186. We are going to build on this goodwill. We 
have already set out improvements to the 
StreetLink platform which will help 
members of the public link people who 
sleep rough with local services. We want to 
ensure the voices of small charities, 
including faith groups, are heard and form 
part of our future work.

To enable the voices of small charities, 
including faith groups, into further 
iterations of the strategy, we will 
convene a roundtable bringing together 
a range of charitable organisations. 

Employment

187. Charities, local authorities and community 
groups also do a lot of group work to help 
people who sleep rough develop the right 
skills to find work. This government is clear 
that work provides the best opportunity to 
move out of poverty, and we are determined 
to do all we can to support those recovering 
from rough sleeping to stabilise their lives so 
they can move closer to or into work. Crucial 
to this is an individualised, tailored approach 
which takes into account personal 
circumstances, needs and capabilities.

188. The Department for Work and Pensions 
already provides a substantial package of 
support to people who may have 
experienced homelessness and claim 
benefits (including people who have slept 

rough). Support is tailored to take into 
account an individual’s readiness for work 
and includes: access to work experience 
opportunities, sector-based work  
academies and the New Enterprise 
Allowance for those interested in starting 
their own business. Those individuals who 
need extra, tailored and more long term 
support to find work have immediate access 
to traineeships and the Work and Health 
Programme. Work coaches tailor work 
search requirements to take account of 
individual circumstances, including putting 
jobseeking requirements on hold to give 
people time and space needed to resolve 
their accommodation issues. 

189. We want to do more to ensure homeless 
people receive the support they need to 
access and navigate the benefit system and 
find work.

We will: 
•  establish a work coach homelessness 

expert to act as a single point of 
contact in every Jobcentre; 

•  task Jobcentre Plus Partnership 
Managers with building effective 
working partnerships with housing 
services, homeless charities and 
organisations;

•  provide a dedicated, comprehensive 
package of guidance for work coaches 
and external stakeholders that clearly 
sets out the Department for Work and 
Pensions support offer for people who 
sleep rough; and

•  share as best practice the innovative 
partnership work between Newcastle 
Jobcentre Plus and Newcastle Local 
Authority, an early adopter of the 
Homelessness Prevention Trailblazer 
Programme across the whole 
Jobcentre Plus network. 

 Chapter 5 | Recovery 61




190. Jobcentre work coaches already refer 
homeless people to other local employment 
providers, including the Ready to Work 
Programme run by Business in the 
Community (BITC).

191. There are also other innovative locally-
developed and small-scale models in place 
which we wish to build on. For example, at 
the Connection at St Martin’s Day Centre in 
central London, Jobcentre work coaches 
work alongside homelessness professionals 
to provide a joined-up and holistic service.

192. Another example of an approach to support 
people at risk of rough sleeping or with a 
history of rough sleeping was the STRIVE 
programme, which helped individuals gain 
basic skills necessary to access the labour 
market. This programme had significant 
successes. It successfully met its aim of 
supporting 100 people over the first two 
years of delivery. Nearly half of participants 
had progressed to education, volunteering 
or employment, with 15 of those individuals 
in work.

Subject to further evidence and 
affordability, we will support further 
pilots and proofs of concepts which 
support people at risk of rough sleeping 
into work. 

193. This will involve working across local 
agencies and involving local business 
communities where possible, including 
working with organisations such as BITC  
to use learning from existing schemes  
(such as the ‘Ready to Work’ scheme).

62 Chapter 5 | Recovery




 Chapter 5 | Recovery 63




Chapter 6

Conclusion and next steps




194. We are under no illusions that the manifesto 
commitment to halve rough sleeping by the 
end of this Parliament and to end it by 2027 
is a challenging and ambitious objective. 
However, it is an objective that we are 
committed to achieving. We know the 
human cost of rough sleeping. It is not 
acceptable that in our prosperous society 
vulnerable people sleep on our streets. We 
have a duty to support these people, to 
make sure that they have suitable, safe and 
stable accommodation. We need to make 
sure that they have access to the privileges 
that so many of us take for granted in our 
day to day lives, including access to 
healthcare, mental health and substance 
misuse support, and access to benefits. We 
must make sure that in the future, no one 
ever has to sleep rough again. 

195. This strategy sets out a bold, long-term 
vision for achieving this. For the first time, 
the government is coming together to solve 
these issues in a targeted, comprehensive 
way. We know that people who sleep rough 
need access to suitable accommodation 
that meets their needs, but this in itself is not 
enough. We recognise that they also need 
wider support through health care, mental 
health, substance misuse and support 
services. We know that those leaving prison 
need to be able to access accommodation, 
those who need help to find work or 
benefits need to be able to access 
Jobcentres and that some people need help 
and support with their immigration status. 
In order to achieve our ambitious objective, 
we need all parts of government, local 
authorities, the care system, the health 
service, prisons and probation services, the 
police, immigration services and Jobcentres 
to come together so that public services are 
working to support the most vulnerable. 
There is an opportunity for many parts of 
society to work together to ensure that we 
are all doing our bit to end rough sleeping. 

196. We need to support those in crisis on our 
streets now. This strategy focusses, rightly, 
on putting in place new programmes and 
structures to support people off the streets 
now. However, this strategy is the first step 
to deliver our 2027 vision to end rough 
sleeping. We recognise that embedding 
preventative approaches takes time which is 
why are committing to updating this 
strategy annually. We know that there are 
gaps in our evidence base, and as we better 
understand the needs of people who sleep 
rough, we will be able to extend and refine 
our offer. We will keep this strategy under 
review and continue to develop work and 
further initiatives including around how we 
support non-UK nationals off the streets.

197. We will be refreshing this strategy on an 
annual basis, setting out the progress we 
have made and ensuring that our offer 
remains targeted. We will also publish in the 
autumn a delivery plan which will set out 
how we will deliver the ambitious work set 
out in this strategy. Finally, we will also be 
following this publication up with a strategy 
which will address other forms of 
homelessness. 

 Chapter 6 | Conclusion and Next Steps 65




Table of Commitments

Section  
of Strategy

Strategy  
Commitment

Accountable 
Department 

25. The Rough Sleeping Initiative will support work in local areas 
to improve the recording and assessing of rough sleeping by 
autumn 2018.

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government 

43. We will ensure that people’s lived experience of rough sleeping 
and homelessness will feed into future updates of the strategy.

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and 
Local Government

46. Over the next nine years, we will plug evidence gaps and pilot, 
test and evaluate new approaches which will inform our plans 
for wider roll-out.

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

65. In our 2027 vision we are clear that we will deliver a  
much expanded social investment market, including  
Social Impact Bonds.

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and 
Local Government

• Department for Digital, 
Culture, Media and Sport

70. We will launch a wider review of homelessness and rough 
sleeping legislation, which will include the Vagrancy Act. 
The review will ensure that the structures are in place to 
deliver effective services and engage with vulnerable people 
constructively. We expect the review will report by March 2020.

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

• Department of Health  
and Social Care

• Ministry of Justice

• Home Office

71. We will work with the Local Government Association and local 
authorities so that by winter 2019:

• all local authorities update their strategies and rebadge them 
as homelessness and rough sleeping strategies;

• strategies are made available online and submitted to 
MHCLG; and

• local authorities report progress in delivering these strategies 
and publish annual action plans.

Where necessary, we will support these changes by seeking to 
legislate at the earliest opportunity.

Where local authorities do not follow these changes, we will 
take action.

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

73. We will consult, by the end of this year, on ways to improve 
accountability at the local level, including the potential use of 
local Homelessness Reduction Boards.

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

66 Chapter 6 | Conclusion and Next Steps




Section  
of Strategy

Strategy  
Commitment

Accountable 
Department 

74 In the Rough Sleeping Initiative areas, through our practitioner 
team, we will support Health and Wellbeing Boards (HWB) to 
recognise and respond to the health needs of people who sleep 
rough. We will support them to fulfil their statutory duties, and 
to provide leadership in the development of homelessness and 
rough sleeping strategies.

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

• Department of Health  
and Social Care

76. We will work with Safeguarding Adult Boards to ensure that 
Safeguarding Adult Reviews are conducted when a person who 
sleeps rough dies or is seriously harmed as a result of abuse or 
neglect, whether known or suspected, and there is concern that 
partner agencies could have worked more effectively to protect 
the adult. Lessons learned from these reviews will inform 
improvements in local systems and services.

• Department of Health  
and Social Care

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

77. We will work with the Local Government Association to 
develop a comprehensive package of sector-led support for 
homelessness and rough sleeping. We expect this to be in place 
by summer 2019. 

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

80. We will undertake research into workforce challenges and 
opportunities in Housing Options teams and the voluntary 
sector, with the results feeding into future policy approaches.

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

81. Based on findings from the new research into LGBT 
homelessness, we will set out further concrete steps to  
address the issues of LGBT homelessness in the first yearly 
refresh of the Strategy.

• The Government  
Equalities Office

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

82. We will establish data pilots by summer 2019 to develop  
and test an outcomes framework for homelessness and  
rough sleeping.

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

84. We will test ways of including a person’s housing status in new 
NHS data collections to inform future policy and commissioning 
of services for homeless people. 

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

• Department of Health  
and Social Care

85. We will request that NICE produce guidance to support targeted 
homelessness prevention, integrated care and recovery.

• Department of Health  
and Social Care

 Chapter 6 | Conclusion and Next Steps 67




Section  
of Strategy

Strategy  
Commitment

Accountable 
Department 

86. We are funding research to inform ways of working in the 
delivery of hospital discharge and primary care services, due 
for publication in 2018 and 2019. We will actively promote 
the learning from this research into effective hospital discharge 
models, in partnership with the health service. This will be 
promoted in the 83 areas.

• Department of Health  
and Social Care

88. We will invest £3.2 million per year for two years to launch 
pilots in a small number of resettlement prisons in England. 
The pilots will support offenders who have been identified 
as being at risk of rough sleeping on release. The pilots will 
start in April 2019 and will run for two years. We will use the 
information to learn lessons that will inform the future provision 
of accommodation for ex-offenders.

• Ministry of Justice

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government 

90. We are planning to trial a new process to improve access to 
benefits on leaving prison in late August 2018 in both public 
(HMP Wayland & Norwich) and contracted prisons (HMP 
Birmingham); and to implement the new process in the autumn. 

• Ministry of Justice

• Department for Work  
and Pensions

91. We are further improving the support available to prisoners prior 
to release by providing assistance to offenders to help them 
access benefits and employment support.

• Ministry of Justice

• Department for Work  
and Pensions

92. We intend to introduce an ‘accommodation on release’ 
performance metric for prison Governors from 2019/20, which 
will be jointly owned with Community Rehabilitation Companies, 
who are already subject to this performance measure.

• Ministry of Justice

93. We will work with local and national partners to develop a 
pilot for ‘residential women’s centres’ in at least five sites across 
England and Wales.

• Ministry of Justice

97. We will work across government and with other national  
and local partners to develop a National Concordat on  
Female Offenders. 

• Ministry of Justice

102. We will fund £3.2 million in 47 areas to employ specialist 
personal advisers to provide intensive support, appropriate to 
their needs, to the most at-risk care leavers in their area. 

• Department for Education

68 Chapter 6 | Conclusion and Next Steps




Section  
of Strategy

Strategy  
Commitment

Accountable 
Department 

105. We have committed to conduct a feasibility study – led by 
MHCLG and co-funded by DWP. The long-term ambition for 
this research is to develop a quantitative, predictive model (or 
models) of homelessness and rough sleeping, which can be 
applied to various policy scenarios, to help assess the impacts of 
government intervention on levels of homelessness. This will be 
supported by an evidence review on the broad range of factors 
that might influence levels of homelessness, from the housing 
market to welfare systems, as well as individual drivers. 

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and Local 
Government

106. In order to inform thinking for the development of policy 
options to address affordability in the Private Rented Sector 
post-2020, we want to gather evidence from stakeholders, 
including the homelessness sector and local authorities, as to 
the challenges in local areas and options to address them.

• Department for Work  
and Pensions

107. To reduce the number of modern slavery victims at risk of 
homelessness once they exit central government support, we 
will extend the period of move on support from 14 to 45 days, 
significantly increasing the time available for support providers 
to work with victims to ensure they have safe and secure 
accommodation to move to before exiting National Referral 
Mechanism support. We will also be rolling out drop-in hubs 
for victims leaving the National Referral Mechanism, which will 
be accessible up to six months after leaving National Referral 
Mechanism support, providing an opportunity to signpost 
victims at risk of homelessness to appropriate support. We will 
roll out these changes at pace by March 2020.

• Home Office

108. Depending on the results of six local authority pilots to 
test pathways for victims moving out of National Referral 
Mechanism support into local communities, we will use learning 
to inform a national roll out.

• Home Office

110. We will host a roundtable in autumn 2018 with homelessness 
and anti-slavery organisations to bring together experts on these 
issues at a national level and identify opportunities to build on 
the work of regional anti-slavery networks.

• Home Office 

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

111. We will draw on data gathered through the Women’s Aid  
‘No Woman Turned Away’ project to inform our future 
approach to supporting victims of domestic abuse, and to 
develop person-centred, bespoke interventions which flexibly 
address individual needs.

• Home Office

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

116. We can confirm that the Rough Sleeping Initiative will receive up 
to £45 million for 2019/20 to continue its vital, targeted, work. 

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

 Chapter 6 | Conclusion and Next Steps 69




Section  
of Strategy

Strategy  
Commitment

Accountable 
Department 

118. We will ensure that people sleeping rough can access  
local systems by providing new funding for rough  
sleeping navigators.

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

121. We will be pilot a new Somewhere Safe to Stay service in 15 
locations around the country which have high numbers of 
people who sleep rough. This will be backed with up to £17 
million in new funding. We expect that by 2020, these will 
support up to 6,000 people.

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

124. We will work closely with local authorities, providers, hostel 
residents and other stakeholders to launch a review of hostels 
focussed on capacity, quality and outcomes. We work with 
the sector to outline this work this year with the full review 
commencing in Spring 2019.

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

126 We will introduce new training for people working with those 
who sleep rough. This will include:

• new specific packages focussed on identifying and supporting 
vulnerable groups, including victims of modern slavery and 
domestic abuse;

• training and non-statutory guidance around LGBT issues and 
how to most effectively support individuals;

• training for front-line staff on how to deal with unpredictable 
environments, for instance with clients under the influence of 
New Psychoactive Substances such as Spice.

• training for staff on how to support non-UK nationals, 
including ensuring they access the full range of support they 
are entitled to.

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government 
with support from the 
Government Equalities 
Office and the  
Home Office 

128. We will launch a new £5 million fund to help local areas take 
action to help non-UK nationals who sleep rough off the streets.

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

129. The £100 million Controlling Migration Fund will reopen this 
summer, with an increased focus on bids from local authorities 
to work with non-UK nationals who sleep rough.

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

• Home Office

133. We will provide an additional team to support and resolve the 
immigration status of non-UK nationals who are sleeping rough.

• Home Office

70 Chapter 6 | Conclusion and Next Steps




Section  
of Strategy

Strategy  
Commitment

Accountable 
Department 

136. We will set up a cross-government working group to explore 
options for more work to support non-UK nationals off the 
street, with the results feeding into our approach in forthcoming 
Rough Sleeping Strategy updates. It will meet regularly from 
autumn 2018.

• Home Office

141. In 2018/19 we will provide up to £2 million in health funding 
to test models of community-based provision designed to 
enable access to health and support services for people who are 
sleeping rough. This will include services to support people with 
both mental ill health and substance misuse issues. 

• Department of Health  
and Social Care

142. We will begin a rapid audit of provision targeted at people  
who sleep rough that can be used to inform future 
commissioning decisions.

• Department of Health  
and Social Care

143. We will host a round table in August 2018 to discuss what 
further action is needed to improve access to primary care for 
people who sleep rough. It will also discuss monitoring progress 
towards reducing inequalities.

• Department of Health  
and Social Care

144. Guidance on care for homeless people at the end of their lives 
will be promoted through the Ambitions for Palliative and End 
of Life Care Partnership and wider stakeholders made up of 
organisations from across healthcare and third sector, including 
NHS England.

• Department of Health  
and Social Care

146. Drawing on work to develop the long term plan for the NHS, 
we have asked NHS England to spend up to £30m on health 
services for people who sleep rough, over the next five years.

• Department of Health  
and Social Care

149. We will work with local authorities and their partners to tackle 
street activity as part of the Rough Sleeping Initiative work.

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

152. We want to build learning and findings from our recent work 
in local areas to tackle street drinking into the government’s 
new alcohol strategy, currently in development. One of its main 
themes will be support for vulnerable people.

• Home Office

154. Ministers and the Association of Police and Crime 
Commissioners will host a roundtable event in the autumn, 
to encourage leadership on rough sleeping from Police and 
Crime Commissioners and across the wider police to drive 
collaboration and sharing of best practice. This will initially focus 
on the 83 Rough Sleeping Initiative areas.

• Home Office

 Chapter 6 | Conclusion and Next Steps 71




Section  
of Strategy

Strategy  
Commitment

Accountable 
Department 

157. We will launch a new online platform to help individuals, 
community groups and businesses support people who sleep 
rough off the streets for good

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

165. We will undertake an extensive and robust evaluation of 
Housing First and will ensure that all learning from these pilots 
will be used to inform decisions on roll-out. We will also publish 
interim findings which will inform future work. The evaluation 
will begin in autumn 2018.

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

166. We are exploring the introduction of an exemption from the 
Shared Accommodation Rate for the Government-backed pilots 
of Housing First. Any learning from this will be captured through 
the planned evaluation of the pilots, and factored in to further 
roll-outs of Housing First.

• Department for Work  
and Pensions

167. As we move towards a rapid rehousing approach, we will  
learn from the evidence and explore whether the current 
definition of those that have lived in a homeless hostel is still 
the right one for the purposes of exemption from the Shared 
Accommodation Rate.

• Department for Work  
and Pensions

168. We are launching a prospectus with Homes England for bids for 
the £50 million Move-On Fund outside of London.

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

172. We have allocated up to £135 million from dormant accounts to 
social investment, with the majority going towards housing for 
vulnerable people and the rest being spent on new models of 
community funding. The first opportunities in this programme 
will be launched in the autumn.

• Department for Digital, 
Culture, Media & Sport

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and 
Local Government

175. We are opening a new Supported Lettings Fund, of up to 
£19 million, which will fund flexible support and tenancy 
sustainment for homes provided exclusively for people who 
sleep rough.

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

177. We have committed to undertake a review of housing related 
support services. This will commence in September 2018.

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

181. We will primarily focus the £20 million Private Rented Sector 
Access Fund on supporting schemes that help single homeless 
people and families. We will publish further details of our plans 
later this year.

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and 
Local Government

72 Chapter 6 | Conclusion and Next Steps




Section  
of Strategy

Strategy  
Commitment

Accountable 
Department 

182. We will open a new fund to support the set up or extension 
of local lettings agencies in order to source, identify or provide 
homes and advice for people who are homeless or at risk of 
homelessness.

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and  
Local Government

183. We will launch a new Social Impact Bond aimed at young 
people. The Young Futures Fund will be aimed young people 
who not in education, employment and training (NEET), are 
between the ages of 18-24 and are at risk of homelessness and 
rough sleeping.

• Department for Digital, 
Culture, Media & Sport

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and 
Local Government

184. To meet demand for the Rough Sleeping Social Impact Bond 
programme, we are now providing £1.2 million of outcomes 
payments across the programme to ensure that more than 150 
people will have access to the support they need to secure and 
sustain accommodation.

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and 
Local Government

186. To enable the voices of small charities, including faith  
groups, into further iterations of the strategy, we will  
convene a roundtable bringing together a range of  
charitable organisations.

• Department for Digital, 
Culture, Media & Sport

•  Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and 
Local Government

189. In order to ensure homeless people receive the support they 
need to access and navigate the benefit system and find work, 
we will: 

• establish a work coach homelessness expert to act as a single 
point of contact in every Jobcentre;

• Jobcentre Plus Partnership Managers will be tasked with 
building effective working partnerships with housing services, 
homeless charities and organisations;

• provide a dedicated, comprehensive package of guidance for 
work coaches and external stakeholders that clearly sets out 
the DWP support offer for people who sleep rough; and

• share as best practice the innovative partnership work 
between Newcastle Jobcentre Plus and Newcastle Local 
Authority, an early adopter of the Homelessness Prevention 
Trailblazer Programme across the whole Jobcentre Plus 
network.

• Department for Work  
and Pensions

192. Subject to further evidence and affordability, we will support 
further pilots and proofs of concepts building on these models.

• Ministry of Housing, 
Communities and 
Local Government

• Department for Work  
and Pensions

 Chapter 6 | Conclusion and Next Steps 73




Endnotes
i MHCLG (2018) ‘Rough Sleeping Statistics Autumn 2017, England (Revised)’.  

Available at: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/682001/Rough_Sleeping_Autumn_2017_Statistical_Release_-_revised.pdf 

ii Greater London Authority (2018) ‘CHAIN annual report 2017/18’.  
Available at: https://data.london.gov.uk/dataset/chain-reports 

iii MHCLG (2018) ibid.

iv MHCLG (2018) ibid.

v Bramley, G & Fitzpatrick, S (2017) ‘Homelessness in the UK: who is most at risk?’ Housing Studies 33:1.  
Available at: https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/02673037.2017.1344957 

vi Mackie & Thomas (2014) ‘Nations Apart? Experiences of single homeless people across Great Britain.  
Available at: https://www.crisis.org.uk/ending-homelessness/homelessness-knowledge-hub/types-of-homelessness/
nations-apart-experiences-of-single-homeless-people-across-great-britain-2014/  

vii MHCLG (2018) ibid.

viii Mackie & Thomas (2014) ibid; Fitzpatrick et al (2012) ‘Multiple Exclusion Homelessness in the UK: An overview of key 
findings Briefing Paper No.1’. Available at: https://www.hw.ac.uk/schools/doc/MEH_Briefing_No_1_2012.pdf 

ix Fitzpatrick et al (2012) ibid.

x MHCLG (2018) ibid.

xi Greater London Authority (2018) ibid.

xii Fitzpatrick et al (2012) ibid.

xiii Cockersell, P (2011) Homelessness and mental health: adding clinical mental health interventions to existing social 
ones can greatly enhance positive outcomes Journal of Public mental Health 10(2) 88-980 

xiv Bramley et al (2015) ‘Hard Edges: Mapping severe and multiple disadvantage’. The Lankelly Chase Foundation. 
Available at: https://lankellychase.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/Hard-Edges-Mapping-SMD-2015.pdf 

xv Greater London Authority (2018) ibid., Fitzpatrick et al (2012) ibid.

xvi Homeless Link (2018) ‘Young & Homeless 2018’. Available at:  
https://www.homeless.org.uk/sites/default/files/site-attachments/Young%20and%20Homeless%202018.pdf

xvii Bramley & Fitzpatrick (2017) ibid.

 xviii Fitzpatrick et al (2013) ‘Pathways into multiple exclusion homelessness in seven UK cities’. Urban Studies 50(1). 
Available at: https://pureapps2.hw.ac.uk/ws/portalfiles/portal/7456915

xix Greater London Authority (2018) ibid 

xx Aldridge, RW et al (2018) ‘Morbidity and mortality in homeless individuals, prisoners, sex workers, and individuals 
with substance use disorders in high-income countries: a systematic review and meta-analysis’ The Lancet 
391(10117) pp241-250.

xxi Thomas, B (2011) ‘Homelessness: A silent killer – A research briefing on mortality amongst homeless people’. Crisis. 
Available at: https://www.crisis.org.uk/ending-homelessness/homelessness-knowledge-hub/health-and-wellbeing/
homelessness-a-silent-killer-2011/

xxii Sanders, B. & Albanese, F. (2016) ‘It’s no life at all: Rough Sleepers’ experiences of violence and abuse on the streets  
of England and Wales’. Crisis. Available at: https://www.crisis.org.uk/media/20502/crisis_its_no_life_at_all2016.pdf 

xxiii Sanders & Albanese (2016) Ibid.

xxiv Bramley (2015) ibid.

xxv ICF Consulting Services ‘Fair Chance Fund evaluation: interim report year 2’. MHCLG.  
Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/fair-chance-fund-evaluation-interim-reports

74 Chapter 6 | Conclusion and Next Steps

https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/682001/Rough_Sleeping_Autumn_2017_Statistical_Release_-_revised.pdf
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/682001/Rough_Sleeping_Autumn_2017_Statistical_Release_-_revised.pdf
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/682001/Rough_Sleeping_Autumn_2017_Statistical_Release_-_revised.pdf
https://data.london.gov.uk/dataset/chain-reports
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/02673037.2017.1344957
https://www.crisis.org.uk/ending-homelessness/homelessness-knowledge-hub/types-of-homelessness/nations-apart-experiences-of-single-homeless-people-across-great-britain-2014/
https://www.crisis.org.uk/ending-homelessness/homelessness-knowledge-hub/types-of-homelessness/nations-apart-experiences-of-single-homeless-people-across-great-britain-2014/
https://www.hw.ac.uk/schools/doc/MEH_Briefing_No_1_2012.pdf
https://lankellychase.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/Hard-Edges-Mapping-SMD-2015.pdf
https://www.homeless.org.uk/sites/default/files/site-attachments/Young%20and%20Homeless%202018.pdf
https://pureapps2.hw.ac.uk/ws/portalfiles/portal/7456915
https://www.crisis.org.uk/media/20502/crisis_its_no_life_at_all2016.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/fair-chance-fund-evaluation-interim-reports




[i] ICF Consulting Services ‘Fair Chance Fund evaluation: interim report year 2’. MHCLG.  
Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/fair-chance-fund-evaluation-interim-reports 

xxvi Public Health England (2016) ‘Homelessness: Applying All Our Health’.  
Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/homelessness-applying-all-our-health

xxvii The quality of the validated returns for London was insufficient for inclusion within the annual performance measure. 
On-going work to improve data quality returns means that we hope to start reporting London during 2018/19.

xxviii Greater London Authority (2018) ibid.

xxix Morse, A (2014) ‘Children in Care’. National Audit Office.  
Available at: https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/Children-in-care1.pdf

xxx Herriot- Watt (201) ibid. 

xxxi Mackie, P. and Thomas, I. (2014) ‘Nations apart? Experiences of single homeless people across Great Britain.’ 
 London: Crisis.

 Chapter 6 | Conclusion and Next Steps 75

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/fair-chance-fund-evaluation-interim-reports
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/homelessness-applying-all-our-health
https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/Children-in-care1.pdf




ISBN 978-1-5286-0763-6 
CCS0818273008  

https://www.design102.co.uk/




	Ministerial Foreword
	Executive Summary
	Chapter 1: The scale of the problem and why we need to act
	Chapter 2: The 2027 vision: Prevention, Intervention, Recovery
	Chapter 3: Prevention
	Chapter 4: Intervention
	Chapter 5: Recovery
	Chapter 6: Conclusion and Next Steps




