



Adapting to Climate Change: helping key sectors to adapt to climate change


1   

www.defra.gov.uk 


  

Adapting to Climate Change: helping key 
sectors to adapt to climate change 


  


Government Report for the Adaptation Reporting Power 


  

March 2012 


 

PB 13740 


 2  

Contents 

Introduction Page 3 

Purpose of the Adaptation Reporting Power Page 4 

Executive Summary Page 4 

Evaluation Process Page 5 

Aviation Page 8 

Electricity Distributors Page 22 

Electricity Generators Page 42 

Electricity Transmitters Page 60 

Gas Transporters Page 72 

Road and Rail Page 88 

Ports and Lighthouses Page 102 

Public Bodies Page 117 

Water Page 131 


 3  

Introduction 

The Climate Change Act 2008 provides the Secretary of State with the Adaptation 
Reporting Power, to encourage and influence key organisations’1 adaptation actions.  

Even though there were potentially thousands of organisations that could have been 
asked to report, the first strategy for using the Power targeted just 91 organisations. 
These organisations are largely responsible for national infrastructure in the energy, 
transport and water sectors which are sectors of strategic importance to the country.  

In addition 12 organisations responded to our invitation to report. These 
organisations were invited to report rather than directed because either: 

• They did not sit within the legal definition of a reporting authority but their 
adaptation was considered crucial to the ongoing functioning of daily life in 
the UK. 


OR 


• They expressed their willingness to be involved in the process and to be 
seen as exemplars in adaptation. 


 

The Adaptation Reporting Power entitles the Secretary of State to require 
organisations to provide reports containing: 

• “an assessment of the current and predicted impacts of climate change in 
relation to the organisations’ functions; and 

• a statement of the organisation’s proposals and policies for adapting to 
climate change.” 


 

In practice this means that organisations are required to assess the risks and 
opportunities to their organisation from a changing climate. 

                                                            
1 The power applies to ‘Reporting Authorities’ which are defined within the act as either ‘a person or body with functions of a 
public nature’ or statutory undertakers under the Town and Country Planning Act 1990, the Town and Country Planning 
(Scotland) Act 1997 or Planning (Northern Ireland) Order 1991. 


4  

Purpose of the Adaptation Reporting Power  

The first round of the Adaptation Reporting Power focussed on key organisations 
responsible for infrastructure and essential services that were thought to be 
potentially vulnerable to climate change impacts. The first round strategy aimed to be 
proportionate in minimising additional reporting burdens on public and private sector 
bodies and to avoid identifying authorities who already had requirements in 
regulation to report on climate change adaptation. 

The primary aims of the first round of the Adaptation Reporting Power were to 
ensure that the organisations selected understood the risks climate change poses to 
their activities and were making the necessary plans to respond to climate change. 

The Adaptation Reporting Power has enabled Government and others (e.g. the 
Adaptation Sub-Committee2, regulators, and investors) to gain better information on: 

• Levels of preparedness in, and risks to, key infrastructure sectors. 
• Actions that organisations are taking as a result. 
• Areas where Government and others (e.g. regulators, research/scientific 

community) may need to act.  


 

Executive Summary 

103 organisations, primarily from the energy, transport and water sectors, have 
provided reports under the Adaptation Reporting Power (ARP) to Defra. The reports 
demonstrate that these organisations are assessing their risks from climate change 
and in many cases are well-placed to mitigate them.  

Different sectors and different organisations within these sectors are at different 
stages of considering climate change adaptation. The ARP has proved to be the 
catalyst for many organisations to begin formally considering their climate change 
risks and adaptation responses, some for the first time. One of the most common 
outcomes noted both in the Adaptation Reports and the workshops organised by 
Defra for each sector is that the ARP has led to greater visibility of climate change 
risks at the organisational and board level, and has embedded management of these 
risks within corporate risk management processes. 

Some organisations are at an advanced stage of embedding climate change 
adaptation, and were either already undertaking research into the effects climate 
change could have on their functions, or taking adaptation actions to prepare for a 
future climate. Through the process of completing their report, many organisations 
engaged with their relevant stakeholders specifically on climate change risks, and 
worked collaboratively to identify interdependencies between sectors. Similarly the 

                                                            
2 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/government/risk-assessment/ 


5  

reporting process has resulted in greater awareness of potential barriers to climate 
change adaptation and suggested ways these barriers can be overcome.  

Overall the ARP process has demonstrated that reporting authorities are working to 
mitigate climate change risks and that the UK is building resilience to a future 
climate. 


 

The Evaluation Process 

The reports have been evaluated by:  

• Defra’s Adapting to Climate Change Programme team – who examined 
the reports and identified any barriers to action and interdependencies 
between risks. 

• Cranfield University - Risk experts from the Risk Centre at Cranfield 
University who independently analysed the risk assessment methodology and 
results in each Adaptation Report.  

• Lead Policy Government Department - Policy leads in relevant departments 
(e.g. Department for Transport for the aviation sector) and devolved 
administrations, where appropriate, evaluated the Adaptation Report from a 
policy perspective (i.e. lessons to inform future work) and identified 
information gaps and barriers to action. 


 

Compendium Report 

Nearly all of the 103 organisations who reported can be clustered together into nine 
sectors.3 These sectors are: 

• Aviation; 

• Electricity Distributors; 

• Electricity Generators; 

• Electricity Transmitters; 

• Gas Transporters; 

• Ports and Lighthouses; 

                                                            
3 Sector summaries on I.C.T. and Health were not prepared as it was not felt that a complete and accurate representation of 
these sectors could be made given their partial coverage through the first round of reporting. As a result the Ofcom and Monitor 
reports are not included in this document. 


6  

                                                           

• Public Bodies; 

• Road and Rail; and 

• Water. 

There is a chapter in this document for each of these sectors based on advice 
provided by Cranfield University, relevant policy teams in Government departments; 
and discussions with Reporting Authorities. These summary chapters aim to reflect 
the broader sector-wide results that have come out of the Adaptation Reporting 
Power. Workshops were held with all sectors to discuss each of these chapters, and 
in several cases further follow-up meetings and discussions with reporting authorities 
were also held.  

It is important to note that the risks mentioned in these reports are risks identified 
by the Reporting Authorities to their own functions and are not Defra’s 
assessment of climate change risks, which can be found in the UK’s National 
Climate Change Risk Assessment.4 Future editions of the UK’s National Climate 
Change Risk Assessment5 will utilise the information within the ARP reports to build 
a baseline of UK climate resilience against which risks can be assessed. 

Both Defra’s National Climate Change Risk Assessment and the reports submitted 
under the Adaptation Reporting Power will be used as part of the evidence base to 
develop the National Adaptation Programme, where Government will out its 
adaptation policies and actions. 

Each chapter is structured by the following headings: 

• Executive summary; 

• Key climate change risks (as identified by Reporting Authorities); 

• Areas of strength; 

• Areas for further research (note these are not necessarily areas for the 
Reporting Authorities themselves to research); 

• Emerging trends; 

• Barriers (to adaptation as identified by reporting authorities); 

• Interdependencies; and 


 

4 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/government/risk-assessment/ 
5 Which will be produced on a regular five year cycle. 


7  

                                                           

• Annex listing the relevant Reporting Authorities for the sector.6 


 

6 Note that regulators are placed with the sector(s) they regulate, meaning that Ofgem are present in all energy sector 
summaries. 


8   


www.defra.gov.uk 


  

Adapting to Climate Change: helping key 
sectors to adapt to climate change 


  


Aviation Chapter for the Adaptation Reporting Power 


  

March 2012 


   9  

                                                           

INTRODUCTION  


 

In response to directions to report under the Adaptation Reporting Power, 9 airports 
from England, Scotland and Wales, the Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) and National 
Air Traffic Services (NATS) submitted Adaptation Reports to Defra in 20117. These 
reports were reviewed by Defra’s Adapting to Climate Change team, policy teams in 
the Department for Transport and the Risk Centre at Cranfield University. They were 
published by Lord Taylor in October 20118. 


 

This report summarises the findings from the reports, focusing on: 

• The climate risks for the aviation sector as identified by Reporting Authorities  
• Areas of strength for the industry as a whole  
• Areas of good practice  
• Areas for further research;  
• Emerging trends and themes 
• Barriers  
• Interdependencies 


 

Due to the different locations of the organisations, regional conditions bring different 
climate issues for the aviation sector.  


   

7 A full list of the airports who were directed to report can be found at Annex A. 
8 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-
reports/ 


 10  

SUMMARY OF FINDINGS 


 

The evaluation of the reports by Cranfield University, DfT policy teams and Defra’s 
Adapting to Climate Change team show that: 


 

• Climate change risk assessments are being embedded within the aviation 
sector’s corporate risk appraisal processes. 


 

• For climate risk assessments the sector is making good use of climate change 
data (e.g. UKCP09), information, knowledge and tools 


 

• The risk assessments have generated priorities for action and flexible 
adaptation responses are being developed.  


 

• The issue of climate change uncertainties and their implications for the sector 
requires further examination. 


 


KEY CLIMATE RISKS FOR THE SECTOR 

This is not an exhaustive list of every risk to the aviation sector; it is an overview of 
the key climate risks that the aviation sector has identified.  Further details about the 
risks faced by each organisation can be found in their individual adaptation reports.9 
Note that these risks are those identified by Reporting Authorities, not Defra. 


 

Weather Risks 


11  

Increased frequency of extreme weather events – potential 
for flight diversions, delays and airport closure. Also the 
potential loss of business through damaged goods and 
pressure on air cargo storage capacity if cargo aircraft are 
unable to leave the airport. All of these can lead to reputational 
damage and financial implications. 


 

Increased temperatures/heat waves - potential for increase 
in surface and subsurface damage to runways and aprons 
from extreme heat. Also increased risk of adhesion to aircraft 
tyres and ground subsidence. There is the potential for 
overheating of airport buildings requiring use of cooling units 
and cooling systems. 

Heat stress to passengers, staff and particularly to vulnerable 
groups. May also lead to increased fire risk (in conjunction with 
increased drought and lightning likelihood). 


 

Increased rainfall and flood risk- which can cause surface 
water flooding and exceed drainage capacity leading to 
reduced air traffic flow capacity and accident risk. Increased 
runoff from paved areas can cause standing water on runways 
creating hazardous conditions for landing and taxiing aircraft. 

Extreme events pose the risk of de-icer contaminated surface 
water leading to breach of discharge consents.  

Winter rainfall increases the potential for ice formation on 
aircraft which requires de-icing. This can disrupt surface 

                                                            
9 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-
reports/ 

Managing weather risks 


 

Gatwick Airport 
experienced heavy 
snowfall at the end of 
2010. The airport was 
shut for two brief periods 
shortly before Christmas 
when more than 240,000 
passengers were 
scheduled to travel.  


 

A collaborative approach 
with airport partners was 
used, through workshops 
and table top exercises, 
to improve preparedness 
for future snow disruption.  


 

In addition- Gatwick 
invested £600,000 in 
upgrading the snow 
clearing equipment and 
de-icer storage facilities 
during the summer of 
2010. Gatwick also 
invested £8 million to 
double the size of their 
snow fleet, putting their 
snow clearing capacity on 
a par with Oslo airport. 

http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-reports/
http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-reports/


12  

transfer networks, impeding the flow of passengers, air crew and staff as well as key 
supplies. 


 

Seasonal changes in fog - potential for increased disruption caused by low visibility 
procedures (LVPs). These can also restrict airside maintenance activities. 


 

Increased lightning - can cause changes to flight routings and stack locations to 
avoid convection storms. This can lead to suspension of refuelling activities as well 
as disrupting control systems. 


 

Increased freeze/thaw effect - damage of surfaces if winter temperatures become 
more variable, fracture risk to underground utilities and infrastructure. 


 

General Risks 

Interdependencies - particularly with the wider transport sector, water sector, 
energy sectors and the telecoms sector. 


 

Global Risks - such as potential for changes in the distribution of diseases, 
epidemics and pandemics, resulting in travel bans or reduced demand for air travel. 
Risk to destination airports from climate change, as well as wider impacts to airports 
due to climate change mitigation efforts/behavioural change. 


 

Subsidence - increased likelihood possible due to changes to the water table. 


 

Specific Air Traffic Control Risks 

Changes in prevailing wind conditions - affecting runway utilisation through 
reductions in take-off and landing rates causing backlog, delays etc. Permanent 
change could require realignment of runway direction although current climate 
projections do not suggest any likely change in the prevailing wind. 


13   


Jet stream movement - requiring changes to aircraft flow 
patterns and sector loading and could result in preferred 
transatlantic routes moving further north outside NATS’s 
controlled airspace. 


 

Increased low pressure storm conditions and high wind 
speeds - causing air traffic flow reductions, increased aircraft 
separation and missed approaches - leading again to delay 
and backlog and potentially, short-term runway closures. 


 

AREAS OF STRENGTH 

A number of areas of strength were identified from the 
Adaptation Reports, illustrating that the aviation sector 
Reporting Authorities are beginning to take steps to assess 
their climate change risks.  These include: 

Embedding Climate 
Change Adaptation 


 

Climate change is 
included in Birmingham 
Airport’s corporate Risk 
Management Register 
and Environmental 
Management System 
(EMS), whilst Stansted 
Airport’s adaptation 
responses will be 
monitored through its 
existing Sustainability 
and Risk Governance 
Forums. 

Engagement with relevant staff/departments – the majority of the Reporting 
Authorities engaged with key staff and departments when assessing their potential 
climate change risks.  For example, Luton Airport held a 
workshop with senior departmental managers and directors to 
introduce the reporting process, with sub-groups based 
around key business functions subsequently being used to 
assess the risks facing their business areas.  


 

Active engagement with stakeholders and 
interdependencies – the Adaptation Reports illustrate that a 
number of the aviation sector Reporting Authorities are 
actively engaging with a variety of stakeholders and 
interdependencies in relation to climate change risk 
management and adaptation and are aware of the need for 
partnership approaches to address climate change risks.   


 

Risks assessed using existing corporate risk assessment 
methodologies – all of the Reporting Authorities used their 
existing corporate risk assessment methodology and criteria to 
evaluate their climate change risks. This enables climate 
change risks to be compared with existing risks and 
embedded within corporate risk management processes. 

Engaging others on 
adaptation 


 

Cardiff Airport consulted 
a range of stakeholders, 
including NATS, airline 
operators and the Welsh 
Assembly and is 
considering holding an 
awareness raising 
seminar with airlines.   


 

Through this Cardiff 
Airport have recognised 
opportunities for 
themselves for working 
more closely with the 
Welsh Assembly. 
Government. 


 

Evidence of the embedding of climate change in risk management processes –
the aviation sector Reporting Authorities are actively embedding climate change risk 
management within their organisations.   


 

Clear timescales and responsibilities for adaptation – a number of the 
Adaptation Reports outlined adaptation actions which include clear timescales for 
implementation and are accompanied by details of clear responsibilities.  Heathrow 
Airport’s risk management matrices provided details of the business unit risk owners 
and responsible directors, with ‘actions’ and ‘prepare’ tasks expected to be 
completed within the next 3 years. 


 

Plans for the continued assessment and monitoring of climate change risks – 
the reports provided details of the sector’s plans for continued assessment and 
monitoring of climate change risks. For example, Stansted Airport’s Adaptation 
Report provided details of a number of proposed actions to monitor and test airport 
drainage infrastructure. 


 

Evidence that the Adaptation Reporting Power has led to change – some of the 
Reporting Authorities in the sector note that the Adaptation Reporting Power has led 
to changes in the level of understanding or management of climate change risks 
within their organisation.  NATS notes that its climate change risk assessment has 
led to a number of responses with, for example climate change being incorporated in 
its asset management, investment, strategic projects and supplier review processes 
amongst others.  


14  

Assessing possible adaptation responses 


 

Manchester and East Midlands Airports held workshops with senior members of staff to 
identify risks and opportunities, and then ranked these on a scale of significance. An 
electronic voting system was used to create the ranking after discussion. This meant that 
the variance of workshop attendees’ ratings could be analysed to assess where there was 
consensus or difference of opinions. 

Conclusions were then classified as ‘watching brief’, ‘investigate’ or ‘action’. For example 
the process outlined an action to increase the capacity of the surface water drainage 
system in response to the risk of increased winter precipitation. 


15  

                                                           

AREAS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH 


 

The review of the aviation sector reports highlighted a number of areas that might 
benefit from further research in future.  These include: 


 

Changes in behaviour triggered by climate change – the potential for climate 
change to result in changing travel demand and behaviour, with both positive and 
negative impacts on travel demand. 

Risks to cargo flows – climate change may lead to disruptions in cargo operations 
and international cargo flows, and is interdependent with, for instance, the postal 
service. There are also potential risks to specific cargos, for instance livestock which 
may require existing facilities to be adapted to climate change. 

Reputational and financial risks – as highlighted by the 2010 snow disruption, 
severe weather and climate events can disrupt air services and, possibly, lead to 
temporary suspension of airport operations. Reputational risks and financial risks, 
particularly increased insurance costs, were noted as being of concern to the sector.  

Adaptation investment issues – particularly the implications of regulated capital 
investment, investment decision making with long timescales and uncertainties. The 
potential requirement to invest in equipment, infrastructure and training for highly 
uncertain and low frequency risks.  

Overcoming climate change uncertainties – research to understand and address 
the challenges that climate change uncertainties represent for organisations. 

Noise risk – a number of airport operators noted that climate change could increase 
noise risks to local communities through changes in flight patterns and increased 
temperatures10. Cardiff Airport’s report noted increases in noise complaints from 
neighbouring residents during periods of peak temperatures. 

Air quality risks – the potential for increased temperature and heat waves to result 
in reduced air quality and in particular the risk this poses to vulnerable groups with 
existing respiratory and heart conditions. 

Impacts on the emergency services and safety - such as potential increases in 
risks, for example grass fires as temperatures increase, which may require increased 
fire cover and new controls. Emergency service access and increased external 
demands under climate change may need to be investigated and planned for. 


 

10 This is because aircraft need to use increased thrust on take-off to compensate for lower air 
densities. 


16   

Impacts on employees - issues such as employee welfare, reduced productivity 
and risk of heat stress, even increased disease risk, changes in staff relations and 
issues relating to internal expertise and knowledge. 

Changes in wildlife and vegetation - such as possible effects of bird strike risk 
resulting from changes to migration patterns and changes in vegetation growth. 

Interdependencies - with the wider transport network, water and energy sectors, 
planning agreements and telecoms services. The lack of awareness about how 
interdependencies are adapting to climate change and potential for conflicts with 
third parties over adaptation plans/preparedness. There were calls for integrated 
approaches involving local and central government to overcome interdependencies. 

Airfield design standards - for some airports current airfield design standards 
appear to offer only a low standard of protection (no flooding for a 1 in 5 year storm 
and 1 in 10 years for landslide areas) which may need to change in line with 
expected climatic changes. 

Climate change projections and information – further information is required on 
projections for extreme weather, storm frequency and severity, snow frequency and 
intensity wind speed and direction, haze conditions, air quality, fog and lightning.  

Other - ground movement risks, disruption to navigation aids and potential increased 
maintenance costs. 


                  17  

EMERGING TRENDS  


 

The review of the aviation sector’s Adaptation Reports illustrates that each airport is 
at a different stage in the assessment of climate change risks and development of 
adaptation programmes. However, common issues and trends emerge across the 
reports that require cross-industry action.   

The impact of temporary suspensions of operations at some airports during winter 
2010 is clearly reflected in the Adaptation Reports and their consideration of the risks 
posed by adverse winter weather.  


 

Thresholds – While a number of Reporting Authorities appear to be aware of 
climate change thresholds that affect their functions, others noted that they are yet to 
assess their potential climate change thresholds and recognise the need for further 
research and monitoring. The Adaptation Reports do illustrate however, that the 
aviation sector is clearly aware of how weather affects their operations, which is 
reflected in weather-related contingency plans and procedures.   


 

Risk Assessments – In general the quality of risk assessments conducted by the 
sector was good, with the majority of reports containing a detailed description of the 
risk assessment methodology including clearly defined likelihood and consequence 
classifications. 

A number of Reporting Authorities used supporting information such as Environment 
Agency flood risk maps and many used UK CP09 to test their climate change 
sensitivities. All assessed risks over different future timescales and a number 
included an assessment of the level of confidence associated with the assessment. 


 

Further Actions proposed - in general further adaptation actions outlined focused 
on further research monitoring and reviewing of actions as opposed to hard 
infrastructure adaptation.  

A number of organisations are actively designing investments that are resilient to 
climate change. However, others noted recent or planned investment in 
infrastructure but it was unclear whether climate change was considered. 


 

Lack of Research programmes - whilst a small number of Reporting Authorities 
appear to have funded research into their climate change risks, unlike other sectors 


18  

there is very little, if any, evidence to suggest that the sector is engaging in research 
programmes.  

Use of consultants - all but three of the Reporting Authorities’ risk assessments 
were supported by external consultants. 


 

BENEFITS AND OPPORTUNITIES 


 

Self-generation of renewable energy - a number of airport operators highlighted 
the potential opportunities of renewable energy generation, for example through 
biomass or photovoltaics. 

Reduced energy costs - warmer temperatures in future may reduce the heating 
season although this may be outweighed by increased cooling demand. 

New management processes and policies - such as increased energy and water 
efficiencies, opportunities to exploit rain water harvesting from wetter winters and 
milder winters resulting in a longer outdoor work season. 

Partnership opportunities - climate change adaptation is viewed by some as an 
opportunity for facilitating closer working relationships with stakeholders and 
interdependencies. 

Changes in passenger flows and travel destinations – the UK could be seen as a 
better holiday location, particularly if other countries and their airports fail to adapt. 

Potential reduction in the frequency of fog and snow - leading to reduction in 
frequency of Low Visibility Procedures (LVPs) and/or reduction in winter disruption 
and need for anti-icing. 


 

BARRIERS 

The review of the Adaptation Reports identified a number of barriers that were 
highlighted as representing a challenge to the aviation sector’s ability to adapt to 
climate change.  


 

Investment challenges: 

• Airports have short-term timeframes for return on investment whilst climate 
change requires longer term investment which looks unattractive to 
shareholders. 


19   


• Financial uncertainties and resource constraints. Even the airports master 
planning timescales of 20 years is not long enough to prepare for climatic 
changes. 


 

Regulatory Barriers 

• Regulatory constraints on investment - airport capital investment programmes 
are regulated in 5 year periods by the CAA and the Airports Act with costs 
having to be agreed in advance. This cycle does not match the long term 
timescales associated with climate change. 

• Future climate change regulation such as increased legislative constraints 
and levels of fiscal taxes may impact upon airports’ ability to invest in 
appropriate infrastructure. 

• Airfield and aviation safety regulations. 

• Permitting constraints e.g. night flight quotas and noise footprints. 


 

Information gaps 

• Uncertainties around climate science and projections for the future. 

• A lack of data on weather variable that are most important to the sector such 
as wind, fog and lightning. 

• Lack of information on flooding from overland flow and drainage systems. 

• Lack of policy information such as the Welsh Government has not yet 
published its guidance ‘Building resilience into climate change’ nor have some 
local surface water management plans and local transport plans yet been 
published. 


 

Other Barriers 

• Stakeholder acceptance and perception of climate change risks. 

• Uncertainty, not just in climate change/scientific understanding, but also in 
future industry trends and developments. 


20  

• Physical constraints to adaptation, for example limited capacity to store 
supplies on site, space constraints posed by physical location of the airport 
and legacy infrastructure and runway capacity constraints. 

• Skills and technical knowledge can be difficult to access which means the 
future impacts arising from climate change are not fully understood. 


  

INTERDEPENDENCIES 


 

The reports highlighted a large number of interdependent organisations and policies 
with many of these representing key cross-cutting interdependencies. The following 
broad groups were identified. 


  

Public Sector Bodies 
and Regulators – UK 
Government, Devolved 
Administrations, Scottish 
Environmental Protection 
Agency, Environment 
Agency,  Civil Aviation 
Authority, local authorities, 
Health Protection Agency, 
Health protection bodies 
(NHS etc.), Police 
services, local fire 
services, Health and 
Safety Executive. 

Transport/surface 
access – Road network- 
Highways 
Agency/highways 
authorities, surface 
transport operators and 
infrastructure, Network 
Rail and operating 
companies, bus and coach 
operators, taxi companies, 
staff transport, car rental 
and parking. 


 

Aviation Sector – Air 
traffic services, airlines, 
Airport Coordination 
Limited, Heathrow Airline 
Operators Committee, 
airport operators, 
international aviation 
bodies, ground 
handling/baggage 
handling agents. 

Energy Supply/Utilities – 
Fuel supply and 
districution- UK Oil 
Pipeline system, refineries 
and on-site providers, 
Airccraft fuel 
infrastructure, electricity 
suppliers and National 

Stakeholders- 
Community groups, 
surrounding land users, 
Unions, RSPB. 

Other third party 
services – offsite assets, 
landowners/landlords, 
commercial 
services/tenants, retail and 
site concessions and 
delivery partners, retail 
chains, transport/haulage 


21  

Grid, Gas supply, Water 
supply, ICT/telecoms 
provision. 

and logistics companies, 
maintenance engineers, 
cleaning staff/contractors, 
catering, hotels, banking 
services, facilities 
management, drainage 
engineers, landscaping 
companies, cargo 
industry, de-icer suppliers, 
veterinary staff, health 
professionals, Met 
Office/meteorological data 
providers, University 
Research centres, 
consultancies. 


   


ANNEX A 

The full list of reporting authorities for the aviation sector that provided adaptation 
reports. 


 

1. Birmingham Airport 
2. Cardiff International Airport 
3. East Midlands Airport (joint report with Manchester Airport) 
4. Edinburgh Airport 
5. Glasgow International Airport 
6. London Gatwick Airport 
7. London Heathrow Airport 
8. London Luton Airport 
9. London Stansted Airport 
10. Manchester Airport (joint report with East Midlands Airport) 
11. NATS (Air traffic management) 
12. Civil Aviation Authority (aviation regulation) 


  22    

Adapting to Climate Change: helping key 
sectors to adapt to climate change 


  


Energy (Electricity Distributors) Sector Summary Report for the 
Adaptation Reporting Power 


  

March  2012 


     

www.defra.gov.uk 


23  

                                                           

INTRODUCTION  


 

In response to directions to report under the Adaptation Reporting Power, 14 
organisations from the electricity distributors sector submitted Adaptation Reports to 
Defra between June and November 201111. These reports were reviewed by the 
Government’s Adapting to Climate Change team in Defra, policy teams in the 
Department of Energy and Climate Change and the Risk Centre at Cranfield 
University. They were published by Lord Taylor in December 201112. 


 

This report summarises the findings from the reports focussing on: 

• The climate risks for the electricity distributors sector as identified by 
Reporting Authorities 

• Areas of strength for the industry as a whole  
• Areas for further research or consideration  
• Emerging trends and themes 
• Benefits and opportunities 
• Barriers  
• Interdependencies 


    

11 A full list of the organisations who were directed to report can be found at Annex B. 
12 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-
reports/ 


24  

SUMMARY OF FINDINGS 


 

The evaluation of the reports by Cranfield University, DECC policy teams and 
Defra’s Adapting to Climate Change team show that: 


 

• Climate Change risk assessment forms a component of corporate risk 
assessment within the electricity distribution sector. The level of embedding 
and consideration of climate change in corporate planning and process is 
mixed across the sector, with some organisations yet to completely embed 
climate change risk management. 


 

• Reporting Authorities have clearly used a range of relevant and appropriate 
data, information, knowledge and tools in their risk assessments reflecting not 
only the collaborative sector-level assessment of climate change risks, 
through the reporting process, but the range of in-depth studies that have 
been commissioned to develop a greater understanding of the risks facing the 
sector. 


 

• The risk assessments have generated priorities for action, with key risks being 
accompanied by adaptation responses. The Reporting Authorities have 
highlighted a number of cases where they have already begun adaptation 
actions to reduce risks from climate change. Reporting Authorities’ plans for 
monitoring and evaluating adaptation effectiveness were less clear however. 


 

• Reporting Authorities emphasised that other changes, for instance 
surrounding the delivery of the government’s ‘Low Carbon Transition Plan’, 
the introduction of smart grid technology and the connection and growth in the 
use of electric vehicles, will lead to greater changes to their operations than 
climate change.  


    25  

KEY CLIMATE RISKS FOR THE SECTOR 


 

This is not an exhaustive list of every risk that the electricity distribution sector has 
identified; it is an overview of the key climate risks which were identified by the 
Reporting Authorities. Further details about the risks faced by each organisation can 
be found in their individual adaptation reports.13 Note that these risks are those 
identified by Reporting Authorities, not Defra. 

The Energy Networks Association produced a core sector report which aimed to 
prioritise risks based on relative impact and relative likelihood. Four risks were 
identified which, if no adaptation measures were taken, received a ‘very high’ 
classification. 


 

Substations affected by sea flooding due to increased sea levels and/or tidal 
surges. This risk was scored as having an extreme impact and a possible relative 
likelihood. 

Substations affected by flash flooding due to increase winter rainfall. This risk 
was scored as having a significant impact and a possible relative likelihood. 

Substations affected by river flooding due to increased winter rainfall. This risk 
was scored as having a significant impact and a probable relative likelihood. 


 

Additional risks which, without adaptation measures, were given a high classification 
were: 

• Overhead line conductors affected by temperature rise, reducing rating and 
ground clearance. 

• Underground cable systems being affected by increase in ground 
temperature, reducing ratings. 

• Transformers affected by urban heat islands and coincident air conditioning 
demand leading to overloading in summer months.  


 

Clearly the industry believes that the greatest risks from climate change it faces are 
as a result of flooding, particularly to substations. Overall however the industry 
believes that it is capable of addressing all of these risks in a timely manner and at a 
cost which is estimated to be affordable. 

                                                            
13 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-
reports/ 

http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-reports/
http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-reports/




AREAS OF STRENGTH 


26  

A number of areas of strength were identified from the 
Adaptation Reports that demonstrate that the electricity 
distribution sector is assessing and acting upon their 
climate change risks.  These include: 


 

Awareness of thresholds and climate change effects – 
the Adaptation Reports illustrate that the electricity 
distribution sector is developing a detailed understanding 
of the impact that climate change and weather events may 
have on electricity distribution infrastructure.  This includes 
an awareness of the thresholds associated with different 
types of assets (e.g. transformer de-ratings), which are 
based on design standards and work with the Met Office 
developing network fault models.  


 

Awareness of the geographical distribution of risks – 
the reports illustrate that the sector is developing an 
understanding of the spatial distribution of a number of 
risks that affect the sector, particularly at the national level, 
although some companies are also aware of the 
geographical distribution of their own risks.  However, 
further research is required to develop a more detailed 
understanding of the spatial distribution of risks. 

Research into climate 
change risks 

Industry research including 
EP2, with recent work 
commissioned to develop a 
risk model that quantifies 
the relationship between 
climate and network faults 
and the vulnerability and 
exposure of the network to 
these faults. 


 

UK Power Networks and 
Central Networks (now 
Western Power 
Distribution), have worked 
with the National Soil 
Research Institute (NSRI) at 
Cranfield University and the 
British Geological Survey 
(BGS) to produce an 
earthing mapping system 
which they hope to extend 
to account for the effects of 
seasonality and climate 
change. 


 

In response to concerns 
regarding potential changes 
in vegetation growth as a 
result of climate change, a 
number of electricity 
distributors have 
commissioned a 4 year 
research project with ADAS 
to quantify the impact of 
vegetation growth around 
overhead lines and the 
manner in which utility 
space is degraded by 
vegetation growth. 


  

Research programmes – the reports provide details of a 
number of ongoing research initiatives, at both the sector 
and organisational level that the Reporting Authorities are 
participating in to investigate and assess their climate 
change risks and adaptation actions.  Some of the studies 
have been funded through Ofgem’s Investment Funding 
Initiative (IFI), which was introduced in response to the 
regulator’s recognition of declining levels of research and 
development by the sector.   


 

Industry-level collaboration – as well as funding industry-level research, the sector 
is also collaborating on climate change risk management and resilience issues 
through the Energy Networks Association.   


 

Stakeholder collaboration – for example, the ENA task group 
that produced their climate change report includes electricity 
transmission and distribution companies and the Department of 
Energy and Climate Change (DECC), with inputs from Ofgem, 
Defra, the Environment Agency, the Met Office and others. 

Action on Flooding 


 

Electricity North West 
has embarked on a 
prioritised investment 
plan to defend sites 
vulnerable to flooding 
at a total cost of over 
£10m. Work has been 
completed at 28 sites 
out of a total of 50 
identified as requiring 
improvement in the 
first tranche. This part 
of the programme will 
be completed by 2014. 
A further 102 sites are 
to be surveyed. 

The ENA member companies propose to engage in discussions 
with Ofgem and DECC with a view to agreeing revised design 
standards for overhead line poles to take effect from the next 
price control review starting in 2015. 


 

Flood resilience – in response to the 2005 Carlisle flood and 
2007 floods, the sector developed an Engineering Technical 
Report (ETR 138) that sets out a common approach to the 
assessment of flood risk and the development of target mitigation 
levels that are subject to cost benefit analysis. Furthermore, the 
electricity distribution companies have begun a circa 10 year 
programme of work to improve substation resilience to flooding, 
with Ofgem setting allowances of £110m which has been agreed 
as part of Distribution Price Control Review 5, that runs between 
2010 and 2015. 


 

Awareness of potential adaptation costs – the electricity 
distribution sector, through the ENA, outline the rough costs 
associated with adapting the electricity distribution network to 
climate change and the costs of replacing specific assets.  Such 
information has not commonly been provided by other 
sectors/Reporting Authorities and represents best practice.  

Further evidence of 
adaptation responses 


 

SSE Power 
Distribution is 
introducing early 
adaptation measures 
including network 
automation and storm 
management systems, 
enhancing its ability to 
respond to extreme 
weather events that 
are likely to typify 
climate change. 


 

Emergency preparedness - the sector has well established 
emergency plans, which are reviewed and managed through the 
Energy Emergencies Executive (E3).  Network companies are all 
members of the North East West South Area (NEWSAC) mutual 
aid consortium.  This was used during the 2007 floods when CE 
Electric received assistance from Scottish Power and Central 
Networks. 


 

Evidence that the Adaptation Reporting Power has led to 
change – some of the Reporting Authorities in the sector note 
that the Adaptation Reporting Power has led to changes in the 
level of understanding or management of climate change risks 
within their organisation.  Examples include: 


27  

o SP Energy Networks notes that it had not explicitly 


28  

considered climate change risk to the business before receiving the Direction 
to Report.  Indeed, the development of its Adaptation Report has led to a 
more formal consideration of climate change risks within the company. 

o Ofgem has met with other economic regulators to set out a framework for 
coordinating cross-sector work on interdependencies. 


29  

AREAS FOR FURTHER INVESTIGATION OR CONSIDERATION 


 

Regulatory Environment 

A number of issues relating to the regulated nature of the electricity distribution 
sector, and its management of climate change risks and ability to adapt to climate 
change may warrant further investigation.  Amongst the possible issues identified 
from the reports are: 

• Regulated Price Control Reviews - allowed revenues for the industry are set 
by Ofgem in periodic price reviews and therefore any potential adaptation 
costs are considered in setting the allowed revenue.  Reporting Authorities 
noted that the regulatory planning cycles require business plans to be agreed 
5-8 years in advance and that there is a possibility that, as energy network 
assets are typically long life assets, and investments considered on a net 
present value, companies may favour delaying investment until the asset 
needs replacing rather than considering retrofitting existing equipment. 

• Competitive markets and cost versus adaptation – Ofgem’s focus is on 
protecting consumers by ensuring costs of the network companies are as 
efficient as possible and investment is encouraged where it is needed to meet 
future needs. Price controls representing its main contribution to adaptation, 
through review of business plans and setting allowed revenue for the network 
company for the price control period.  Should adaptation costs be significant 
then there is the risk of tensions between adaptation, funding, and consumer 
willingness-to-pay for adaptation, given potential benefits are long into the 
future.  This is recognised by Ofgem who acknowledge that its main challenge 
as a regulator is ensuring risk mitigation that secures sustainable energy 
supplies and long-term value for money for customers. 

• Indirect management of climate change – Ofgem currently indirectly 
addresses climate change through licences, transmission and distribution 
price controls for network operators, the offshore regime and network codes, 
and there may be a requirement for more direct management in future. 

• Security of supply and extreme events - overall levels of supply security 
are agreed by Ofgem, with the standards specifying the requirements for the 
availability of alternative supplies at various levels of customer load.  Although 
the standards allow for the loss of multiple circuits they do not provide for low 
probability events such as multiple failures or the total failure of a grid or 
primary substation.  Thus, as highlighted in the reports, particular attention 
must therefore be given to grid and primary substations when considering 
network resilience. 


30   


Design Standards and Industry Codes 

The electricity distribution sector Adaptation Reports highlight that the sectors’ 
assets are designed to industry design standards that are used in warmer climates 
and thus will be able to remain in service, with a potentially reduced capacity, 
allowing for predicted climate change.  However, a number of possible areas for 
further research exist, including: 

• De-rating figures - there appears to be uncertainty surrounding some of the 
de-rating figures provided in the Adaptation Reports, with variations in the 
percentage of de-rating under climate change being cited in different reports.  
For example, a number of reports quote figures of <10%, whilst others, such 
as SP Energy Networks, estimate that de-ratings could be as high as 25% 
should warmer ground temperatures coincide with droughts.   

• De-rating temperatures/thresholds – some of the de-rating information 
provided in the reports suggests that some assets will be affected by relatively 
low temperatures (e.g. 30-35oC).  There is also a need for thresholds affecting 
specific equipment/sites to be assessed so that the potential implications for 
the electricity transmission network can be determined.  This is recognised by 
some Reporting Authorities. 

• Industry codes and standards – there may be a need to adjust existing 
industry codes and standards in future to facilitate adaptation to climate 
change.  For example, the reports note that there may be a requirement to 
revise the maximum design temperatures for equipment and that the risk 
profile of transformers will be affected as design temperature thresholds are 
exceeded, with changes needed in national electricity industry standards.   


 

Infrastructure and Network Vulnerability to Climate Change 

The review of the Adaptation Reports suggests that further research investigating the 
risk that climate change poses to electricity distribution infrastructure and the 
network as a whole may be beneficial.  Possible areas for further research that were 
identified in the reports include: 

• Risks posed by new types of event - the potential risk posed by new types 
of event that have not been previously encountered, but could arise under 
climate change, such as the impact of solar gain on urban assets.   

• Resilience of specific infrastructure - the resilience of grid and primary 
substations and particularly their potential vulnerability to major flood 
incidents. 


31  

• Urban heat risks – solar heat faults requires further research as the future 
fault distribution from solar heat faults has not been estimated because their 
rare occurrence makes it difficult to determine a relationship between fault 
numbers and weather events. Reporting Authorities are also concerned about 
the risks posed to basement substations, located in urban environments. 

• Thresholds – whilst there is an awareness of the equipment thresholds 
associated with the electricity distribution network equipment, based on 
design standards, further research regarding thresholds, and site-specific 
thresholds is required to gain a clearer understanding of the risk that climate 
change poses to the sector. 


 

Future Demand 

The Adaptation Reports highlight the potentially significant challenges facing the 
electricity distribution sector that arise from forecast increases in electricity demand.  
A number of areas for further research, relating to future changes in demand were 
identified by the Reporting Authorities, including: 

• Climate change and future demand - further research is required to fully 
understand how climate change may affect electricity demand, capacity and 
supply arrangements.  In particular, the potential of increased air conditioning 
loads during the summer, which together with reduced winter peak demands, 
as a result of warmer winters, will lead to a flatter seasonal demand curve.  
This potentially has implications for network flexibility and will make it harder 
to take circuits out of service at lightly loaded times for maintenance, requiring 
enhanced capacity or service standards. 

• Distributed generation/smart grids - the shift towards distributed and low 
carbon forms of generation, together with smart grids could potentially lead to 
a significant change to the daily demand profile in future. However, the shift to 
smart grids will enable climate change adaptation to be addressed. 


 

Vegetation Management 

The Reporting Authorities identify future changes in vegetation growth as a result of 
future climate change as being a particular concern, with increases in the number of 
days over 5.6oC impacting on the growing season.  The sector highlights that there 
has been a significant increase in tree related faults on the UK electricity network 
between 1990 and 2006 and that it represents a significant cost to network 
operators.   


 

Earthing Risks 


32  

Changes in earth potential as a result of climate change was identified as a key risk 
by the sector, with increases in earth resistance resulting in protective equipment, 
such as lightning arresters, taking longer to operate.  Whilst this risk is being 
investigated by the industry, further research may be required into the impact of 
climate change and localised effects (e.g. groundwater levels, agricultural practice 
and land surface/drainage), especially as it is noted that substation earthing risk may 
require increased inspection regime which could potentially be expensive due to the 
large number of network assets.   


 

Combined Events 

The analysis of the electricity distribution sector risks, indicates that the sector is 
concerned about the risk posed by combined events that may become more 
prevalent under future climate change, and are deemed to represent challenges for 
the sector.  Amongst the combined risks, that were outlined earlier, the sector 
highlights that the most challenging conditions for overhead line ratings occurs under 
high ambient temperatures, high solar radiation and low wind speeds. 


 

Interdependencies 

A number of issues relating to interdependencies were highlighted that may require 
further research, including: 

• Third-party risks - such as transport, supply chain and logistics risks, 
particularly as equipment is sourced from overseas.  In some instances it is 
assumed that third-parties are identifying and managing their climate change 
risks. 

• Risks to IT/communication and control infrastructure – it was noted that 
IT and communication and control infrastructure risks have the potential to 
impact upon the management and control of the electricity transmission 
network and are of particular concern to some Reporting Authorities.   

• Flood and coastal defence - SP Energy Networks notes that a very small 
number of sites are potentially at increased risk from sea level rise and 
coastal erosion if the current level of protection is not maintained or improved.   

• Smart networks – the shift towards smart networks, renewable distributed 
generation and low carbon loads will result in more significant changes to the 
network than those required for adaptation.  This is reflected in Reporting 
Authorities recognising the need to consider climate change and the low 
carbon agenda together rather than in isolation as is the current situation. 


  33  

Adaptation Strategies 

Whilst it is apparent that the electricity distribution sector is actively adapting to 
climate change, for example through the Ofgem funded 10 year programme of work 
to improve substation resilience to flooding, a number of areas relating to its future 
ability to adapt to climate change warrant further research.  Particular issues 
identified in the Adaptation Reports include: 

• Price controls and adaptation – Ofgem’s RIIO price control will include 
incentives under categories such as reliability and availability and customer 
satisfaction. Ofgem believes adaptation is therefore indirectly covered through 
these incentives (there is currently no specifically targeted incentives on 
adaptation). Whether this may need to change in the future is unclear at 
present. 

• Switch to low-carbon networks – the reports highlight that the future shift to 
low carbon networks and smart grids will potentially represent a larger 
challenge to the industry than climate change.  They also emphasise that this 
shift provides an opportunity for adaptation to be built into the future electricity 
network. 


  

Climate Change Knowledge, Expertise and Data/Information Issues 

A number of issues related to climate change knowledge and data issues were 
raised in the Adaptation Reports that may require further research.  These include: 

• Information asymmetry – Ofgem’s Adaptation Report notes that it is reliant 
on information provided by the sector and that it is aware that this risks 
information asymmetry.  It also raises issues of transparency and information 
reliability and suggests that as a regulator, it may wish to consider 
undertaking independent research to evaluate the risks facing the sector as it 
would help to identify the adaptation needs of the sector and the potential 
costs when setting price control revenues. 

• Use of EA/SEPA flood maps – a number of Reporting Authorities utilised the 
EA/SEPA flood maps to evaluate their flood risks, which have a number of 
limitations in relation to their use in climate change risk assessment.  

• Information gaps – a wide range of information gaps were highlighted by the 
Reporting Authorities that limit their ability to fully assess their climate change 
risks.  

o Wind storms – inconclusive evidence that climate change will lead to 
an increase in severity of high winds that can cause extensive damage 
to overhead electricity networks. 

o Projected changes in wind speed, storms and gusts. 


34  

o Future predictions of wind and gale network faults are uncertain. 

o Future changes in the frequency and intensity of ice storms and 
accretion. 

o Potential impact of increased temperatures on cables laid in urban 
areas. 

o Impact of climate change on air condition load and the timing 
relationship between peak ambient temperature and peak demand. 

o Future changes in lightning. 

o UKCP09 projections for precipitation have not been translated into 
impacts on river levels. 

o Pathways of flood water from dam bursts. 


35  

EMERGING TRENDS  

The review of the electricity distribution sector Adaptation Reports identified a 
number of common issues emerging across a number of the reports which are 
outlined below. 


 

Functions Impacted by Climate Change 

Thresholds – the evaluation of the Adaptation Reports suggests that the sector is 
developing a good awareness of the climate change thresholds associated with 
different types of electricity distribution equipment.  For example, temperature 
thresholds that are associated with rating reductions are known for transformers, and 
organisations are also using equipment specifications, design standards and 
regulatory requirements as thresholds.  However, many Reporting Authorities 
highlighted the need for further research to investigate other risk thresholds, such as 
those associated with future changes in vegetation growth and earth potential, and 
site-specific thresholds. 

Impact of climate on the organisational functions – the Adaptation Reports 
indicate that the electricity distribution companies are beginning to develop an 
understanding of how climate change may impact upon different asset types and 
demand for example.  However, it is difficult to determine the level of risk to the 
individual companies because whilst some of the potential risks to generic types of 
equipment have been identified, their implications for companies’ sites and individual 
assets are yet to be assessed by some organisations.  

This may reflect the fact that Reporting Authorities emphasised that other changes, 
for instance surrounding the delivery of the government’s ‘Low Carbon Transition 
Plan’, the introduction of smart grid technology and the connection and growth in the 
use of electric vehicles will lead to major changes.  

Varying quality risk classifications – in many cases the risk assessments could 
have been improved if they provided clearer, more precisely defined risk likelihood 
and impact classifications.  This affected the assessment of a number of the 
Evaluation Framework sub-attributes relating to the risk assessment methodology 
and risk appetite.   

Awareness of information gaps – many of the Adaptation Reports contained 
details of information gaps that currently affect Reporting Authorities’ ability to 
assess their climate change risks.  To address such issues, a number of Reporting 
Authorities are planning continued engagement with organisations such as the Met 
Office and the Environment Agency on such issues, and plan to reassess their risks 
when new information becomes available.   


 36  

The ENA report recognises the need for the sector to reassess flood risks when 
updated flood risk information, including future risks and pluvial flooding, together 
with the second generation of Shoreline Management Plans, which include 
projections for coastal erosion, are published. 

Cost Benefit Analysis and Sustainability Appraisal – the Adaptation Reports 
illustrate that the electricity distribution sector is aware of the potential long-term 
costs associated with adapting the electricity network to future climate change.  This 
is evident in both the ENA report, that for example includes details of the sector-level 
costs associated with work to increase substation flood resilience, and in a number 
of the individual Adaptation Reports that provide details of the level of funding 
allowed by Ofgem for such works.  The ENA report also outlines the indicative costs 
associated with adapting the electricity distribution network to a worse case climate 
de-rating impact. 


 

Summary of Risks 

Risk matrices – the quality of the risk matrices provided in the electricity distribution 
sector Adaptation Reports was variable. Some of the Reports could have been 
improved by providing greater detail on the definition of likelihood and impact 
classifications for their risk matrices which would have made it easier to interpret and 
compare the results. For instance, the ENA Core Report provided clear definitions of 
what its scoring on different impact levels meant, e.g. ‘minor’ impact means “small 
town off supply for a 24 hour period OR significant increase in cost of network 
maintenance requirements” which made it much easier to interpret the results. 

Temporal changes in climate change risks – the analysis of the Adaptation 
Reports suggests that the electricity distribution sector is developing an 
understanding of the timescales associated with a number of its climate change 
risks, although the level of understanding at the individual organisation level is less 
clear and more variable in some cases.  

Opportunities – the review of the Adaptation Reports suggests that climate change 
may provide opportunities for the electricity transmission sector.  These particularly 
relate to the shift towards smart networks, low carbon electricity generation, and 
reduced design standards for overhead lines as a result of milder winters.   


 

Actions Proposed to Address Risks 

Clear links between priority risks and adaptation actions – the majority of 
reports from the sector clearly prioritised the climate change risks, with clear links to 
adaptation responses. 


 37  

Mixed adaptation responses/targets – the Adaptation Reports provide a mixed 
picture of the adaptation responses proposed by the Reporting Authorities to 
address their climate change risks.  Whilst in some cases, Reporting Authorities 
have clear adaptation plans, with timescales and clear risk reduction targets, others 
only appear to aim to reduce risks. 


 

Barriers to Adaptation and Interdependencies 

Awareness of barriers – it is evident that the electricity distribution sector Reporting 
Authorities are clearly aware of a number of barriers that have the potential to affect 
their ability to adapt to climate change.  This is reflected in the majority of Reporting 
Authorities providing detailed descriptions of their barriers that are accompanied by 
plans to overcome them in future. 

The ENA report notes that network operators will seek to resolve the potential 
barriers by jointly examining with Ofgem the current assessment of impacts and 
adaptation options, with the aim of agreeing a way forward that will be considered as 
part of the next round of price control reviews starting in 2015. 


 

Monitoring and Evaluation  

Mixed plans for monitoring and evaluating climate change risks and 
adaptation plans –the analysis of the Adaptation Reports has identified a mixed 
picture of plans for the electricity distribution sector Reporting Authorities to monitor 
and evaluate their climate change risks and adaptation responses.  Whilst a number 
of organisations have clear plans to for monitoring and assessment that are linked to 
existing processes, many Reporting Authorities only provided indicative plans. 


 

General Issues Identified from the Reports 

Site specific risks – whilst the sector is developing an awareness of the effect that 
climate change will have on specific types of infrastructure, there is a clear need to 
translate this into individual organisation-level assessments of risk. 

Flood risk – like many other sectors, flood risk assessment and adaptation appears 
to have been a key focus for the sector to date. 


38  

BENEFITS AND OPPORTUNITIES 


 

A number of potential benefits or opportunities arising from future climate change 
were identified by the electricity distribution sector.  These include: 

• Potential increase in the daytime rating of overhead lines due to longer drier 
summers which may be accompanied by higher wind speeds that provide line 
cooling. 

• Milder winter climates will reduce the frequency of ice accretion and loading, 
which cause asset failures, potentially enabling a reduction in design standard 
for ice loadings (e.g. for overhead lines) with subsequent cost savings. 

• Reduced snowfall improving access to assets and extending the construction 
window for new grid connections. 

• Peak loads moving to summer would enable maintenance programmes to be 
moved into spring and autumn, taking advantage of milder weather. 

• Smart networks and climate change adaptation could be considered 
simultaneously thus reducing costs. 

• Carbon reduction through increased renewables generation connections. 

• Opportunities for further collaboration, experience sharing and learning, which 
will lead to increased resilience. 

• Increased resilience of the power sector as a result of new technologies (e.g. 
distributed generation), that will increase efficiency, reliability and diversity of 
generation sources. 

• Provision of opportunities and incentives for the energy sector to adapt to 
climate change. 

• Opportunities for environmental benefits or low carbon futures. 

• Energy efficiency may reduce the costs and challenges associated with 
adapting to climate change by reducing the need to build new generation or 
network capacity and the need for associated adaptation measures. It could 
also reduce the energy demands related to cooling in summer in domestic, 
commercial and industrial premises. 


39  

BARRIERS 

A number of potential barriers to adaptation were identified in the reports including: 

Ofgem price control reviews – have a strong influence on capital investment 
programmes and operational expenditure and there is the potential for conflict of 
drivers between cost reduction and the early pursuit of adaptation measures given 
the long lifetimes of electricity network assets.  

Financial and Economic – adaptation measures may not pass current net present 
value investment tests. Similarly there are challenges associated with consumer 
willingness to pay. However some Reporting Authorities expressed confidence in 
Ofgem’s ‘RIIO’ price control framework as an effective mechanism for disclosing, 
justifying and discussing the cost of adaptation with the regulator and customers. 

Long asset life spans - the long lifetime (50y or more) of assets makes it important 
for key stakeholders to accept that actions required to mitigate issues that may only 
materialise as a result of future climate projections (e.g. 2050) may need investment 
in the near future. 

Systematic rather than piecemeal adaptation is required - Electricity networks 
are complex interconnected systems that can only be modified or up-rated through 
systematic processes that are likely to require a considerable period of time. 
Piecemeal upgrades are unlikely to be cost effective or successful. 

Uncertainties – make forming robust adaptation plans and investment plans 
challenging. There are both climactic uncertainties around projections- but also 
longer term industry uncertainties associated for instance with the move towards 
smart networks. 

Physical barriers to adaptation - Physical barriers to putting new connections and 
infrastructure in place – e.g. lack of space in urban areas. 

Planning timescales - gaining planning permission for schemes can be lengthy. 

Interdependencies - dependency on 3rd party suppliers, especially for 
communications infrastructure. 


 


INTERDEPENDENCIES 

The reports highlighted a large number of interdependent organisations and policies, 
with many of these representing key cross-cutting interdependencies. The following 
broad groups were evident. 


  

Regulators/ regulations and 
legislation – UK Government, 
EU, Council of European 
Energy Regulators, Agency for 
the Cooperation of European 
regulators, Defra, DECC, 
Environmental Agency, 
SEPA,other regulated sectors 
and regulators 


 

External expertise/data 
– Universities, Research 
organisations, Met 
Office/Hadley Centre, 
UKCIP, External review 
groups/expertise, 
UKCP09, Flood risk data, 
Institute of Engineering 
and Technology. 

Other – Utilities e.g. 
water sector, Shoreline 
Management 
Plans/coastal flood 
defence. 

Energy sector– Energy 
Networks Strategy Group, E3 
Committee, European 
electricity and gas markets, 
Low carbon futures/smart 
networks and electric vehicles. 

Transport – Railway 
sector, Network Rail, 
London Underground. 

Suppliers – Third party 
communications/ICT 
infrastructure, fuel 
supply chains. 


     40  41  

ANNEX B 

The electricity distributor sector organisations that provided adaptation reports. 


 

1. Central Networks East Plc 
2. Central Networks West Plc 
3. EDF Energy Networks (Eastern) 
4. EDF Energy Networks (London) 
5. EDF Energy Networks (Seaboard) 
6. Electricity North West Limited 
7. Northern Electric Distribution Plc 
8. Scottish Hydro Electric Power Distribution Plc 
9. Southern Electric Power Distribution Plc 
10. SP Distribution Plc 
11. Western Power Distribution (South Wales) Plc 
12. Western Power Distribution (South West) Plc 
13. Yorkshire Electric Distribution Plc 
14. Office of the Gas and Electricity Markets (Ofgem) 


 

As a result in changes in within the electricity distribution sector and the submission 
of joint reports, the following Adaptation Reports were reviewed and form the basis 
for the analysis outlined in this report: 

1. CE Electric UK – covering Northern Electric Distribution Limited and Yorkshire 
Electricity Distribution Plc 

2. Electricity North West Limited 
3. SSE Power Distribution – including Scottish Hydro Electric Transmission. 
4. SP Energy Networks – covering SP Distribution Limited and SP Manweb Plc 
5. UK Power Networks – covering Eastern Power Networks Plc, London Power 

Networks Plc and South Eastern Power Networks Plc 
6. Western Power Distribution 
7. Ofgem 


   42    

www.defra.gov.uk 


  

Adapting to Climate Change: helping key 
sectors to adapt to climate change 


  


Energy (Electricity Generators) Sector Summary Report for the 
Adaptation Reporting Power 


  

March  2012 


   43  

                                                           

INTRODUCTION  

In response to directions to report under the Adaptation Reporting Power, 10 
organisations from the electricity generation sector in England and Wales submitted 
Adaptation Reports to Defra between July and November 201114. These reports 
were reviewed by the Government’s Adapting to Climate Change team in Defra, 
policy teams in the Department of Energy and Climate Change and the Risk Centre 
at Cranfield University. They were published by Lord Taylor in December 2011.  

Under the 2009 Strategy for using the Adaptation Reporting Power, reporting 
authorities were deemed to be electricity generating companies who produced an 
annual output in excess of 10 TWh. In discussions with industry, it was agreed that 
the scope of the reporting in the individual climate change adaptation reports would 
encompass each company’s generating plant over 100MWe capacity, on the 
grounds of proportionality. It was also agreed that the reports should consider only 
existing power stations, and that power stations ‘opted-out’ of the Large Combustion 
Plant Directive would be excluded, on the grounds that they will close by the end of 
2015 at the latest. Similarly it was agreed that the timescale for assessments would 
be for the 30 year period 2010-2039 as this represents a realistic timescale for 
continued operation of existing plants (and those under construction). This timescale 
is valid as current regulations require that climate change is factored into new power 
station projects at the design and planning stage.  

This report summarises the findings from the reports, focussing on: 

• The climate risks for the electricity generation sector  
• Areas of strength for the sector   
• Areas for further research  
• Emerging trends and themes 
• Benefits and opportunities 
• Barriers 
• Interdependencies. 


    

14 A full list of the organisations who were directed to report can be found at Annex C. 


44  

SUMMARY OF FINDINGS 

The evaluation of the reports by Cranfield University, DECC policy teams and 
Defra’s Adapting to Climate Change team show that: 


 

• Climate change risk assessments are embedded, or plans are in place to do 
so, within the electricity generation sector’s corporate risk appraisal 
processes. 

• Reporting Authorities have made evidence-based decisions on adapting to 
climate change, supported by the use of relevant and appropriate data, 
information and tools such as the UKCP09 Weather Generator and Threshold 
Detector. 

• Using a semi-quantitative risk assessment the sector has identified the most 
relevant hazards as: 

o Flooding 

o Extreme high temperatures 

o Drought 

• In the vast majority of cases, the hazards assessed were considered “low risk” 
or “very low risk”; only in a few instances were they classed as “medium risk”.  

• Climate change is expected to increase the probability of existing risks 
occurring, and in some cases their severity, but it will not introduce any 
fundamentally new sources of risk. 

• Adaptive capacity across the sector as a whole is ensured currently by the 
combination of a generating plant capacity margin, geographical diversity of 
generating plant (together with a national transmission network) and diversity 
in generation technology.  

• As a result of this, the electricity supply system is robust against individual 
plant failure and, in the last decades, electricity generation has demonstrated 
a consistently high level of resilience to potential disruptions from extreme 
events. Provided that these key factors are maintained over the next 20 years, 
this intrinsic robustness is not expected to change.  




KEY CLIMATE CHANGE RISKS FOR THE SECTOR 
This is not an exhaustive list of every risk that the electricity generation sector has 
identified; it is an overview of the key climate risks that the sector faces.  Further 
details about the risks faced by each organisation can be found in their individual 
adaptation reports.15 It should be noted that individual power stations face different 
risks due, amongst other reasons, to their geographical spread around the country 
and the different types of plants asked to report.  This geographical diversity builds 
resilience against climate change risks at the national level and is demonstrated in 
the figure 1 below16: 


  

Figure 1. 

                                                            
15 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-
authorities/reporting-authorities-reports/ 


45  

16 With thanks to Association of Electricity Producers for providing Defra with this image. 

http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-reports/
http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-reports/




The generating companies directed to report 
agreed a common approach under the AEP17’s 
Working Group on Resilience and Adaptation 
(AEP WGREAD), and addressed 17 sources of 
identified hazards, collected within 4 groups. A 
semi-quantitative risk assessment methodology 
was used to identify five categories of severity of 
risk. No risks were assessed as being within the 
top two categories (very high risk and high risk) 
by any Reporting Authority for the agreed 
period: 2010 - 2039.  


46   

Flooding and storm surge 

This includes flooding to the actual site of the 
power station, flooding of access routes to the 
site, and extreme high river flow. This could lead 
to partial or complete shutdown of a plant, water 
damage to infrastructure, increased 
maintenance costs, increased staff shifts/staff 
access, disruption damage to auxiliary systems 
and commodity supply disruption. Flooding and 
heavy precipitation can also reduce water 
quality which is necessary where steam is used to generate electricity. 

Evidence of embedding 
climate change risks 


 

EDF Energy is adding 
climate change risks to the 
company risk log, with the 
process for assessing and 
reviewing them defined in 
its ISO14001 accredited 
Environmental Management 
System.  


 

SSE Generation’s report 
highlighted that climate 
change is already 
documented as a strategic 
risk within its business risk 
register. 

Two reporting authorities classified storm surges with a medium risk score (for 
coastal power plants). Otherwise the most significantly scored risk was the risk of 
flooding of the site of the plant. 


 

Extreme high temperature 

Extreme high temperatures could impact on gas turbine or steam turbine efficiency 
and net output. The impact of increased temperatures is more significant for air 
cooled condenser (ACC) than water cooled plants. Combined Cycle Gas Turbines 
(CCGTs) are potentially most affected by elevated air temperatures leading to a 
reduction in plant net thermal efficiency and generation output, due to reduced air 
density from increased ambient temperatures.  


 

                                                            
17 Association of Electricity Producers 


47  

One reporting authority classified extreme high temperatures with a medium risk 
score (although this was not directly related to the effect on the steam turbine, but on 
other plant elements). The most common risk score for this hazard was low risk. 


 

Climate hazards affecting water use 

Drought affects water availability which could lead to insufficient water for cooling 
purposes leading to reductions in capacity or partial shutdowns. It also has an impact 
on water discharge, and could cause operational limitations in order to comply with 
environmental permit requirements.  AEP has assessed the potential effects of a 
country-wide drought supposed to simultaneously affect generation output from all 
power plants located on rivers or estuaries. It found that generation from nearly one 
third of this capacity could potentially be constrained by flow-related restrictions 
included in the abstraction licences. Also taking into account the significant capacity 
of coastal power stations, unaffected by drought, the associated level of impact was 
not considered of national significance.  

Other indirect operational limitations within this grouping are potentially related to 
permit constraints (e.g. linked to the temperature or the temperature rise of the 
discharged cooling water), which might restrict the amount of electricity generated at 
a power plant.  

Climate hazards affecting water use received the most medium risk scores, from five 
different organisations, with risk of drought on water availability the most 
pronounced. In addition several of these risks were assessed by several authorities 
as likely to increase between now and the 2020s. Together these factors mean that 
this risk grouping was the most significant identified by the Reporting Authorities. 


 

Other Climate hazards 

This grouping contained a wide variety of risks including extreme snowfall, the 
effects of extreme low temperatures on cooling tower fans, external systems and 
cooling towers, extreme winds, subsidence/landslide and weather conditions causing 
plume grounding (‘ground fogging’ which can lead to hazards and complaints). 

The risk of extreme winds was cited by two reporting authorities as being a medium 
risk, but otherwise these risks were predominantly given a ‘very low risk’ score. 




AREAS OF STRENGTH 


48  

The electricity generation sector has inherent resilience 
through the combination of generating plant capacity 
margin, geographical diversity of generating plants 
(together with a national transmission network) and 
diversity in generation technology. As a result of these 
factors, the electricity supply system is robust against 
individual plant failure. 

A number of areas of strength were identified from the 
Adaptation Reports that demonstrate that operators in the 
electricity generation sector are assessing and acting upon 
their climate change risks.  These include: 


 

Industry-level collaboration – as well as undertaking 
collaborative research at the industry-level, for example 
involving the Met Office through the EP2 study, the 
electricity generation sector has established an Association 
of Electricity Producers (AEP) Working Group on 
Resilience and Adaptation as a result of the Direction to 
Report.  This has resulted in the development of a common 
climate change risk assessment methodology that has 
been used by the sector Reporting Authorities. 

Stakeholder engagement – the analysis of the Adaptation 
Reports illustrates that the electricity generation sector 
Reporting Authorities are engaging with stakeholders in 
relation to the assessment and management of climate 
change risks.  This includes both sector-level engagement, 
for example through participation in Operation Watermark, 
engaging with Defra on future water management policy, 
and company-level engagement activities with 
organisations such as the Environment Agency. 

Adaptation Case Study: 
E.ON 


 

Where steam is used to 
generate electricity, there 
are strict limits on the 
quality of the water that can 
be used. Flooding and 
heavy precipitation can 
reduce water quality. 


 

After a comprehensive 
assessment, an increase in 
the frequency and 
magnitude of flooding in the 
respective river basin 
catchment was found to be 
the root cause of water 
quality problems at two E. 
ON power stations. 


 

After monetising the 
impacts at each of the 
stations (principally, the 
expense of lost generation), 
new Reverse Osmosis (RO) 
water treatment plants were 
built at both of the stations. 


 

UKCP09 constraints- the sector appears to have a good 
awareness of the constraints associated with UKCP09 and tools such as the 
Weather Generator. 

Consideration of climate change in new developments – the Reporting 
Authorities highlight how climate change risks are considered by the sector during 
planning for new power stations through existing regulatory requirements such as 
Environmental Permitting Regulations. Similarly, water use and supply assessments 
are conducted during the planning of new-build power stations and climate change is 
considered in National Policy Statements for energy infrastructure. 


49  

Evidence of embedding – many of the Reporting Authorities have either embedded 
climate change risk management within existing corporate risk management 
processes or outline plans to take such steps as a result of the Adaptation Reporting 
Power. A number of organisations also outline responsibilities for the management of 
climate change risks. 


 50  

AREAS THAT MAY REQUIRE FURTHER CONSIDERATION 

Note that these are areas identified for further consideration, but not necessarily 
tasked to the electricity generation sector. 


 

Climate Uncertainties 

• The future availability of water for cooling, and its temperature under climate 
change are key issues for the electricity generation sector.  

• The industry identified a need for better information on likely river flow levels 
in future under climate change. The industry also highlighted its desire to see 
national flood projections based on UKCP09 climate projections. 

• Similarly, projections of changes in water temperature and salinity are not 
available for the 2020s period under UKCP09. Further information/projections 
on likelihood of extreme droughts were also identified as an information gap. 

• The thresholds at which these climate variables become critical are also both 
difficult to determine and uncertain. 

Water Management 

• Reporting Authorities highlighted the increasing scrutiny of water demand and 
consumption. Future reform of water abstraction, discharge licences and 
permits were identified by the industry as significant current issues.  

• Water management risks can be cumulative in instances where a number of 
power stations utilise the same river for abstraction (e.g. the River Trent). 

Timescales for climate change 

• Defra agreed with Reporting Authorities that the scope of the power would be 
restricted to the period 2010 – 2039. There is a need for continued research 
into climate change impacts over the longer term although it is recognised that 
extended timescales are not relevant to the majority of existing plants. 

• Heat wave risks were assessed under the assumption of uniform air 
temperatures of 32ºC and 34oC (across all of the UK), as agreed with DECC 
and the Met Office as part of work with Cabinet Office on heat wave 
vulnerability. However looking further ahead, an assessment against a ‘heat 
wave’ scenario consistent with UKCP09 might be appropriate. 


  51  

Interdependencies 

• The connections with other parts of the energy sector were noted by several 
Reporting Authorities. For instance in some cases, grid connections for 
generation plants are of concern because they may be more vulnerable to 
flooding than the generation plants themselves. 

• The Water sector is particularly important to the electricity generation sector, 
and access to water is a key driver for power station location. 

• Dependence on transport infrastructure for staff access, materials, fuel etc 
was also highlighted.  


 52  

EMERGING TRENDS 

The review of the electricity generation sector Adaptation Reports identified a 
number of common issues emerging across a number of the reports.  These are 
outlined below using the headings from the Evaluation Framework overall appraisal 
comments, which are based on the issues outlined in Box 2 of the Statutory 
Guidance: 

Functions Impacted by Climate Change 

Thresholds – the evaluation of the Adaptation Reports suggests that the sector has 
been conducting work to assess climate change thresholds, through activities such 
as ‘stress tests’ that have been undertaken to determine the impact of droughts and 
high temperatures on electricity generation plants.  However, the sector Reporting 
Authorities recognise the difficulties associated with identifying and assessing 
climate change thresholds, suggesting that further work in this area may prove 
beneficial. 

Impact of climate on business functions – the Adaptation Reports indicate that 
the electricity generation companies are developing an understanding of how climate 
change may impact not only specific asset types, such as CCGTs for example, but 
also sector level risks posed by climate change including drought and heat waves.  

Approach 

Use of advanced UKCP09 tools - the Adaptation Reports provided by the electricity 
generators outline the use of the UKCP09 Weather Generator and Threshold 
Detector, and their use in ‘stress tests’.  Whilst this represents good practice, in 
many cases the reports would have benefitted from the inclusion of further details of 
how such tools were used together with the specific results from the stress tests, 
because this information was often a little unclear or not presented. This was as a 
result of structure of the reporting timeframes, and is something that could be 
addressed in future to allow a more iterative reporting process. 

Poorly described risk classifications – whilst the sector developed a semi-
quantitative risk assessment methodology which utilises a clear likelihood 
classification, the consequence classifications were based on those already used by 
individual Reporting Authorities.  In some cases, the consequence classification 
descriptors were either not provided or poorly described, making it difficult to 
interpret the risk assessment methodology and results. A non-linear risk scoring 
classification was used by some Reporting Authorities (Figure 2) despite the 
qualitative descriptors inferring a linear classification. This was partly as a result of 
structure of the reporting timeframes, and is something that could be addressed in 
future to allow a more iterative reporting process. 


  

Figure 2 – an example of non-linear risk scoring used by a Reporting Authority. 


 

Awareness of information gaps and UKCP09 constraints – the Adaptation 
Reports contained details of information gaps that currently affect Reporting 
Authorities’ ability to assess their climate change risks as well as a number of 
constraints associated with UKCP09 that were encountered during the risk 
assessment process.   

Cost Benefit Analysis and Sustainability Appraisal – only two sector Reporting 
Authorities provided details regarding the potential costs and benefits associated 
with their adaptation responses.  However, this is reflective of the wider findings from 
the evaluation of the Adaptation Reports submitted by all sectors, and should be 
appreciated that such an assessment is difficult at the strategic level of the 
Adaptation Reporting Power. 

Summary of Risks 

Transparency – there were mixed levels of transparency in the presentation and 
discussion of risks across the sector, with some organisations providing details of 
site specific risks and others not providing detailed information. This may have been 
as a result of commercial sensitivity. Examples of areas where transparency issues 
were identified include: 

• The results from the heat wave stress tests and use of the weather generator 
were not always presented in the reports. 


53  54  

• Whilst many reports discussed site-specific risks, some Reporting Authorities 
aggregated their risks or chose not to discuss the risks facing specific sites.  


 

Geographical risks – the nature of the sector’s assets meant that many of the 
reports provided details of the location of risks, although as noted above, it was 
sometimes difficult to interpret site-specific risks due to the level of information 
provided by Reporting Authorities. 

Confidence – one of the Reporting Authorities provided an assessment of the level 
of confidence in their risk assessment. This is consistent with other sectors under the 
Adaptation Reporting Power and reflects the difficulty in establishing levels of 
confidence in the risk assessments.   

Risk narratives – many of the Adaptation Reports contained good narratives of the 
risks identified by the risk assessment. 

Opportunities - the review of the Adaptation Reports suggests that climate change 
may provide opportunities for the electricity generation sector.  However, in many 
cases the Reporting Authorities did not report their eventual plans to exploit such 
opportunities although the commercial sensitivities associated with such information 
might explain these omissions. 

Actions Proposed to Address Risks 

Mixed adaptation responses/targets – whilst the majority of Adaptation reports 
identify priority risks that are linked to adaptation actions, adaptation responses and 
targets are very mixed across the sector.  In particular, whilst some Reporting 
Authorities have clear adaptation plans, with timescales and clear risk reduction 
targets, others only appear to aim to reduce risks.   

This may represent the observation that the Adaptation Reporting Power has 
resulted in some sector organisations assessing their climate change risks for the 
first time, and as such they may not have reached the stage of identifying specific 
risk reduction and adaptation targets. Alternatively it may reflect the fact that the 
sector considers other risks to be of greater significance than those resulting from 
climate change. 

Focus on monitoring and review – whilst some Adaptation Reports provided 
details of infrastructure adaptation, the majority of adaptation actions outlined by the 
Reporting Authorities appear to focus on risk monitoring and reviews. This is likely 
due to the fact that climate change does not introduce any novel risks to the sector, 
and that other risks are considered of greater significance. 

Stakeholder engagement - the sector is continuing to engage with stakeholders on 
climate change risk issues, which represents good practice.  For example, the 
Adaptation Reports note that the electricity generators will continue to work with 


55  

organisations such as the Met Office to identify climate change thresholds that start 
to trigger weather conditions critical to safe plant operation. 

Uncertainties and Assumptions 

Awareness of uncertainties - in general, Reporting Authorities from across the 
sector are aware of the uncertainties associated with their climate change risks, and 
particularly the constraints and uncertainties associated with UKCP09.  However, the 
level of understanding of uncertainties and their implications for the risk assessment 
findings and adaptation responses appears to be more mixed.   

Monitoring and Evaluation  

Mixed plans for monitoring and evaluating climate change risks and 
adaptation plans –the analysis of the Adaptation Reports has identified a mixed 
picture of plans for the electricity generation sector Reporting Authorities to monitor 
and evaluate their climate change risks and adaptation responses.  Whilst a number 
of organisations have clear plans for monitoring and assessment that are linked to 
existing processes, many Reporting Authorities only provided indicative plans. 

Evaluating adaptation effectiveness – in a number of reports it was difficult to 
identify whether the Reporting Authority had clear plans for monitoring and 
evaluating the effectiveness of their adaptation actions.  Whilst in many reports 
monitoring and evaluation processes appeared to be addressed through risk review 
processes, such activities were not always entirely clear.   

Embedding – as previously noted there is evidence of embedding in existing 
business risk management and power station planning processes that have clearly 
defined monitoring and review timescales.   


   56   


BENEFITS AND OPPORTUNITIES 

Given the competitive market in which power stations operate, the identification of 
opportunities is a potentially sensitive area for individual companies. Nevertheless a 
number of potential benefits or opportunities arising from future climate change were 
identified by the Reporting Authorities.  These include: 

Warmer temperatures 

• Warmer winters with reduced ice accretion and loading could reduce the risk 
of structural failures and could lead to reduced use of anti-icing systems. 

• Reduced ice damage of equipment and the cost of maintenance due to 
extreme low temperature. 

• Increased plant availability/reduced average start-up times during the winter 
months. 

Commercial 

• Decreased peak demand in winter (decreasing use of electric heating) and 
increasing demand in summer (increasing use of air conditioning) could offer 
electricity generators the opportunity of operating under a more even spread 
of energy demand over the year, thus leading to a more evenly-balanced 
utilisation rate in power stations. 

• Potential opportunities arising from higher yields of biofuel crops and therefore 
enhanced biomass-fuelled energy generation. 


 57  

BARRIERS 

A number of potential barriers to adaptation were identified in the reports including: 


 

Commercial/financial/adaptation 

• For an existing plant, the remaining station lifespan might be the main barrier 
to investment because it is difficult to justify physical or plant modifications on 
commercial grounds for power stations with limited remaining operational life.   

• Legacy infrastructure which may require retrospective adaptation. 

Climate Projections/Data 

• Current lack of national flood projections based on UKCP09. 

• National projections of river flows based on UKCP09 are still being 
researched. 

• Catchment Abstraction Management Strategies (CAMS), which provide 
information on water availability for households and industry, do not consider 
UKCP09. 

• Unavailability of data and inherent uncertainties within climate projections. 

Interdependencies 

• Interdependencies with other stakeholders (e.g. regulatory, infrastructure and 
indirect), including their climate change risks and adaptation plans. 

• Incompatibility of (stakeholder) adaptation plans (e.g. differences in the 
treatment of risk, use of projection data etc). 

• Economic barriers – challenges associated with consumer willingness to pay 
and companies potentially delaying adaptation. 


 


INTERDEPENDENCIES 

The reports highlighted a large number of independent organisations and policies, 
with many of these representing key cross cutting interdependencies. The following 
broad groups were evident. 

Government, regulators and 
legislation – UK Government, Defra, 
DECC, Ofgem, Gas and Electricity 
Market Authority (GEMA), Ofwat, EA, 
SEPA, HSE, Office of Nuclear 
Regulation, European Commission, 
Council of European Energy Regulators. 


 

Public Sector – Road networks and the 
Highways Agency/Local Authorities, 
Inland Drainage Boards, Shoreline 
management planning, flood and coastal 
defence. 


 

Utilities – Communications networks, 
electricity suppliers, water infrastructure 
and water companies, information 
technology. 

Energy Sector – Power 
distribution/transmission, trade 
associations, gas distribution, European 
electricity and gas markets, Global LNG 
markets. 

Transport – Transport infrastructure for 
fuels, essential chemicals, raw materials 
and waste disposal. Also in terms of staff 
travel. 

External expertise/data – Climate 
Change projections, EA, Met Office, 
UKCIP, Institute of Engineering and 
Technology, Academia/external review 
groups. 

Customers – Market demand, 
customers for electricity and generation 
by-products. 


 58  59  

ANNEX C 

The full list of electricity generation organisations that provided adaptation reports. 


 

1. Centrica Energy 

2. Drax Power 

3. E. ON UK 

4. EDF Energy 

5. InterGen 

6. International Power/GDF Suez Energy UK 

7. RWE npower 

8. SSE Generation 

9. Scottish Power Generation 

10. Office of the Gas and Electricity Markets (Ofgem) 


  60    

www.defra.gov.uk 


  

Adapting to Climate Change: helping key 
sectors to adapt to climate change 


  


Energy (Electricity Transmitters) Sector Summary Report for the 
Adaptation Reporting Power 


  

March  2012 


   61  

                                                           

INTRODUCTION  


 

In response to directions to report under the Adaptation Reporting Power, 3 
organisations from the electricity transmitters sector submitted Adaptation Reports to 
Defra between September and October 2011 as well as Ofgem (Office of Gas and 
Electricity Markets)18. These reports were reviewed by the Adapting to Climate 
Change team and Policy teams in the Department of Energy and Climate Change 
and the Risk Centre at Cranfield University and published by Lord Taylor in 
November 2011.  


 

This report summarises the findings from the reports, focussing on: 

• The climate risks for the energy transmitters sector;  
• Areas of strength for the industry as a whole;  
• Areas of good practice;  
• Areas for further research;  
• Emerging trends and themes; 
• Benefits and opportunities 
• Barriers;  
• Interdependencies 


             

18 A full list of the organisations who were directed to report can be found at Annex D. 


62  

SUMMARY OF FINDINGS 


 

The sector-level results from Cranfield University’s evaluation of the adaptation 
reports, Department of Energy and Climate Change policy teams and Defra’s 
Adapting to Climate Change Team show that: 


 

• Climate change risk assessment is being embedded within electricity 
transmission sector organisations’ corporate risk appraisal processes. 

• There is strong sector level engagement on climate change risks issues, 
including the commissioning of detailed research studies which is reflected 
clearly in the risk assessments. 

• The sector is aware of the importance of considering climate change 
uncertainties both in terms of the risk assessment and the identification of 
robust and flexible adaptation measures. 

• There is a wide variation in the adaptation plans across the sector with some 
organisations having detailed plans, whilst others have yet to identify 
adaptation responses. 

• There may be limited benefits and opportunities for the sector under future 
climate change. 


             


KEY CLIMATE CHANGE RISKS FOR THE SECTOR 

This is not an exhaustive list of every risk that the electricity transmitter sector has 
identified; it is an overview of the key climate risks which were identified by the 
Reporting Authorities. Further details about the risks faced by each organisation can 
be found in their individual adaptation reports. Note that these 
risks are those identified by Reporting Authorities, not Defra. 


63   

Increased temperature/ heatwaves – This could have an 
impact on equipment ratings (e.g. switchgear, transformers 
and control centre equipment).  This could potentially lead to 
a possible reduction in the flexibility of the network, increased 
air conditioning demand or potential health risks.  

Increased rainfall/flooding (fluvial, pluvial and 
coastal/sea level rise) – There is a risk of flooding and 
inundation of tunnels, underground cable routes, overhead 
lines, towers,  cable bridges, communications and control 
infrastructure which could lead to a  potential loss of system 
resilience or in exceptional circumstances a potential loss of 
supply. This may also prevent safe and immediate access to 
assets requiring emergency repair/response. 

Increased coastal erosion – Possible risk to infrastructure, 
including substations, overhead lines and towers, cable 
bridges, tunnels and underground cable routes.  However, 
the slow nature of the risk means that sites at risk will either 
be protected or relocated prior to any system impacts. 

Increased river erosion – towers, cable bridges and cable 
routes are at risk of failure if foundations are exposed or 
weakened, or soil stability is reduced, with routes potentially 
becoming non-operational. This could lead to a loss of 
system resilience and in exceptional circumstances a 
potential loss of supply. 

Working with key 
stakeholders 


 

The Met Office has been 
working closely with UK 
energy companies on EP2, 
an innovative project 
looking at the effects of 
climate change on the 
energy industry. 

It identified that: 

The transmission network is 
more resilient to weather 
related faults compared to 
the distribution network. 

Lightning is the dominant 
cause of weather related 
faults 

Wind, gale, snow 
storms/blizzards and ice are 
responsible for the 
remaining weather related 
faults. 

Vegetation changes – Overhead lines are affected by interference from vegetation, 
with the risk potentially increasing as a result of prolonged growing season and 
changes in the growth of vegetation species sensitive to climate change 


  

AREAS OF STRENGTH 

A number of areas of strength were identified from the Adaptation Reports that 
demonstrate that the electricity transmission sector is assessing and acting upon 
their climate change risks.  These include: 


 

Research Programmes – the Reports provided details of a number of ongoing 
research initiatives to investigate and assess climate change risks and adaptation 
actions at both the sector and organisational level. 

Engagement with relevant staff/departments – many of the risk assessments 
involved engagement with key staff and departments to assess potential climate 
change risks. For example, the ENA task group that produced their climate change 
report includes electricity transmission and distribution 
companies and the Department of Energy and Climate 
Change, with inputs from OFGEM, Defra, the Environment 
Agency and the Met office amongst others. 

National Grid has funded 
over £1m of research on 
weather and climate 
change related projects 
through the Innovation 
funding Incentive since 
2007, both directly and in 
collaboration with other 
utilities and 
manufacturers (combined 
funding over £10m).   


 

There have also been 
industry level research 
initiatives including 
Energy Project 1 and 2 
with recent work 
commissioned to develop 
a risk model that 
quantifies the relationship 
between climate and 
network faults and the 
vulnerability/exposure of 
the network to these 
faults. 

Examples of research 
undertaken 

 Industry Level Collaboration – The sector is collaborating on 
climate change risk management and resilience through the 
Energy Networks Association. For example, following the 2005 
and 2007 floods, the sector developed an Engineering 
Technical Report setting out a common approach to the 
assessment of flood risk (inclusive of allowances for climate 
change and sea level rise) and the development of target 
mitigation levels that are subject to cost benefit assessment. 

Emergency preparedness – The sector has well established 
emergency plans, which are reviewed and managed through 
the Energy Emergencies Executive (E3) 

Examples include – SSE Power Distribution has a strategic 
stock of plants and cables to address emergency events such 
as floods. 

Until work to defend its sites is complete, National Grid has 
emergency deployment plans to utilise a 1.7km mobile flood 
defence system 

Evidence that the Adaptation Reporting Power has led to 
change – a number of the organisations noted that the 
Adaptation Reporting Power has led to changes in the level of 
understanding and management of climate change risks within 
their organisation.  The development of the Adaptation report 


64  65  

has led to a more formal consideration of climate change risks within several 
Reporting Authorities.  


 

AREAS THAT MAY REQUIRE FURTHER CONSIDERATION 

The review of the electricity transmission sector reports highlighted a number of 
areas that may require further research in future.  These include: 


 

Regulatory Environment 


 

Competitive market cost versus adaptation – Ofgem’s focus is on the protecting 
consumers by ensuring costs of the network companies are as efficient as possible 
and investment is encouraged where it is needed to meet future needs. Price 
controls represent Ofgem’s main contribution to adaptation, through review of 
business plans and setting allowed revenue for the network company for the price 
control period.  Should adaptation costs be significant then there is the risk of 
tensions between adaptation, funding, and consumer willingness-to-pay for 
adaptation, given potential benefits are long into the future.  This is recognised by 
Ofgem who acknowledge that its main challenge as a regulator is ensuring risk 
mitigation that secures sustainable energy supplies and long-term value for money 
for customers. 

Security of supply and extreme events- The overall levels of supply security are 
agreed by Ofgem, with the standards specifying the requirements for the availability 
of alternative supplies at various levels of customer load.  Although the standards 
allow for the loss of multiple circuits they do not provide for low probability events 
such as multiple failures or the total failure of a grid or primary substation.  Thus, as 
highlighted in the reports, particular attention must therefore be given to grid and 
primary substations when considering network resilience 

Adjustments for exceptional events and climate change – exception events 
could become more frequent under climate change. There are potential issues 
surrounding the attribution of performance risk/annual revenue exposure to climate 
change which have already been acknowledged by Ofgem. 

Infrastructure and Network Vulnerability to Climate Change 

Offshore transmission network – The Adaptation reports did not discuss the 
potential threat that climate change poses to offshore transmission infrastructure 
(e.g. interconnectors) and its operation, this could be a possible area for further 
research. 


 66  

Future Demand 

• Climate change and future demand - further research is required to fully 
understand how climate change may affect electricity demand, capacity and 
supply arrangements.  In particular, the potential of increased air conditioning 
loads during the summer, which together with reduced winter peak demands, 
as a result of warmer winters, will lead to a flatter seasonal demand curve.  
This potentially has implications for network flexibility and could make it 
harder to take circuits out of service at lightly loaded times for maintenance, 
requiring enhanced capacity or service standards. 

• Distributed generation/smart grids - the shift towards distributed generation 
and smart grids could potentially lead to a significant change to the daily 
demand profile in future. However, the shift to smart grids will enable climate 
change adaptation to be addressed. 

• Management of balancing services – National grid notes that to provide 
secure and reliable delivery of electricity it has commercial arrangements with 
market participants to enable electricity demand or generation output to be 
varied.  It is unclear how such arrangements may be affected by future 
climate change and may warrant future research. 


67  

EMERGING TRENDS REQUIRING CROSS INDUSTRY ACTION 


 

The review of the electricity transmitter sectors Adaptation identified a number of 
common issues emerging across a number of the reports, these include: 

Thresholds – the evaluation of the Adaptation Reports suggests that the sector is 
developing a good awareness of the climate change thresholds associated with 
different types of electricity transmission equipment.  For example, temperature 
thresholds that are associated with rating reductions are known for transformers.  
Thus, organisations are using equipment specifications, design standards and 
regulatory requirements as thresholds.  However, some Reporting Authorities 
highlighted the need for further research to investigate other risk thresholds, such as 
those associated with future changes in vegetation growth and earth potential. 

Impact of climate on the organisational functions – the Adaptation Reports 
indicate that the electricity transmission companies are beginning to develop an 
understanding of how climate change may impact upon different asset types and 
demand for example.  However, it is difficult to determine the level of risk to the 
individual companies because whilst some of the potential risks to generic types of 
equipment have been identified, their implications for companies’ sites and assets 
are yet to be assessed and in a number of cases the temporal nature of risks is a 
little unclear. 

Approach 

Lack of methodological detail – climate change risks – it is clear that the 
electricity transmission sector companies have commissioned a wide range of 
studies at the sector level to investigate their climate change risks, and these have 
been used to inform the risk assessments.  However, whilst these studies are 
evidently comprehensive in nature, it is difficult to evaluate the methodologies 
employed because of the limited evidence trail. This was to some extent a common 
theme across different sectors and could perhaps be addressed by a more iterative 
reporting process in future. 

Level of confidence – none of the Adaptation Reports included an assessment of 
the level of confidence associated with the risk assessment that had been evaluated 
using a sound methodology. This was a common theme across sectors in that it 
proved very difficult to provide a comprehensive assessment of the level of 
confidence associated with risk assessments. 

Awareness of information gaps – many of the Adaptation Reports contained 
details of information gaps that currently affect Reporting Authorities’ ability to 
assess their climate change risks.  To address such issues, a number of Reporting 
Authorities are planning continued engagement with organisations such as the Met 


68  

Office and the Environment Agency on such issues, and plan to reassess their risks 
when new information becomes available.   

Cost Benefit Analysis and Sustainability Appraisal – a number of the Adaptation 
Reports discuss the economic/environmental costs and benefits associated with 
adapting to climate change, with the two ENA-derived reports including details of the 
predicted long-term adaptation costs associated with the electricity network.  


 

BENEFITS AND OPPORTUNITIES 

A number of potential opportunities and benefits were identified in the reports from 
the electricity transmission sector. These include: 

Fewer and less severe icing events: This will reduce the risk of ice accretion and 
loading which causes asset failures. This should allow a reduction in the design 
strengths for overheard line structures, with subsequent cost savings. 

Peak loads moving to summer: This would enable maintenance programmes to be 
moved into spring and autumn, taking advantage of the milder weather. 

Energy Efficiency: This may reduce the costs and challenges associated with 
adapting to climate change by reducing the need to build new generation or network 
capacity and the need for associated adaptation measures. It could also reduce the 
energy demands related to cooling in summer in domestic, commercial and industrial 
premises 


           69  

BARRIERS 

The review of the Adaptation Reports identified a number of barriers that were 
highlighted as representing a challenge to the electricity transmitter sectors’ ability to 
adapt to climate change.  


 

Regulatory, economic and physical barriers –There are challenges associated 
with consumer willingness to pay for adaptation. Balancing short term considerations 
against long term benefits from adaptation can be challenging. Lack of space in 
urban areas is a barrier to putting new connections and infrastructure in place. 

Awareness of Climate Change – Better understanding of climate change 
projections, science and impacts by those in the planning, investment and asset 
management for infrastructure so that appropriate measures are incorporated in the 
decision making process. 

Interdependencies – a number of interdependencies are perceived as posing 
barriers to the sectors’ ability to adapt to climate change.  Issues identified included: 

o Dependency on 3rd party suppliers - especially for communications 
infrastructure. 

o Interdependencies including stakeholders – the energy infrastructure 
system is highly interconnected both within and between the gas, electric 
and water sectors and are critical to resilience. 

o External agencies – a number of National Grid’s assets rely on flood 
defences or SMPS owned and managed by external agencies, the 
Environment Agency or SEPA.  Dialogue is required to ensure protection 
is maintained. 


         70  

INTERDEPENDENCIES 

The reports highlighted a large number of interdependent organisations and policies, 
with many of these representing key cross-cutting interdependencies. The following 
broad groups were evident. 


 

Regulators/ regulations and 
legislation – UK Government, 
EU, Council of European 
Energy Regulators, Agency for 
the Cooperation of European 
regulators, Defra, DECC, 
Environmental Agency, 
SEPA,other regulated sectors 
and regulators 


 

Policies – Smart 
Networks/low carbon 
futures, price control 
mechanisms, flood 
defence/Shoreline 
management planning, 
Policies affecting 
demand, including 
regulations, ebergy 
efficiency and energy 
pricing 

Public Sector – local 
Authorities, Emergency 
Services and Highways 
Agency 


 

Energy sector– Transmission 
owners/operators, Distribution 
Network Operators, Energy 
networks Strategy Group, E3 
commitee, European electricity 
and gas markets, Local and 
regional area mutual defence 
strategies 

Transport – Road, air 
and sea transport, rail 
and air transport 
companies 

Suppliers – Third party 
communications/ICT 
infrastructure, fuel 
supply chains, gas, 
electricity, water, 
emergency generator 
suppliers. 

Utilities – Other utilities, water 
sector. 

External expertise/data 
– Universities, Research 
organisations, Met 
Office/Hadley Centre, 
UKCIP, External review 
groups/expertise, 
UKCP09, Flood risk data, 
Institute of Engineering 
and Technology. 

Company – Finance, 
Markets, Dams( third 
party ownership) 


71  

ANNEX D 

The full list of organisations from the electricity transmitters sector that provided 
adaptation reports. 


 

1. National Grid 
2. SP Transmission 
3. Scottish Hydro Electric Transmission Limited. 
4. Ofgem 


   72    

www.defra.gov.uk 


  

Adapting to Climate Change: helping key 
sectors to adapt to climate change 


  


Energy (Gas Transporters) Sector Summary Report for the Adaptation 
Reporting Power 


  

March  2012 


   73  

                                                           

INTRODUCTION  

In response to directions to report under the Adaptation Reporting Power, 9 
companies from England, Scotland and Wales submitted Adaptation Reports to 
Defra in June 201119 and Ofgem (Office of the Gas and Electricity Markets) 
submitted a report in September 2011. These reports were reviewed by the Adapting 
to Climate Change team and policy teams in Department of Energy and Climate 
Change, and the Risk Centre at Cranfield University and published by Lord Taylor in 
December 201120. 


 

This report summarises the findings from the reports, focusing on: 

• The climate risks for the gas transporters sector;  
• Areas of strength for the industry as a whole;  
• Areas of good practice;  
• Areas for further research;  
• Emerging trends and themes; 
• Barriers; 
• Interdependencies 


 

Due to the different regional coverage of the organisations; local conditions bring 
different climate concerns for the gas transporters sector.  


   

19 A full list of reporting authorities from the gas transporters sector can be found at Annex E. 
20 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-
reports/ 


 74  

SUMMARY OF FINDINGS 

The evaluation of the reports by Cranfield University, DECC policy teams and 
Defra’s Adapting to Climate Change team show that: 


 

• Climate change risk assessment is being embedded within the gas 
transporter sector’s corporate risk appraisal processes. The Adaptation 
Reporting Power process has been a key driver behind this for a number of 
organisations. 


 

• The sector is making good use of relevant data, information and knowledge 
tools, particularly through engagement at the sector level. The sector has 
shown good awareness of interdependencies and barriers to adapting to 
climate change. 


 

• Some organisations could have benefited from the use of more robust semi-
quantitative risk assessment methodologies in future that consider risks as 
opposed to climate impacts. Reporting Authorities are yet to identify clear risk 
reduction targets. 


 

• The issue of climate change uncertainties and their implications for the sector 
requires further examination. 


 75  

KEY CLIMATE RISKS FOR THE SECTOR 

This is not an exhaustive list of every risk that the gas transporters sector faces; it is 
an overview of the key climate risks the sector has identified.  Further details about 
the risks faced by each organisation can be found in their individual adaptation 
reports.21 Please note that these are risks identified by the Reporting Authorities 
themselves rather than Defra. 


 

Weather Risks 

Flooding – in particular to critical sites and assets including pipes and Pressure 
Regulating Installations (PRIs). In addition several reports highlighted risks around 
transport disruptions affecting emergency service provision and staff access to 
offices depots and streetworks. 

River bed and bank erosion- River bed and bank erosion risks exposing pipelines. 
Also high river water volumes risk damaging mains and pipelines in over-river 
crossings. 

Wind damage- to above ground assets such as telemetry masts and PRIs. 

Land Contaminants- Mobilisation and migration of land contaminants from former 
gas production sites due to changing patterns of precipitation, flooding, drought and 
high winds. 

Ground movement – The risk of ground movements fracturing ageing low pressure 
network assets. Note that this risk is specific to National Grid who own and operate 
the UK Gas Transmission system. 

Increased temperatures – Increased temperatures can affect transmission 
compressor stations and could lead to security of supply issues as without 
adaptation actions some compressors would not be operational at elevated 
temperatures. Note that this risk is specific to National Grid who own and operate the 
UK Gas Transmission system. 


 

Other Risks 

Investment – Investment policy could be affected by both increased temperatures 
and carbon reduction/energy efficiency measures reducing gas penetration in new 
homes impacting future company growth. 

                                                            
21 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-
reports/ 

http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-reports/
http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-reports/


76  

Supply chain risks- risks that key suppliers are not sufficiently climate resilient and 
are not adapting to climate change. 




AREAS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH 

The review of the gas transporters reports has highlighted a number of areas that 
may require further research in future, although not necessarily by the gas 
transporters sector themselves.  These include: 


 

Interdependencies 

Interdependencies are a key issue for the gas transporter organisations because of 
the complexity of the sector and the large number of critical interdependencies.  

• Distributed business models - A number of the Reporting Authorities, 
particularly the supplementary gas transporters, operate highly distributed 
business models.   For instance companies do not necessarily operate 
transmission system supply/energy balancing control rooms or compressors, 
seasonal or diurnal storage systems, odorant injection equipment or 
emergency call centres meaning they are 
reliant on external providers for these 
facilities.   

• Interdependence on upstream gas 
transporters – there are interdependencies 
within the gas industry, with supplementary 
gas transporters’ gas distribution networks 
being reliant on National Grid’s 
transmission system and Gas Distribution 
Network Operators distribution systems for 
example.  This raises the potential for 
cascade effects. 

• Supply chain risks – the reports highlight 
concerns regarding supply chain risks that 
have the potential to impact upon the 
sector.  These include reliance on single 
suppliers, long lead-in times for some 
products, and potential overseas supply 
chain risks.  Furthermore, some Reporting 
Authorities note that they only have limited 
stocking facilities, although some 
organisations have agreements in place 
with suppliers to address such risks. 

Interdependencies 


 

Wales and West Utilities are 
managing their 
interdependencies with their 
wider supply chain by 
ensuring that all key 
suppliers provide a 
continuity plan, and have a 
contingency of emergency 
stock. 


 

Gas Distribution Network 
Operators (GDNOs) have 
mutual aid agreements to 
help mitigate the impact of 
large scale events which 
could result in a loss of 
service. 

• Emergency service provision – a number of the supplementary gas 
transmitters are reliant on Gas Distribution Network Operators (GDNOs) and 


77  


• Road transport – the road network represents a key cross-cutting 
interdependency affecting emergency service provision for example.  

• Assumed adaptation/resilience – a number of the Reporting Authorities’ 
noted in their risk assessments and adaptation plans that they were assuming 
that key interdependencies such as road/transport networks and critical 
suppliers/supply chains are sufficiently adapted to climate change. 

• Risks from third party structures – gas transmission assets, including 
mains and pipelines in third party structures that are susceptible to flood 
damage are of concern to some Reporting Authorities. 

• IT vulnerability - vulnerability of critical IT 
equipment to extreme weather events and 
data centres near areas of high flood risk 
were raised as a potential concern by 
Reporting Authorities. 


78   

Regulatory Environment 

A number of issues relating to the regulatory 
environment associated with the gas transporter 
sector, its management of climate change risks 
and ability to adapt to climate change may warrant 
further investigation.  These include: 

• Investment in adaptation – all GNDOs 
operate regulated businesses operating 
under licences issued by Ofgem.  Allowed 
revenues for the industry are currently set 
by Ofgem every 5 years (moving to 8 from 
2013) and these reviews govern regulated 
activities and therefore any costs associated 
with adapting to climate change would be 
considered in setting the allowed revenue by Ofgem. 

Examples of 
Interdependencies 


 

Mains pipes associated with 
ESP Gas Group’s gas 
distribution systems are typically 
located within footway or 
carriageway structures which 
are, or subsequently becomes 
(on new housing development 
sites upon completion or 
development), adopted public 
highway. The Highways 
Authority is responsible for these 
structure upon their adoption 
and ESP Gas Group has no 
jurisdiction over the likelihood of 
subsidence or similar failures of 
these structures.  


 

• Competitive markets and cost versus adaptation – Ofgem’s focus is on 
protecting consumers by ensuring costs of transporter companies are as 
efficient as possible and investment encouraged where it is needed to meet 


79  

future needs. Price controls represent its main contribution to adaptation, 
through review of business plans and setting allowed revenue for the network 
company for the price control period. Should adaptation costs be significant 
then there is the risk of tensions between adaptation, funding, and consumer 
willingness-to-pay for adaptation, given potential benefits are long into the 
future.  This is recognised by Ofgem who acknowledge that its main challenge 
as a regulator is ensuring risk mitigation that secures sustainable energy 
supplies and long-term value for money for customers. 


 

Asset Resilience 

Whilst the sector notes that its underground assets are deemed to be naturally 
protected from the majority of the effects of climate change, the analysis of the 
reports has highlighted a number of issues relating to asset resilience that may 
warrant further research.  These include: 

• Thresholds – the analysis of the Adaptation Reports suggests further work 
identifying both general and site-specific thresholds that have the potential to 
impact the sector represents an area for further research.  

• Geographical distribution of risks - many of the Reporting Authorities have 
large numbers of assets dispersed over large geographical areas.  There is a 
need for further research to investigate site-specific risks and the potential 
spatial distribution of the risks to the sectors’ infrastructure.  Indeed, some 
Reporting Authorities recognise that this is this is a key area for further 
research and represents a challenge. 

As noted earlier, water ingress into gas meter installations represents a 
potential risk affecting the sector.  Identifying the number of installations at 
risk is potentially a large task, especially with companies, such as Wales and 
West Utilities having ~243,000 meter installations. 


 

Climate Change Knowledge and Data/Information Issues 

A number of issues relating to climate change knowledge and data issues were 
raised in the Adaptation Reports that may require further research.  These include: 

• Secondary climate change impacts – the Reporting Authorities highlighted 
the limited availability of information on secondary climate impacts as 
representing a challenge when assessing their climate change risks and 
developing adaptation responses.  The following areas were of concern to the 
sector: 


80  

o Wildfire risk – this risk posed to assets from possible increases in wildfires 
was of concern as it can result in considerable damage to major assets 
and security of supply issues. 

o Impacts on river crossings – current impacts are limited to structural 
damage to bridges but this may change under climate change, with more 
significant damage caused by increased water volumes. 

o The complex relationship between precipitation forecasts, river water 
volumes, flow rates and impacts to river crossings is not fully understood. 

o Changes in soil stability and subsidence, particularly in relation to case 
iron pipework. 

o Vulnerability of critical IT equipment to extreme weather events. 


 

Information asymmetry – Ofgem’s Adaptation Report notes that it is reliant on 
information provided by the sector and that it is aware that this risks information 
asymmetry.  It also raises issues of transparency and information reliability and 
suggests that as a regulator, it may wish to consider undertaking independent 
research to evaluate the risks facing the sector as it would help to identify the 
adaptation needs of the sector and the potential costs. 


 

Information gaps – 

o Current flood risk processes do not account for climate change. 

o It would be helpful for UKCP to provide absolute peak temperatures rather 
than a relative increase. 

o UKCP09 indicates changes to wind and storm patterns and intensities but 
does not provide sufficient detail.  The sector is seeking information 
relating to future changes in the frequency and intensity of such events 
and high wind speeds. 

o Information relating to future changes in the frequency/intensity of snow, 
sleet, blizzard, ice and freezing fog. 

o Some locations are not currently covered by the Environment Agency’s 
flood online risk maps. 

o Environment Agency flood maps do not account for climate change. 

o Pluvial and future flooding, and flood depths are not included in the 
EA/SEPA flood risk maps. 

o Coastal erosion and potential storm surge risks by area. 


 81  

EMERGING TRENDS  

The review of the gas transporter sector Adaptation Reports identified a number of 
common issues emerging across the reports.   

Functions Impacted by Climate Change 

Impact of climate on the organisational functions – the analysis of the Adaptation 
Reports indicates that the gas transporter sector Reporting Authorities are 
developing an awareness of the potential impact that climate has upon their 
organisational functions and infrastructure, with a number providing specific 
examples of risks that have been encountered.  Alongside this awareness of generic 
risks, a number of the Reporting Authorities are developing an understanding of site 
or asset-specific risks across their networks or are working towards this increased 
level of detail. 

Thresholds – the evaluation of the Adaptation Reports suggests that whilst the gas 
transporter sector is aware of thresholds that relate to the design standards 
associated with some types of assets, further work is required by the sector to 
develop an understanding of climate change thresholds.  In particular, there is a 
need for Reporting Authorities to investigate site-specific thresholds which are a key 
driver for the sectors’ risks. 

Approach 

Inter-sectoral approaches to assessing risk – excluding Ofgem, two approaches 
to assessing risk are apparent in the reports.  Those Reporting Authorities involved 
with the Energy Networks Association (ENA) opted to utilise their existing corporate 
risk assessment methodology to assess their climate change risks, whilst the 
Association of Independent Gas Transporters (AIGT) members used the National 
Grid approach.  In the case of the AIGT Reporting Authorities, whilst a number of 
reports outline details of existing business risk assessment methodology it was not 
clear how they were used in practice. 

Climate change risk assessments considering impacts as opposed to risks – a 
number of the Reporting Authorities only assessed their climate change impacts as 
opposed to assessing the level of risk impact and likelihood.  In future these 
organisations may wish to consider using more robust semi-quantitative risk 
assessment methodologies, to assess their climate change risks. 

Unclear risk classifications – whilst using existing business risk methodologies to 
assess climate change risks represents good practice, some of the Reporting 
Authorities who adopted this approach have not provided details of their likelihood 
and consequence classifications or their risk appetite.  As such it is difficult to 
interpret the findings from these risk assessments.  This detail may have been 
omitted on confidentiality grounds. 


82  

Level of confidence – few of the Adaptation Reports included an assessment of the 
level of confidence associated with the risk assessment that had been evaluated 
using a sound methodology. This was a common issue across most sectors, not only 
gas transporters. 

Summary of Risks 

Temporal changes in climate change risks – from the analysis of the reports it is 
difficult to determine whether the Reporting Authorities have a clear understanding of 
the timescales associated with their climate change risks.  For example, whilst a 
number of reports noted that the risk assessment covered multiple time periods the 
results were frequently not presented.     

Spatial distribution of risks – there is evidence of a number of Reporting 
Authorities beginning to consider the spatial distribution of their climate change risks, 
although further work could be useful. 

Transparent discussion of risks – a number of the Reporting Authorities provide a 
transparent discussion of their climate change risks. 

Actions Proposed to Address Risks 

Priority risks linked to adaptation responses – the majority of reports from the 
sector contain priority risks that are linked to adaptation responses.  Furthermore, 
the adaptation actions outlined by a number of Reporting Authorities are 
accompanied by timescales, resources and/or general responsibilities.  

Unclear adaptation responses/targets – the Adaptation Reports suggest that on 
the whole, the adaptation responses outlined by the gas transporter sector Reporting 
Authorities currently lack clear risk reduction targets.  

Embedding – the analysis of the Adaptation Reports illustrates that the gas 
transporter sector Reporting Authorities are actively embedding climate change risk 
management into their organisations.  For example, organisations are incorporating 
climate change in their existing corporate risk registers and considering climate 
change in business risk processes, investment decisions and asset design. 

Uncertainties and Assumptions 

Awareness of uncertainties –there appears to be a mixed level of awareness of 
uncertainties across the sector, with a number of the Adaptation Reports only 
identifying the main uncertainties associated with the risk assessment as opposed to 
including a consideration of their implications for the risk assessment findings and 
adaptation responses.   

Assumptions – similar to uncertainties, the reports tend to contain details of the 
assumptions associated with the risk assessment and adaptation plans, with the 
majority of reports not discussing their implications and how they can be addressed 
by the Reporting Authority. 


83  

Barriers to Adaptation and Interdependencies 

Awareness of barriers – in general the analysis of the Adaptation Reports suggests 
that the gas transporter sector Reporting Authorities have a good awareness of a 
range of barriers that have the potential to affect their ability to adapt to climate 
change.  This is reflected in a number of the Adaptation Reports containing detailed 
descriptions of their barriers that are accompanied by plans to overcome them in 
future 

Awareness of interdependencies – the Adaptation Reports illustrate that the gas 
transporter Reporting Authorities are clearly aware of a number of interdependency 
issues, which is reflective of the structure of the sector and its reliance on third-
parties.  Furthermore, many of the reports provide examples of how the Reporting 
Authorities are engaging with their interdependencies and stakeholders to manage 
climate change risks.  

Monitoring and Evaluation  

Monitoring climate change risks through existing corporate processes – the 
Adaptation Reports outline details of how many of the gas transporter Reporting 
Authorities plan to monitor their climate change risks through existing corporate risk 
management processes, which commonly have clear review timescales and risk 
ownership responsibilities.  However, it is difficult to determine whether some 
Reporting Authorities have plans to evaluate their adaptation plans, although this is 
likely to occur through corporate risk management processes. 


84  

BENEFITS AND OPPORTUNITIES 

A number of potential benefits or opportunities arising from future climate change 
were identified by the gas transporter sector.  These include: 

Business/commercial opportunities 

• Diversification into other energy assets and zero carbon technologies in 
response to carbon reduction targets. 

• Potential opportunity to pioneer and develop innovative new technologies and 
techniques, including: 

o Alternative forms of gas production and availability – e.g. biomethane. 

o Upgrade obsolete assets and integrate climate resilience into new 
designs. 

o Diversify both the use of gas (e.g. for cooling as well as heating) and 
the use of the network (e.g. CO2 transportation for carbon capture and 
storage). 

o Combine adaptation and mitigation measures. 

Operational opportunities  

• Increased winter temperatures:  
o Small capacity sites may no longer require pre-heating. 

o Reduced snow and ice causing access issues – reduced interruption to 
the working environment. 

o Reduced snow and ice – fewer safety issues and incidents. 

o Fewer extreme cold weather conditions – reduced pipe fracture and 
leakage. 

• Reduced summer precipitation 

o Drier summers – drier working conditions leading to improved excavation 
conditions. 

Other opportunities 

• Opportunities for enhanced shareholder returns based on improvements in 
network efficiency, reliability and consumer service. 

• Increased resilience of the power sector as a result of new technologies (e.g. 
distributed generation), that will increase efficiency, reliability and diversity of 
generation sources. 


  85  

BARRIERS 

A number of potential barriers to adaptation were identified in the reports including: 


 

• Ofgem price control reviews have a strong influence on capital investment 
programmes and operational expenditure and there is the potential for conflict 
of drivers between determining efficient investment cost and the early pursuit 
of adaptation measures given the long lifetimes of electricity network assets 
and uncertainties about the probability of the risk so far into the future.  


 

• There are still considerable uncertainties around the likelihood and extent of 

climate change impacts. For instance there is limited available data on 
potential extreme weather events and locations, and there is a lack of national 
flood projections based on UKCP09. 


 

• There are uncertainties around the future energy mix and what role gas may 

have within it which make it difficult to prioritise adaptation. 


  86  

INTERDEPENDENCIES 

The reports highlighted a large number of interdependent organisations and policies, 
with many of these representing key cross-cutting interdependencies. The following 
broad groups were evident. 


 

Regulators/regulations/legislation- 
EU, UK Government, Welsh 
Government, Council of European 
Energy Regulators, Agency for the 
Cooperation of European regulators 
(ACER), Ofgem, Health and Safety 
Executive, Environment Agency, SEPA, 
Met Office, Other regulated sectors and 
regulators. 

Public Sector – Highways Authorities, 
Highways Agency, Emergency 
Services, Local Authorities, British 
Waterways 

Energy Sector – Upstream gas 
transporters/gas distribution networks, 
National Grid Transmission 
Service/National Transmission System, 
Gas Distribution Networks, Gas 
shippers and suppliers, Global LNG 
markets, National and industry 
standards and specifications, E3 
Committee, European Gas markets. 

Transport – Road network, Ports- 
overseas supplies, Network Rail, 
railway network 

Utilities – Electricity supply, Water 
supply, Utility providers, 
Telecoms/broadband availability, Fuel 
availability/supply chain. 

Suppliers/contractors – Regional 
construction/maintenance 
organisations, critical supplies/supply 
chain- odorant suppliers, 
manafacturers of Polyethylene pipe, 
call centre resilience. 

External expertise/data- Met Office, 
UKCP09, Environment Agency, Institute 
of Engineering and Technology, 
Institution of Gas Engineers and 
Managers, Academia. 

Policies – Emergency service 
provision, safety regulations 


 .  87  

ANNEX E 

The full list of reporting authorities for the gas transporters sector that provided 
adaptation reports. 


 

13. National Grid Gas Plc 
14. ESP Connections 
15. GTC Pipelines 
16. Independent Pipelines- referred to as Independent Pipelines and Quadrant 

Pipelines (IPL/QPL) in the report. 
17. Northern Gas Networks 
18. Scotland Gas Networks- joint Scotia Gas Networks report 
19. Southern Gas Networks- joint Scotia Gas Networks report 
20. SSE Pipelines- report not received 
21. Wales and West Utilities 
22. Office of the Gas and Electricity Markets (Ofgem) 


  88    

Adapting to Climate Change: helping key 
sectors to adapt to climate change 


  


Road and Rail Sector Summary Report for the Adaptation Reporting 
Power 


  

March  2012 


     

www.defra.gov.uk 


89  

                                                           

INTRODUCTION  

In response to directions to report under the Adaptation Reporting Power, 4 
organisations from the road and rail sectors in England and Wales submitted 
Adaptation Reports to Defra between September 2010 and September 201122. 
These reports were reviewed by the Government’s Adapting to Climate Change 
team in Defra, policy teams in the Department for Transport and the Risk Centre at 
Cranfield University. They were published by Lord Taylor in October 2011. The fifth 
and final rail sector report was published in February 2012  


 

This report summarises the findings from the reports, focussing on: 

• The climate risks for the road and rail sectors as identified by Reporting 
Authorities 

• Areas of strength for the two sectors   
• Areas of good practice  
• Areas for further research  
• Emerging trends and themes 
• Benefits and opportunities 
• Barriers 
• Interdependencies. 


    

22 A full list of the organisations who were directed to report can be found at Annex F. 


90  

SUMMARY OF FINDINGS 

The evaluation of the reports by Cranfield University, DfT policy teams and Defra’s 
Adapting to Climate Change team show that: 


 

• Climate change risk assessments are already being embedded within the 
road and rail sectors’ corporate risk appraisal processes. 

• The reports contain details of a range of activities that these organisations 
are undertaking to investigate and adapt to the risks posed by climate 
change. 

• The Reporting Authorities are at the stage of assessing their climate 
change risks, with some of the organisations undertaking detailed 
research to investigate specific risks and thresholds. Since the reports 
were submitted further work has been carried out by reporting authorities. 


   

KEY CLIMATE CHANGE RISKS FOR THE SECTORS 

This is not an exhaustive list of every risk to the road and rail sectors; it is an 
overview of the key climate risks that the Reporting Authorities identified.  Further 
details about the risks faced by each organisation can be found in their individual 
adaptation reports.23 Note that these risks are those identified by Reporting 
Authorities, not Defra. 


 

Examples of existing policies 
and procedures to ensure 
climate change resilience 


 

Eurotunnel have an 
established a Heatwave plan 
requiring increased shift 
turnover of staff between indoor 
and outdoor positions, possible 
installation of water mist 
equipment in loading areas and 
the possibility of reducing the 
number of vehicles loaded onto 
each shuttle. 


 

TfL has previously assessed 
the current and future impacts 
of climate change through its 
work with Greater London 
Authority on the transport 
element of the Mayor’s Climate 
Change Adaptation Strategy for 
London. 


 

Infrastructure - A number of climate change 
impacts could represent risks to the 
infrastructure of the road and rail sectors. 
These include increased and/or extreme 
temperatures causing issues such as rail 
buckling, increased mean winter temperatures 
leading to fewer problems caused by 
freeze/thaw, increased probability of extreme 
wind speed, increased fog, increased humidity, 
lightning risk, ground movement caused by soil 
wetting and drying, flooding and in coastal 
areas, sea level rise and storm surges. 

Passengers/Travellers/Cargo – Increased or 
extreme changes in temperature may impact 
on customer and crew comfort. There is also 
the impact that increased flooding and 
increased probability of extreme wind speeds 
can have on infrastructure leading to 
delays/cancellations and reputational risks.  

Operations/Maintenance – Significant 
changes in temperature, increased probability 
of extreme wind speed and precipitation (and 
subsequent flooding), increased fog and 
increase and change in vegetation could all 
impact on operations and may increase the 
frequency of maintenance and the difficulty in 
carrying it out. 


91  

                                                            
23 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-
authorities/reporting-authorities-reports/ 

http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-reports/
http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-reports/




AREAS OF STRENGTH 

A number of areas of strength were identified from the Adaptation Reports that 
demonstrate that the road and rail sectors are assessing and acting upon their 
climate change risks.  These include: 


 

Examples of engagement 
with stakeholder and 
other interdependent 
organisations in the 
Adaptation Reports 


 

The Highways Agency 
signed a Memorandum of 
Understanding with the 
Environment Agency, which 
specifically includes climate 
change adaptation 


 

Network Rail has been 
working with a number of 
organisations, including the 
Cabinet Office’s Civil 
Contingencies Secretariat, 
to map natural hazard and 
climate change 
interdependencies. 


 

Office of Rail Regulation 
are working closely with 
Network Rail, passenger 
and freight train operators 
and the industry supply 
chain to conduct the 
periodic review ‘PR13’ by 
2013. They have 
specifically requested the 
development of a plan to 
increase the resilience of 
the railway (track and 
trains) to extremes of 
weather and the costs and 
benefits of doing so. 

Engagement with relevant staff/departments – Many of 
the risk assessments involved workshops and engagement 
with key staff and departments to assess potential climate 
change risks. 

Active engagement with stakeholders and 
interdependencies – The reports show that the sectors are 
actively engaging with a variety of stakeholders and 
interdependencies in relation to climate change risk 
management and adaptation.   

Evidence of detailed climate change studies and 
technical reviews – The reports outline details of a number 
of studies and technical reviews that organisations across 
the sectors are undertaking to explore and manage their 
climate change risks.   

Research programmes – A number of the organisations 
provide details of research initiatives that they are 
participating in to assess and adapt to climate change risks.  
These include industry level research programmes and 
international studies.    

Evidence of the embedding of climate change in risk 
management processes – It is clear that these 
organisations have begun to embed climate change risk 
management within their corporate processes. For example, 
TfL is implementing adaptation measures through existing 
business process such as Asset Management Plans. 

Consideration of climate change in investment 
decisions – There are several examples throughout the 
reports of how climate change is being considered in 
investment decisions, such as the Crossrail development 
and the Highways Agency taking steps to modify its 
drainage standards to increase resilience against climate 
change. 

Transparent discussion of risks – A number of the 
reports include a transparent discussion of the 


92  93  

organisation’s climate change risks and how they may affect specific locations or 
assets. 

Evidence that the Adaptation Reporting Power has led to change – There is 
evidence in some of the reports that the Adaptation Reporting Power has led to 
changes in the level of understanding or management of climate change risks within 
these organisations.  


94  

                                                           

AREAS THAT MAY REQUIRE FURTHER CONSIDERATION 

The review of the road and rail sectors’ reports highlighted a number of areas that 
may require further research in future24.  These include: 


 

Flooding and drainage issues – Flooding represents a key risk to both sectors and 
the reports highlight a number of areas relating to flooding which may require further 
research. These include pluvial flooding, rain water drainage systems such as 
Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems (SUDS), drainage and the risk of pollution 
resulting from extreme events, the impacts of groundwater flooding, the need for 
specialist sea level monitoring and flood protection issues such as the reliance on 
the Environment Agency for flood protection and related information.  

Interdependencies - Interdependencies were highlighted as requiring further work 
particularly in relation to flood defences, the need for partnership approaches to 
manage interdependent issues, reliance on ICT, power supply and supply chain 
vulnerabilities. In particular the dependence on ICT for signalling and 
communications was highlighted by some of the reporting authorities in the rail 
sector. 

Slope and soil stability – Some of the specific research needs that were 
highlighted in the report include:  

• the potential for changes in soil stability/ground movement and the 
relationship between climate and soil pore pressure regimes in slopes,  

• future changes in slope stability and landslip risk,  

• the interactions between soil, slope and climate change,  

• the potential use of bioengineering (e.g. planting trees) to address slope and 
soil stability risks. 

Engineering, infrastructure and maintenance – There were a number of issues 
relating to engineering, infrastructure and maintenance risks that were raised in the 
reports that may require further research. These include: electricity supply risks, line 
side equipment failure, scour, engineering and design standards, construction and 
maintenance activities, asset deterioration and green landscaping.   

Risks to passengers – The risk to passengers from heat waves was raised in a 
number of reports.  In particular, the need for research into a number of factors 
which potentially pose risks to passengers has been recognised, such as ventilation, 
humidity levels, the type of train failure and the impact of traction failure on air 
conditioning. 


 

24 Since the publication of the ARP reports, further research has already begun in many of these 
areas 


95  

Evidence that the Adaptation Reporting Power has led to change – There is 
evidence in some of the reports that the Adaptation Reporting Power has led to 
changes in the level of understanding or management of climate change risks within 
these organisations.   


96  

EMERGING TRENDS 

The review of the road and rail sectors’ reports illustrates that although organisations 
are at different stages in their assessment of climate change risks and the 
development of their adaptation programmes, there are common issues and themes 
that are prevalent across the range of the reports.   


 

Thresholds - The evaluation of the Adaptation Reports suggests that there is a 
relatively mixed level of understanding of thresholds amongst the sectors.  Whilst 
some Reporting Authorities exhibit a clear awareness of a number of weather related 
thresholds affecting their operations, other organisations have not identified or 
assessed their thresholds or have only identified a small number of thresholds. 
Research has also indicated that reassessment of thresholds may be valuable in 
some cases. 

Impact of weather on the organisations’ functions - The Adaptation Reports 
indicate that the sectors are aware of how weather currently affects their operations 
and in many cases actively consider weather and climate change risks in their 
business decision-making. 

Risk assessments - The risk assessments commonly used an expert judgement 
approach to assess risks, underpinned by a range of data sources such as UKCP09. 
None of the reports initially included a level of confidence in their risk assessments 
themselves although the research cited in the reports does quantify the level of 
confidence in some cases (e.g. Network Rail).  

The majority of the reports used qualitative approaches to assess their climate 
change risks. These often only provided generic estimates of impact rather than risk. 
Whilst the reports generally classified risks (e.g. high, medium and low), there was 
not always a clear definition of these classifications, making it difficult to interpret the 
results and compare risks. However, in some cases the research cited in the reports 
did provide quantitative risk assessments. 

Embedding adaptation - The road and rail sectors are taking steps to incorporate 
climate change risks in existing business risk management, decision making and 
investment processes.   

Uncertainties and assumptions - The reports demonstrate an awareness of the 
uncertainties and assumptions associated with climate change risks across both the 
sectors.  

 Barriers to adaptation and interdependencies - In general the sectors appear to 
be aware of a range of barriers that affect their ability to adapt to climate change, 
although some of the reports did not identify any barriers. It is possible that this is 
due to some of the organisations being at an early stage of considering their climate 


97  

                                                           

change risks or that these organisations were happy with the analysis of barriers 
carried out by other parts of the sectors and did not want to repeat the analysis.   

The reports suggest that the sectors are developing an understanding of their 
interdependencies with some organisations more advanced in their thinking than 
others. In some cases organisations are exploring these interdependencies further 
through working groups or studies such as Engineering the Future25. 

Monitoring and evaluation - The reports indicate that the organisations in these 
sectors plan to monitor and evaluate their climate change risks and adaptation plans 
in the future.  


 

25 http://www.raeng.org.uk/news/publications/list/reports/Engineering_the_future_2011.pdf 


98  

BENEFITS AND OPPORTUNITIES 

A number of potential opportunities and benefits were identified in the reports from 
the road and rail sectors. These include: 


 

• Potential for a reduction in weather events that affect network performance 
e.g. freezing temperatures and snow. However, despite predicted higher 
mean temperatures in winter, this does not necessarily imply less disruption 
from snow, as more extreme weather is also predicted. 

• Warmer and wetter winters may reduce the need for winter maintenance 
activities and could also lead to fewer accidents (e.g. slips and falls). 

• Climate change modelling will enable the prioritisation of actions to focus on 
cost-effective responses e.g. focus on long-term measures for long-life assets 
rather than short term rapid wear assets. 

• Increased mean temperature leading to less salt needing to be spread on the 
network during winter months, this could also lead to slower degradation of 
infrastructure and fewer corroded vehicles. 

• Potential for a change in the modes of transport that people use as a result of 
the impacts of climate change e.g. increased storminess could lead to more 
people using the Channel Tunnel instead of ferries. 


  

BARRIERS 

The review of the Adaptation Reports identified that whilst some organisations have 
highlighted a number of barriers that represent a challenge to the road and rail 
sectors’ ability to adapt to climate change, others did not highlight any. The key 
barriers that were identified include:  


 

Uncertainties – Relating to both climate change and business functions were cited 
as barriers. Regulatory uncertainties, relating not only to how the Government would 
respond to the rail industry’s adaptation plans but also how adaptation would be 
funded in the long term were a concern. The future shape of the transport network 
was also cited as an unknown. 


 99  

Balancing short-term profit and long-term adaptation – The difficulties 
associated with balancing short-term benefits and financial efficiencies when 
considering measures with long-term benefits were raised by the sectors. 

Third party and external risks – Risks that are not under road and rail 
organisations’ control or ownership were identified as posing a potential barrier to 
adaptation. 


100  

INTERDEPENDENCIES 

The reports highlighted a large number of interdependent organisations and policies, 
with many of these representing key cross-cutting interdependencies. The following 
broad groups were evident. 


 

1. Institutional Interdependencies 

Government, regulators and 
legislation – Department for 
Transport and Transport Scotland, 
Transport for London, Office of Rail 
Regulation, Other Government 
Departments (e.g. Defra, 
Environment Agency, Cabinet Office 
and Business, Innovation and Skills), 
Local and regional government (e.g. 
London Boroughs) -  with 
responsibility for local road 
maintenance. 


 

Transport network – Road networks 
and the Highways Agency, Airports and 
cross-channel ports, Bordering national 
rail networks – e.g. Network Rail and 
SNCF, Train operating companies, 
Freight operating companies. 


 

Customers/suppliers –Customers, 
Supply chain, Contractors and operators, 
providers of weather related information 
and forecasts. 

2. Physical Interdependencies 
Utilities - Gas and electricity supply 
and distribution, water supply and 
sewerage networks, ICT suppliers. 

3. Operational Interpedendencies 
Staff absence (eg train drivers unable 
to get to work), denial of access to 
adjacent site or geographical area. 
Local Resilience Forums and 
Infrastructure recovery groups have 
been identified as bodies that help 
reduce the risks from operational 
interdependencies. 


  .   101  

ANNEX F 

The full list of road and rail organisations that provided adaptation reports. 


 

15. Eurotunnel 
16. Network Rail 
17. Transport for London (TfL) 
18. Highways Agency 
19. Office for Rail Regulation 


   102    

Adapting to Climate Change: helping key 
sectors to adapt to climate change 


  


Ports and Lighthouses Sector Summary Report for the Adaptation 
Reporting Power 


  

March  2012 


     

www.defra.gov.uk 


103  

                                                           

INTRODUCTION  

In response to directions to report under the Adaptation Reporting Power, 16 
organisations from the ports and lighthouse sectors submitted Adaptation Reports to 
Defra between February and May 201126. These reports were reviewed by the 
Government’s Adapting to Climate Change team in Defra, policy teams in the 
Department for Transport and the Risk Centre at Cranfield University. They were 
published by Lord Henley on 17 October 201127. 


 

This report summarises the findings from the reports focussing on: 

• The climate risks for the ports and lighthouse sectors as identified by 
Reporting Authorities 

• Areas of strength for the industry as a whole  
• Areas for further research or consideration  
• Emerging trends and themes 
• Benefits and opportunities 
• Barriers  
• Interdependencies 


    

26 A full list of the organisations who were directed to report can be found at Annex G. 
27 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-
reports/ 


104  

SUMMARY OF FINDINGS 


 

The evaluation of the reports by Cranfield University, DfT policy teams and Defra’s 
Adapting to Climate Change team show that: 


 

• Climate change risk assessments are being embedded within ports and 
lighthouse sector organisations’ corporate risk appraisal processes. 


 

• The risk assessments contain good coverage of climate change uncertainties, 
which is commonly reflected in accompanying plans for flexible adaptation 
responses and supporting plans for monitoring and evaluating adaptation 
effectiveness. 

• Many of the organisations are in the early stages of assessing their climate 
change risks, having only considered them in detail, as a result of having to 
report under this Direction. Therefore, few of them currently have adaptation 
plans in place. 

• There may be limited benefits and opportunities for the sector under future 
climate change. 


   

KEY CLIMATE RISKS FOR THE SECTORS 

This is not an exhaustive list of every risk that the ports and lighthouse sectors have 
identified; it is an overview of the key climate risks which were identified by the 
Reporting Authorities. Further details about the risks faced by each organisation can 
be found in their individual adaptation reports.28 Note that 
these risks are those identified by Reporting Authorities, not 
Defra. 

Examples of Specific 
Climate Change Risks 
Identified in the 
Adaptation Reports 


 

Harwich Haven 

Sea level rise and/or any 
increase in the frequency of 
extreme events will 
potentially increase the risk 
of flooding of radar and 
radio equipment at 
Landguard Point, Shingle 
Street and Shotley.  The 
loss of this equipment 
would have a major and 
unacceptable impact on 
Harwich Haven Authority’s 
ability to fulfil its statutory 
functions. 


 

ABP Humber 

Spurn Point, which is the 
location of ABP Humber 
Harbour Authority’s VTS 
and pilotage operations, 
currently experiences high 
levels of erosion and wave 
overtopping and is at risk 
from long-term sea level 
rise. 


 

Statutory Duties 

Navigation and Vessel Traffic Services – A number of 
climate change risks could have an impact on navigation and 
Vessel Traffic Services (VTS). These include erosion and 
flooding of port, radar facilities or power supply units which 
can lead to interruptions to services, sea level rise which 
could have an impact on the safety and security of essential 
navigation channels and increases in storms, storm surges 
and extreme events which creates risks to navigational safety 
and infrastructure.   

Sea defences – Sea level rise and an increase in storms 
could have an adverse impact on sea defences and 
surrounding infrastructure. 


 

Operational Functions 

Vessel Movements – Increased wind speeds, greater 
incidences of fog and higher swells could create delays to 
shipping movements. 

Cargo Operations – Sea level rise and storm surges, 
increased rainfall, high winds, higher temperatures and 
increased incidences of fog could all impact on cargo 
operations to varying degrees depending on their severity 
and scale. 


 

                                                            



105  

28 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-
reports/ 

http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-reports/
http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-reports/


106  

Passenger operations – Increases in storms, wind speed and fog will increase the 
likelihood of delays to passenger transportation.  

Infrastructure and equipment – A number of risks have the potential to impact on 
infrastructure and equipment. These include landside flooding, sea level rise, tidal 
flooding, high water levels impacting on quays and sea defences, temperature rise 
leading to the degradation of assets such as roads and rail and increased 
precipitation overwhelming existing drainage resulting in localised flooding. 

Business – Extreme events, increased wind speed and storms have the potential to 
impact on the ability of the business to function by increasing costs and reducing 
traffic. This could potentially lead to reputational risks to the business.  


 

Interdependencies – There is a reliance on surface transport for access and 
onward movement of cargo as well as reliance on the shipping industry. There is 
further reliance on flood defences and drainage systems to protect infrastructure and 
equipment. 


 

Other 

Conservation sites – A small number of ports have a role in relation to designated 
conservation sites. Flooding, sea level rise and coastal squeeze can all create risks 
to these sites and can potentially increase the risk of pollution incidents. 


           

AREAS OF STRENGTH 

A number of areas of strength were identified from the Adaptation Reports that 
demonstrate that the ports and lighthouse sectors are assessing and acting upon 
their climate change risks.  These include: 

Consideration of risks to non-statutory functions – The majority of Reporting 
Authorities considered the impact of climate change risks on their wider, non-
statutory functions in their risk assessment. 

Engagement with relevant staff/departments – Many of the risk assessments 
involved workshops and engagement with key staff and departments to assess 
potential climate change risks. 

Risks assessed using existing corporate risk assessment methodologies – A 
number of the organisations used their existing corporate risk assessment 
methodology and criteria to evaluate their climate change risks. This allows climate 
change risks to be compared with existing risks and embedded 
within corporate risk management processes. 

Evidence of climate 
proofing in the reports 


 

The Port of Dover notes 
that a climate change 
assessment was 
undertaken as part of the 
planning for its new 
Terminal 2, with berths 
being aligned to maintain 
operations during 
inclement weather.   


 

Some Reporting 
Authorities, such as 
Harwich Haven 
Authority and Milford 
Haven Port Authority 
are requiring Marine 
Works Licences and 
consent applications to 
demonstrate that they 
have considered climate 
change and are future-
proofed. 

Transparent discussion of risks – A number of the reports 
included a transparent discussion of the organisation’s climate 
change risks.  These not only included risks to specific 
locations or assets but also risks relating to potentially sensitive 
issues such as staff relations. 

Consideration of extreme climate scenarios – The reports 
illustrate that a number of Reporting Authorities have 
considered the potential impact of different climate change 
scenarios and in particular the H++ sea level rise scenario on 
their business functions. 

Evidence of embedding climate change risk management 
– The Adaptation Reports illustrate that a number of the 
organisations are taking steps to embed climate change risk 
management within their organisation.  For example, climate 
change risks are being integrated in risk registers and 
Environmental Management Systems, with responsibilities for 
climate change risk management being clearly identified in 
some reports.   

Evidence of climate-proofing – The Adaptation Reports 
clearly illustrate that a number of the organisations are taking 
steps to climate-proof new assets.  Ports and lighthouses are 
already geared up to deal with extreme weather events and 



107  




108  

infrastructure is designed to deal with these issues.  

Evidence that the Adaptation Reporting Power has led to change – A number of 
the organisations noted that the Adaptation Reporting Power has resulted in their 
organisation explicitly considering its climate change risks for the first time. They 
noted that this work has led to changes in their level of understanding or 
management of climate change risks within their organisation.  For example, the Port 
of London Authority note that their report has resulted in a change of emphasis on 
when adaptation actions are required and that more structured management of its 
climate change risks is required.  Indeed, many of the organisations within the sector 
are actively implementing or introducing processes to manage their climate change 
risks as a result of the Reporting Power process.  


  109  

AREAS FOR FURTHER INVESTIGATION OR CONSIDERATION 

The review of the ports and lighthouse sectors reports highlighted a number of areas 
that may require further research in future.  These include: 


  

Cargo – The harbour authority reports highlighted a number of areas relating to the 
handling of cargo which may require further research including sensitivity of cargoes 
to weather and climate change, invasive species and the knock on implications of 
delays to cargoes caused by extreme weather events.  

Interdependencies - Interdependencies that were highlighted as requiring further 
work include greater co-operation and third-party infrastructure planning agreements, 
internal interdependencies and links with the supply chain. 

Coastal and sedimentary change – A wide range of issues that relate to coastal 
and sedimentary change were highlighted in the reports as areas that may need 
further research. These include long term risks to infrastructure and assets, the 
impact that climate change will have on conservation sites and potential changes in 
sedimentary patterns which could impact on issues such as vessel handling and 
dredging activities. 

Commercial/Business Risk – There were a number of issues relating to 
commercial/business risks that were raised in the reports that may require further 
research. These include reputational risk caused by the potential impacts of severe 
weather events, increased costs and liabilities arising from damage or adverse 
impacts and the potential for increased insurance premiums. 

Combined events – The review of the reports highlighted some of the potential 
combined events that threaten the sector such as sea level rise combined with high 
tides in storm conditions and high spring tides and short duration high intensity 
rainfall.  

Climate Data - The reports highlighted a lack of robust information and climate 
projection data on variables especially relevant to the sector such as fog, wind speed 
and direction, lightening, storms etc. 


     110  

 EMERGING TRENDS  

The review of the ports and lighthouse sectors’ reports illustrates that although 
organisations are at different stages in their assessment of climate change risks and 
the development of their adaptation programmes, there are common issues and 
themes that are prevalent across the range of the reports.   


 

Thresholds - The evaluation of the Adaptation Reports suggests that there is a 
relatively mixed level of understanding of thresholds amongst the sector.  Whilst 
some Reporting Authorities exhibit a clear awareness of a number of 
weather/climate related thresholds affecting their operations, other organisations 
have not attempted to identify or assess their thresholds or have only identified a 
small number of thresholds (e.g. sea level rise). Some Reporting Authorities noted 
that the general direction, rate and implications of any future change were of more 
value to them than identifying particular thresholds.  Where thresholds were 
identified, often very little detail relating to whether they would be exceeded in future 
was provided.   

Impact of weather on the organisation’s functions - The Adaptation Reports 
demonstrate that the ports and lighthouse sectors are aware of how weather 
currently affects their operations and in many cases actively consider weather and 
climate change risks in their business decision-making. 

Risk Assessments - The majority of the organisations in these sectors used their 
existing corporate risk assessment processes to assess their climate change risks. 
This allows climate change risks to be compared against wider business risks and to 
be embedded in existing risk management processes. Although the sectors 
commonly chose to classify their risks using their existing risk management 
methodologies, a significant number of them didn’t clearly define these 
classifications.  There was also a lack of explanation about organisational risk 
appetite, making it difficult to understand how significant the risks are to the 
organisations. There were few reports that included a level of confidence in their risk 
assessments, which could be addressed in the future with improved guidance and 
training. This was an issue common across several sectors. 

A number of organisations used an expert-judgement-based approach to assess 
risks which was underpinned by a range of data sources, such as UKCP09 and 
Shoreline Management Plans (SMPs).  However, it was not always clear how 
specific climate change variables had been assessed because of the lack of 
methodological detail or evidence sources provided in the reports. 


 




111  

Embedding adaptation - The ports and lighthouse sectors are clearly taking steps 
to incorporate climate change risks in existing business risk management e.g. 
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and Business Continuity Management 
(BCM), environmental management and reporting processes.   

Uncertainties and assumptions - There appears to be an awareness of the 
uncertainties associated with climate change risks across the sectors with several 
organisations recognising the importance of having flexible adaptation responses. 
There was also an outline of the assumptions which had been made in the 
development of the risk assessment and adaptation plans in the majority of the 
reports. 

Barriers to adaptation - In general the ports and lighthouse reports illustrate that 
the organisations are aware of a range of barriers that affect their ability to adapt to 
climate change. However, in some cases the narrow scope of these barriers 
suggests that some of the organisations are at an early stage of developing their 
thinking on these issues. Barriers to adaptation are discussed in more detail in a 
later section.  

Interdependencies - The reports suggest that the sectors are developing an 
understanding of their interdependencies with some organisations more advanced in 
their thinking than others. Some organisations are at a more advanced stage of 
thinking and outlined plans to engage with their interdependencies in future. 

Monitoring and evaluation - The majority of reports outlined structured plans for 
evaluating adaptation actions and monitoring residual risks which are commonly 
linked to existing risk management review processes. A number of organisations 
also provided details of plans to improve how they monitor potential risks and collect 
data in order to enable adaptation measures to be put in place when needed.  


 




112  

BENEFITS AND OPPORTUNITIES 

A number of potential opportunities and benefits were identified in the reports. 
However for ports these are, in some cases, difficult to expand upon because these 
organisations operate in a competitive market and have commercial interests to 
protect. Benefits and opportunities include: 


 

Sea level rise 

• Increased depth of navigable water enabling the safe passage of larger vessels. 
Also may increase access for more vessels and/or larger vessels.  

• Possible reduction in dredging requirements, although some Reporting 
Authorities noted that surveying and dredging requirements may need to be 
amended. 

• Potential reduction in the need for the pumped equalisation of water levels within 
impounded docks, reducing energy use and increasing the time when the locks 
can be open. 


 

Low carbon and renewable energy 

• Opportunities arising from the increased use of low carbon modes of transport 
e.g. rail and coastal shipping due to the rail connections at many ports. 

• Increasing wind speed, frequency of high winds and increased solar radiation, 
opening opportunities to generate renewable energy. Enables organisations to 
harness their own power supplies, reducing costs and improving energy security.  

• Opportunities associated with the development of the offshore renewable energy 
industry and low carbon fuels. 


 

Warmer winters 

• A reduction in ice and snow related incidents.  
• Reduced costs from for example salting and gritting.  
• Reduced delays from snow and ice events 


113  

BARRIERS 

The review of the Adaptation Reports identified a number of barriers that were 
highlighted as representing a challenge to the ports and lighthouse sectors’ ability to 
adapt to climate change.  


 

Uncertainties – relating to both climate change and business functions were cited 
as barriers by the sectors.  Improved evidence and/or confidence in climate change 
impacts was cited by some organisations to help make the commercial argument for 
investing in climate change adaptation measures. 

Commercial interests and costs – A number of organisations cited challenges 
associated with the costs and commercial interest of adaptation.  These include: 

• The need for a justifiable business case and available budget to cover 
adaptation measures that require investment outside existing capital 
programmes or maintenance and review schedules.  In particular, many 
organisations noted that it is particularly difficult to take action when there is 
perceived to be limited or no return on investment within a reasonable 
timescale. 

• Lack of resources – supplier issues, conflicting operational requirements and 
budget restrictions. 

Knowledge and information gaps – A range of specific information gaps, that pose 
a barrier to adaptation were identified in the reports, including a lack of predictions of 
future erosion, sediment movement and accretion, future changes in the frequency 
and intensity of lightning, probabilistic estimates of changes in fog and future 
changes in the frequency and intensity of wind (particularly gusts) and gales. 

Internal barriers – There are a number of possible internal barriers that may affect 
the ability of organisations within the ports and lighthouse sectors to adapt to climate 
change. These include: 

• Conflicting investment timescales - adaptation measures require long-term 
decisions which are sometimes incompatible with the investment decision 
timeframes of business. 

• Lack of engagement/support – a number of organisations noted that the 
potential for lack of engagement and adaptation awareness from stakeholders 
could be problematic. 

• Staff relations – it was noted that the need to adapt working practices such 
as shift patterns, could impact upon staff relations in some organisations. 


 114  

Lack of appropriate drivers for taking action – Some of the reports identified the 
need for financial drivers for adaptation in order for the sector to gain a reasonable 
return on any future investment in adaptation measures. In a minority of cases the 
need for regulatory/legislative drivers was also raised. 

Interdependencies – A number of interdependencies are perceived as posing 
barriers to the sectors’ ability to adapt to climate change.  Issues identified included: 

• A lack of control of a number of interdependencies - particularly transport, 
infrastructure and utility providers.  Concerns relating to the level of control 
over privately owned and operated cargo handling terminals or recreational 
users were also highlighted. 

• Planning constraints/consent and approval for harbour reconstruction – 
Crown Estate and Marine Management Organisation. 

• Stakeholder support – the number and diversity of stakeholders and the 
challenges associated with their support or resistance. 

• Coastal defence/shoreline management planning/monitoring – the sector 
is highly reliant upon coastal defence and shoreline management planning.  
As such a key interdependency is with the Environment Agency, not only in 
terms of coastal defence but monitoring and detailed coastal studies. 


   




115  

INTERDEPENDENCIES 

The reports highlighted a large number of interdependent organisations and policies, 
with many of these representing key cross-cutting interdependencies. The following 
broad groups were evident. 


 

Government, regulators and 
legislation – UK and Scottish 
Governments, EU, LA’s, 
Department for Transport, 
Defra, the Environment 
Agency, Natural England, 
Countryside Council for Wales, 
Cadw (Welsh Government’s 
historic environment service), 
Environmental/EU directives 
(e.g. Habitats and Water 
Framework Directives), 
International climate change 
agreements, International 
trade bodies. 


 

Ports – Commercial 
ports and terminals, 
developments e.g. 
operational berths, 
leisure or housing, other 
ports/harbour authorities, 
Trinity House, 
International Maritime 
Organization. 

Flood and coastal 
defence - Flood 
defence policy, 
Shoreline Management 
Plan process, Coastal 
flood protection, Flood 
planning groups. 


 

Transport– Transport 
infrastructure, Local Highway 
Authorities, Train operators 

Stakeholders/ 
recreational groups - 
Royal Yachting 
Association and yacht 
clubs, environmental 
NGO’s, emergency 
services/groups, port 
working groups. 

Customers –
Commerical, leisure 
users, tenants and 
organisations on 
adjacent land, third 
party users of marine 
facilities, license 
holders. 

Utilities - Gas and electricity 
supply and distribution, water 
companies, pipeline network. 

Suppliers –  specialist 
suppliers, shipping 
companies contractors. 

Company – 
employees, 
contractors, 
shareholders/investors 

Emergency 
services/planning - 
Emergency services. 


   116  

                                                           

ANNEX G 

The ports and lighthouse sector organisations that provided adaptation reports. 


 

20. Corporation of Trinity House 

21. Northern Lighthouse Board 

22. Maritime and Coastguard Agency 

23. ABP Harbour Authority Hull3 

24. ABP Harbour Authority Humber3 

25. ABP Harbour Authority Immingham3 

26. ABP Harbour Authority Southampton29 

27. Dover Harbour Board 

28. Felixstowe Dock and Harbour Company 

29. Harwich Haven Authority 

30. Mersey Docks and Harbour Company 

31. Milford Haven Port Authority 

32. PD Teesport Ltd 

33. Port of London Authority 

34. Port of Sheerness Ltd 


    

29 Combined report. 


117    

www.defra.gov.uk 


  

Adapting to Climate Change: helping key 
sectors to adapt to climate change 


  


Public Bodies Sector Summary Report for the Adaptation Reporting 
Power 


  

March  2012 


   118  

                                                           

INTRODUCTION  

In response to a request to report under the Adaptation Reporting Power, The 
Environment Agency reported in November 2010.  Other public bodies from England 
were invited to report and 10 voluntarily submitted Adaptation Reports to Defra 
between November 2010 and January 201230.  Nine reports were reviewed by the 
Adapting to Climate Change team and policy teams in Defra and the Risk Centre at 
Cranfield University and published by Lord Taylor in March 2012. 31  

This report provides an overview of some of the key findings from the reports, 
focussing on: 

• Climate risks for the sector, as identified by the reporting authorities, 
• Areas of strength, 
• Areas of good practice;  
• Areas for further research;  
• Emerging trends and themes; 
• Benefits and opportunities 
• Barriers; 
• Interdependencies 


 

The diverse nature of the role of the public bodies’ means sector wide issues are 
difficult to be identified, thus this document only provides an overview of some of the 
main risks as identified by reporting authorities.  


  

30 A full list of the organisations who reported can be found at Annex H. 
31 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-
reports/ 


119  

                                                           

SUMMARY OF FINDINGS 

The evaluation of the reports by Cranfield University, policy teams from Defra and 
DCLG32 and Defra’s Adapting to Climate Change team show that: 


 

• Climate change risk assessment is being embedded within the public sector 
corporate processes and activities and that the process of developing the 
reports acted as a driver to prioritise ‘adapting to climate change’. 


 

• The assessments undertaken by the reporting authorities make good use of 
relevant and appropriate data, information, knowledge and tools and enables 
the reporting authorities to make evidence based decisions on adapting to 
climate change. 


 

• Plans are already underway in some areas for continued monitoring and 
evaluating climate change risks. 


 

• Further research requirements were highlighted and some of this work is now 
already underway. 


 

32 Department for Communities & Local Government 




KEY CLIMATE RISKS FOR THE SECTOR 

This is not an exhaustive list of every risk that the public bodies sector has identified; 
it is an overview of the key climate risks that the sector faces.  Further details about 
the risks faced by each organisation can be found in their individual adaptation 
reports.33 Note that these risks are those identified by 
Reporting Authorities, not Defra. 


 

Identification of risks 


 

Using the evaluation criteria 
the Environment Agency 
identified their priority risks 


as: 


• flooding and coastal 
erosion 

• water resources and 
quality 

• the impacts of climate 
change on wildlife and 
habitats. 

There are a huge number of cross cutting risks, these have 
been classified into three weather changes and two 
significant effects of weather change. 


 

Hotter drier summers 

The increase in temperatures will impact biodiversity with 
changes in water body temperatures changing life 
composition of marine ecosystems where some species will 
be unable to track their changing climate space, and also 
impact upon terrestrial biodiversity where suitable climate 
space may be fragmented. 

Whilst hotter temperatures may increase tourism in some 
areas it will decrease it in others and threaten utilities and 
services.  


 

Extreme events 

Whilst extreme events will have immediate effects during the course of the event, 
decreasing the ability to carry out day to day activities of the public body, they will 
also have longer term impacts. 

Increase in intensity and frequency of storm events could cause more erosion and 
damage to habitats.  Fish species distribution would be affected and changes in 
migration patterns could have a negative impact on marine diversity. 

In woodlands, trees will experience stress conditions many species are not adapted 
to, and some will not prove resilient. Historic buildings would also be affected by 
extreme events.  


 120  

                                                            
33 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-
reports/ 

http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-reports/
http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-reports/


121  

Warmer, wetter winters 

Warmer damp conditions make increases in pests and diseases leading to damage 
to woodlands more likely as well as damage to buildings.  Wetter winters may lead to 
an increase in erosion. 


 

Increased erosion 

Whilst erosion also damages the landscape it erodes, thus putting important natural 
features at risk e.g. the Nordic Erratics; it also increases siltation in areas where the 
material ends up.  This could change river landscapes and increase risk to marine 
environments as increased material could bring with it increased pollutants. 


 

Sea Level rise and flooding 

Sea level rise will risk those within the reach of the coast of greater likelihood of 
flooding but will also impact the surrounding biodiversity and farming land quality 
with changing salinity of water. Flooding will affect rights of way and the composition 
of native woodlands as some species are less tolerant to water logging.  




AREAS OF STRENGTH 


 

A number of areas of strength were identified from the Adaptation Reports that 
demonstrate that the public bodies are assessing and acting 
upon their climate change risks.  These include: 

Partnership working 

A partnership of 
agencies and 
organisations are 
working on Cheviot 
Futures, a local scale 
project in North 
Northumberland, working 
with land managers and 
farmers to increase 
awareness of adaptation. 


 

Example of flexible 
adaptation 

The Broads Authority 
highlighted that its 
Adaptation Plan will 
need to be a dynamic 
document which is 
reviewed and modified 
according to improving 
understanding and data, 
and its recognition of the 
need for flexible 
adaptivemanagement 
responses to account for 
future uncertainties. 

Engagement with relevant staff/departments – many of the 
Reporting Authorities utilised both internal and external experts 
when conducting their climate change risk assessments. 

Active engagement with stakeholders and 
interdependencies – Public bodies are actively engaged with 
their stakeholders in relation to the assessment and 
management of their climate change risks. 

Partnership approaches – The adaptation reports illustrate a 
clear awareness of the need for partnership based responses 
to climate change. 

Research studies and programmes – Many organisations 
across the sector are conducting further research to gain more 
detailed local understanding of their risks.  This is including 
spatial distribution of risks.  

Awareness of the need for a flexible adaptation – Many of 
the reporting authorities are aware of the need for flexible 
responses, such as adaptative management responses, that 
enable adaptation measures to respond to climate change 
uncertainties. 

Evidence of the embedding of climate change – Public 
bodies are taking steps to embed climate change risk 
management within their organisations into their national 
plans, thus ensuring it is considered on a more permanent 
basis. 

Example of embedding climate change 

Natural England is embedding adapting to a changing climate within their organisation, from 
strategic actions of including it in their objectives to developing training for staff and 



122  




123  

                                                           

AREAS OF FURTHER RESEARCH 

The review of the public bodies’ reports highlighted a number of areas that might 
benefit from further research.  These range from the impacts of potential adaptive 
methods but also include specific local risks where the impacts are as yet unclear.34 


 

Species relocation – may need to consider how species would be affected by 
relocations, such as which would be more resilient e.g. particularly those in uplands 
where as the climate becomes hotter and the cooler climate space of the uplands is 
squeezed.  

Invasive species – the introduction of non-native species are of concern to the 
reporting power authorities, their effects on specific areas are less well researched. 

Changing species composition and the impact on landscape character – for 
example new types of species will alter the appearance of forests and woodlands. 

Ecological responses to water abstraction – further research is required to 
understand the impact of water abstraction and related pressures on ecology. 

Identification of vulnerable critical infrastructure and communities to flooding 
– critical infrastructure including ecosystems services needs to be identified and 
interdependencies between them understood. 

Landscape-scale approaches – the sector highlights the need for further research 
exploring landscape scale and transformative approaches to adaptation that provide 
resilient multifunctional landscapes and balance socio-economic interests alongside 
the environmental and adaptation benefits. 

Conservation choices under climate change – a number of reporting authorities 
recognise that designated features may not remain valid under climate change.  
Understanding needs to be gained on the ‘value’ of certain features and when would 
it be considered not valuable enough to continue to manage. 

Assessment of heatwave and overheating risk – further research on mapping and 
assessing heatwave/overheating risk, this is particularly by the Greater London 
Authority covering the urban area. 

Risk to spring-fed properties – the potential risk that climate change poses to rural 
properties with spring-fed water supplies was highlighted. 

Community preparedness – why there is low level of community awareness and 
capacity to respond to high risks including a lessons learnt exercise from awareness 
raising campaigns such as uptake of Floodline Warnings Direct. 


 

34 Since the publication of the ARP reports, further research has already begun on some of the areas 
highlighted. 


124  

EMERGING TRENDS REQUIRING CROSS INDUSTRY ACTION 

The review of the public bodies’ sector Adaptation Reports identified a number of 
common themes and issues emerging across a number of the reports.  These are 
mainly actions that the industry should consider taking. 


 

Expert advice – public bodies appear to have used a range of additional supporting 
information, including expert input to underpin their risk assessment; however they 
have continued to use UKCP02, where they may benefit from using the more 
updated UKCP09. 

Thresholds – in some cases there is not a clear picture on how weather and climate 
change is currently affecting their organisational objectives therefore it is difficult to 
calculate future effects.  The affects of climate change thresholds that may affect 
functionality could be further looked into. 

Embedding adaptation – the reports include steps to embed climate change within 
their existing organisational processes. 

Uncertainties and assumptions – there appears to be an awareness of the 
uncertainties and assumptions associated with climate change risks across the 
sector, more work could be done on how these uncertainties will affect specific 
implications for the sector. 

Evidence of change – a number of the reports detailed how this process has 
already led to changes to the organisations management of climate change risks. 

Time – great awareness was shown for understanding the risks on the three 
different timescales, thus showing understanding of a flexible approach. 

Assumptions – the sector varied in its use of assumptions.  Some clearly identified 
assumptions, where others went further and highlighted the implications of the 
assumptions. 


125  

BENEFITS AND OPPORTUNITIES 

A number of potential opportunities and benefits were identified in the reports from 
the natural environment and public bodies sector. These include opportunities 
resulting from actions to adapt to or mitigate against climate change.  


 

Archaeological Assets – Previously unknown or unidentified archaeological sites 
could be exposed by drought, erosion and new areas being prone to flooding. 

Biodiversity – Improved conditions for some species, may result in species 
immigration, whilst some priority species and habitats may thrive by gaining an 
increased competitive advantage. 

Communities – There may be more of an interest in natural environmental solutions 
across communities. 

Energy – Potential increase in more sustainable energy production, via solar, 
offshore wind generation etc. 

Environmental Benefits – With more carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, 
photosynthesis and plant growth will increase.  

Farming and land management – Increased temperatures may lead to a longer 
growing season for some crops, which may lead to increased crop yields (with the 
availability of rainfall). 

Fisheries – Fish species that flourish in warmer climates may increase in numbers 
potentially benefitting coarse fisheries. 

Flood Risk Management – Sustainable management of flood risk, such as creation 
of more wetland and coastal habitats and reconnection of floodplains.  

Transport – The waterways could be used more effectively to provide more 
sustainable transport. 

Visitors, Recreation and Access – Increased number of visitors as a result of 
hotter, drier summers bringing in more money to the area. 

Water quality and resources - Climate change may raise the profile of the water 
environment and the need for sustainable water management.  

Woodland and Forestry – Opportunities may arise from declining productivity and 
tighter controls on sustainability management practices in some other global timber 
producing regions. 


 


Potential increased decrease in atmospheric carbon dioxide resulting in increased 
woodland productivity (only in non-water stressed areas). 

There are a number of cross-cutting benefits that will be felt across all sectors 
including those to the organisations workforce health wellbeing and ability to get to 
the office, as well as the upkeep of property and assets. 


 

The Greater London Authority identified a number of potential benefits and opportunities 
from climate change and additional benefits that adaptive action can have.  For example the 
increase in urban greening to provide shade against the increase in the heat will also improve 
the physical and aesthetic environment for people in London.  


 126  




127  

BARRIERS 

The review of the Adaptation Reports identified a number of potential barriers that 
were highlighted as representing a challenge to the public bodies’ ability to adapt to 
a changing climate.  As the sector is so diverse these barriers are relatively 
organisation specific. 


 

Timescales  

Some sectors, for instance the forestry sector, plan over long term timescales, thus it 
is not necessarily easy to bring in changes.   

Keeping pace with the continued changing nature of the landscape may make it 
increasingly difficult to manage. In the forestry sector so far there has been little 
demand for alternative minor species thus there is little planting stock in the 
nurseries. 

There are challenges to getting funding for working across partners and 
organisations. Some sectors may find some potential costly adaptation measures 
are not economically viable due to long pay back periods. It may be difficult to get 
buy-in from communities, land managers etc for measures that are perceived as long 
term threats. 

Space 

Adaptation measures may need to be put in place in a different location to the area 
benefitting thus it may be difficult to gain agreement to the action. 

The size and scale of land areas and the cross-cutting nature of adaption required in 
some approaches can present physical challenges.  

Some adaptation measures are agreed internationally, which may not be viable to all 
local situations. 

Incentives 

Agri-environmental schemes are key levers, however some are on a short term basis 
making it difficult to rely on the scheme for long term change. 

Knowledge, Understanding and Expertise 

Working on a larger scale may require a range of expertise and skills which may 
have resource implications.  

Monitoring 


128  

Monitoring requires resources, where funding is usually found for pressure based 
monitoring and where opportunities for direct observations may be limited. 

Regulatory 

Some barriers are linked to restrictive legislation created when climate change was 
not such a prominent issue, potentially limiting available adaptation action. 

Technological 

Some of the technical demands may be beyond the capability or capacity of 
organisations at the moment. 


129  

INTERDEPENDENCIES 

The reports highlighted a large number of interdependent organisations and policies, 
with many of these representing key cross-cutting interdependencies. The following 
broad groups were evident. 


 

International Agreements – Global 
trade agreements, UN Framework 
Convention on Climate Change, 
Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) 
reform 

Legislation and policy – EU Directives, 
e.g. Water Framework Directive, 
Habitats Directives, Renewable Energy 
Directive, Changes in forestry regulation, 
protected areas, spatial planning, non-
native invasive species 

Technical – Technical guidance on 
adaptation, Approach to genetic 
modification on forestry, development of 
biosecurity solutions 

Strategies and plans – England 
Biodiversity strategy, coastal flood 
defence, catchment flood management 
plans 

Incentives – Environmental 
Stewardship, Catchment Sensitive 
farming schemes, National Park 
Authority historic buildings grants, Rural 
development programme 

Science / Research – Met office, UK 
climate projections, marine climate 
change impact programme, scientists, 
specialists, practitioners, Advisory 
groups, studies and expertise, training 
and education 

Regulators – Ofwat, Ofgem, Nuclear 
Regulators, Environment Agency 

Economics and Markets – Biodiversity 
offsets, agricultural pressures, food 
security, fossil fuel prices, market 
demand (timber), carbon markets 

Partnerships and initiatives – Delivery 
partners, local service boards, 
partnerships and  

Other groups – Landowners e.g. 
National Farmers union, Conservation 
reserve managers, Environmental and 
conservation bodies, emergency series 
and planning, Transports sector, waste 
management operators,  


   130  

ANNEX H 

The full list of organisations that provided adaptation reports that are incorporated 
into this summary are: 


 

35. Broads Authority 
36. Environment Agency 
37. Forestry Commission England 
38. Greater London Authority 
39. Natural England 
40. Northumberland National Parks Authority 
41. North York Moors National Parks Authority 
42. Peak District National Parks Authority 
43. Yorkshire Dales National Parks Authority 


 

The following authorities also provided reports, however are not included in this 
summary: 


 

1. Lake District National Parks Authority 
2. Dartmoor National Parks Authority 
3. Exmoor National Parks Authority 


    131     

Adapting to Climate Change: helping key 
sectors to adapt to climate change 


  


Water Sector Summary Report for the Adaptation Reporting Power 


  

March  2012 


    

www.defra.gov.uk 


132  

                                                           


 

INTRODUCTION  

In response to directions to report under the Adaptation Reporting Power, 22 water 
companies from England and Wales submitted Adaptation Reports to Defra in 
January 201135 . Ofwat submitted its Adaptation Report to Defra in June 2011. 
These reports were reviewed by the Adapting to Climate Change team and Water 
Policy teams in Defra, and the Risk Centre at Cranfield University and published by 
Lord Henley in May 201136. 

This report summarises the findings from the reports, focussing on: 

• The climate risks for the water sector;  
• Areas of strength for the industry as a whole;  
• Areas of good practice;  
• Areas for further research;  
• Emerging trends and themes; 
• Barriers; and 
• Interdependencies 


 

Due to the different regional coverage, size and responsibilities of the organisations; 
local conditions bring different climate concerns for water companies. For example, 
companies located by the coast have risks associated with sea level rise and 
salination while individual assets can be affected by issues such as local topography 
that would make them more or less vulnerable to flooding. 


   

35 A full list of the water companies who were directed to report can be found at Annex I. 
36 http://www.defra.gov.uk/news/2011/05/20/water-companies-drier-climate/ 


 

http://www.defra.gov.uk/news/2011/05/20/water-companies-drier-climate/


133  

SUMMARY OF FINDINGS 

• Climate change risk assessment is being embedded within water companies’ 
corporate risk appraisal processes, particularly as a result of regulatory 
requirements. 

• For climate risk assessments the sector is making good use of climate change 
data (e.g. UKCP09), information, knowledge and tools 

• Further work may be needed to improve risk assessment methodologies to 
enable water companies to make more evidence-based decisions on adapting 
to climate change.   

• The issue of climate change uncertainties and their implications for the sector 
requires further examination. 


 

There are two emerging issues reflected in the evaluation of the reports: 

1. The impact of the regulated nature of the water sector on the water 
companies’ risk assessment and adaptation processes.  In particular, the 
embedding of climate change risk assessment and adaptation within the 
water companies, as a result of regulatory processes such as Water 
Resource Management Planning (WRMP), and their requirements for 
monitoring and evaluation. In addition, the regulated nature of the industry has 
influenced the generation of adaptation priorities from the risk assessment 
results, with the water companies focusing their detailed planning on 
adaptation actions that have received regulatory approval. 


   

2. The analysis suggests that either, there are limited opportunities for the sector 
under future climate change, or that these need further exploration. 




KEY CLIMATE RISKS FOR THE SECTOR 

This is not an exhaustive list of every risk that the water sector has identified; it is an 
overview of the key climate risks that the water sector in England faces.  Further 
details about the risks faced by each organisation can be found in their individual 
adaptation reports.37  



134   

Overarching Risks 

Compliance – a number of impacts could result in 
compliance failure or changes to compliance measures. This 
includes: asset loss or failure (e.g. treatment works); poorer 
raw water quality derived from low flows requiring additional 
treatments; and poorer quality receiving waters derived from 
low flows leading to tighter discharge conditions. 

Interdependencies - interdependencies were identified as 
an area of high risk, in particular threats to power supplies 
and telecommunication links to key assets.    

Reputational risk - companies are aware of the reputational 
risk of supply failure, customer flooding and supply 
restrictions (e.g. hosepipe bans).  


 

Water Supply/Resources 

Flooding of assets risking failure of service (e.g. pumping 
station stops working), compliance failure (e.g. unable to 
treat raw water, contamination of water supply) or loss of 
asset function for a time.  Salination of freshwater resources 
was a concern of companies located on the coast. 

Networks (pipes) – concern tended to focus on increasing 
leakage or burst frequency associated with more severe 
drying/wetting cycles.  There was also concern that peak 
demand would put a strain on the capacity of the distribution 
system. However, there may be fewer incidents associated 
with freeze-thaw.  

                                                            
37 http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-
reports/ 

Examples of Specific 
Climate Change Risks 
Identified in the 
Adaptation Reports 


 

Bristol Water 

The public water supply 
intake from the Sharpness 
canal at Purton represents 
a critical asset at risk from 
combined coastal flooding 
and sea level rise, and 
accounts for 45% of Bristol 
Water’s resources.  Whilst it 
is protected up to 2035 
levels, flooding could impact 
upon two major water 
treatment works and the 
water supply to more than 
200,000 people. 


 

Veolia Water Central 

70% of Veolia Water 
Central’s network is made 
up of old iron piping that is 
at the end of its economic 
life, and situated in an area 
that is prone to shrinkage 
and expansion as a result in 
changes in temperature. 
This is likely to increase as 
the climate changes making 
the network even more 
highly vulnerable to 
bursting.   

http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-reports/
http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/sectors/reporting-authorities/reporting-authorities-reports/


135  

Sources of supply – this is a major concern for the majority of companies that 
demand will outstrip, or put a strain, on supply derived from a combination of warmer 
weather (increased demand, evapotranspiration, competition from other water users) 
and reduced availability of the resource (less rainfall). This risk is multiplied by the 
concern that climate change could affect silting of reservoirs in heavy rainfall, 
increased incidence of algeal blooms on reservoirs in warm weather and heavy 
rainfall contributing to more pollutants finding their way into aquifers.   


 

Wastewater  

Flooding of assets risking failure of service (e.g. pumping station stops working), 
compliance failure (e.g. unable to treat raw water, inundation leading to wastewater 
overflows, contamination of water supply) or loss of asset function for a time.   

Network – the major risk is from increases in rainfall (intensity and duration) and the 
flood risk that will result from this. 

Other issues include reduced rainfall leading to sedimentation and contributing to 
blockages and possible flooding, increased odour from treatment works, and greater 
septicity. 

Treatment – lower base flows in water bodies receiving discharges leading to tighter 
discharge consent conditions. 

Sludge –issues include risks to disposal, storage, and increasing odours. 


 


AREAS OF STRENGTH 

Use of UKCP09 


 

Companies, such as 
Severn Trent and Anglian 
Water, are beginning to use 
the more advanced 
UKCP09 Weather 
Generator and Threshold 
Detector tools to assess 
their climate change risks. 


 

Thames Water have been 
developing a risk-based 
case for climate change 
driven investment by 
predicting supply using 
bespoke modelling based 
on information derived from 
UKCP09. 

A number of areas of strength were identified from the 
Adaptation Reports that demonstrate that water companies 
are assessing and acting upon their climate change risks.  
These include: 


 

In-house risk assessment/report production – the vast 
majority of reports submitted by the water sector were 
produced in-house, suggesting that internal climate change 
expertise has been developed within many water 
companies. 

Climate change and corporate planning - the Adaptation 
Reports indicate that water companies are mindful of the risk 
that weather and climate change pose and that climate 
change is being actively considered alongside other 
business risks.  

Evidence of the embedding of climate change within 
water companies – climate change is being embedded 
throughout the water industry both through regulatory 
processes, such as Water Resource Management Plans 
(WRMP), and through inclusion in company risk registers. 

Linking monitoring and review with regulatory timescales – many water 
companies are linking their risk assessment and monitoring and evaluation 
processes with existing regulatory reporting requirements.  This was reflected in the 
plans for monitoring and review, presented in a number of reports, which included 
review timescales. 

Awareness of barriers to adaptation – the wide range of barriers that were 
highlighted in the Adaptation Reports, which were frequently accompanied by plans 
and recommendations for addressing them, illustrate that the water industry is 
developing a good awareness of the barriers to adaptation that it faces. 

Awareness of climate change uncertainties – the review of the reports suggests 
that the water sector has developed an awareness of the uncertainties associated 
with climate change, although the understanding of their impact upon adaptation 
planning is less well developed. 

Active implementation of adaptation plans – the Adaptation Reports illustrate that 
the industry is actively implementing climate change adaptation plans, through the 
Asset Management Plan (AMP) process, and have existing policies and procedures 
in place to finance, manage and adapt to their climate change risks.   



136  


Evidence of detailed climate change studies – the Adaptation Reports outline 
previous climate change risk studies, particularly investigating flood risk, with a 
number of Reporting Authorities outline future plans to commission further studies to 
explore specific climate risks. 

Research programmes – water companies are participating in research initiatives 
to assess and adapt to their climate change risks.  These include individual 
organisations commissioning research as well as cross-industry level research 
programmes and international studies. 

Use of the UK Climate Projections – the water sector is actively using the UK 
Climate Projections, with some water companies beginning to 
develop a good understanding of their use.   

Commissioning Climate 
Change Research 


 

The water sector is 
proactively engaging with 
a range of organisations in 
the assessment of their 
climate change risks, with 
many companies 
commissioning detailed 
studies to investigate risks 
that are of particular 
concern.  Companies such 
as Anglian Water, 
Thames Water and 
Yorkshire Water are 
collaborating with 
organisations including UK 
Water Industry Research 
(UKWIR), UK Climate 
Impacts Programme 
(UKCIP), universities and 
academic research 
centres. 

Plans for internal awareness raising – there is evidence that 
a number of water companies are taking steps to raise internal 
awareness of the risks associated with climate change and the 
need for adaptation. 

Awareness of the limitations associated with current risk 
assessment methodologies and climate change studies – 
the reports indicate that water companies are generally aware 
of the limitations with current climate change risk assessment 
methodologies and studies (e.g. qualitative approaches), and 
plan to address them in future. 

Evidence that the Adaptation Reporting Power has led to 
change – the Adaptation Reporting Power has led to positive 
changes in the level of understanding or management of 
climate change risks within their organisation.  For example, 
Anglian Water outlined how their Reporting Power work has 
resulted in the formation of a Climate Change Steering Group 
and the development of a new risk assessment tool. 


 

AREAS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH 

The review of the water sector reports highlighted a number of 
areas that requires further research in future.  These include: 

Sea Level Rise and Flood Risk – where issues such as low levels of 
protection/resilience, pluvial flooding and Sustainable Drainage Systems (SUDs) are 
combined with events such as flooding from sea level rise, fluvial events and 
extreme rainfall. 



137  




138   

Biosolids/Sludge Disposal - the potential challenges that climate change poses to 
traditional sludge disposal routes, treatment operations and transportation. 

Managing Water Quality and Pollutants - how water quality and pollution may be 
exacerbated by climate change (such as algal blooms and bacterial growth, 
catchment management and treatment processes).  

Risks Posed by Extreme Events – lack of knowledge/data on systems and/or 
infrastructure failure. There is also a limited understanding of how the frequency of 
extreme events may change.  

The Impact of Future Housing Growth and Socioeconomic Issues - further work 
on the impact of population and housing growth combined with climate change 
impacts and the resulting impact on water supply and water efficiency.   

Demand and Demand Management – the impact of climate change on changes in 
demand and demand management.  

Multi year drought frequency – there is currently very little understanding about the 
likelihood of increases in the frequency and/or length of multi year droughts. 

Asset Lifespan under Climate Change - climate change has the potential to impact 
upon the lifespan of water infrastructure and assets, particular issues include the 
vulnerability of pipe crossings of rivers and dam structural stability/safety.  

Water Transfer/Sharing - climate change may require investment in more strategic 
water transfer and storage between neighbouring water companies in future, 
particularly in areas that have low potential to develop new water resources.  There 
are existing precedents for doing this and sharing and transfer agreements already 
exist in some areas. 

Interdependencies - interdependencies were highlighted that requires further work 
including greater co-operation and third-party infrastructure planning agreements.  




EMERGING TRENDS REQUIRING CROSS INDUSTRY ACTION 

The review of the water companies’ Adaptation Reports illustrates that each water 
company is at a different stages in the assessment of climate change risks and 
development of adaptation programmes. However, common issues and trends 
emerge across the reports that require cross-industry action.   


 

Thresholds - While water companies are aware of flood risk 
thresholds and are monitoring and evaluating potential climate 
change risks, more work is required to understand vulnerability 
to climate thresholds. For example, water companies noted a 
current lack of knowledge of thresholds, questioned their 
usefulness, or were yet to determine them, whilst others 
recognised thresholds as representing a key uncertainty or 
difficult to assess due to the site-specific nature of their assets.   

Assessing possible 
adaptation responses 


 

South East Water used a 
qualitative options 
appraisal process to 
assess its possible 
adaptation responses.  
This considered the 
barriers, costs and 
benefits, timescales, 
environmental, economic, 
and social sustainability, 
carbon impact and 
potential level of regret 
associated with each 
adaptation option. 

Risk Assessments - There were a number of themes around 
risks and risk assessments in the reports. These included 
classification of risks (e.g. high, medium and low), where a 
number of the reports failed to clearly define these 
classifications, making it difficult to interpret the results of the 
risk assessment and compare risks. There were very few 
reports that included a level of confidence in their risk 
assessments, which could be addressed in the future with 
improved guidance and training. The focus in the reports on 
the period up to 2035 could potentially mean that longer-term 
risks affecting infrastructure are not being fully considered. 

Whilst a number of water companies provided details of the 
costs associated with specific adaptation actions that have 
been approved by Ofwat, or provided a narrative of the costs 
and benefits associated with their adaptation plans, the 
Statutory Guidance’s requirement for cost benefit and analysis 
and sustainability appraisal appeared to be difficult for the 
water sector to address.   

Managing Climate Risks 


 

Water companies, such 
as Sutton and East 
Surrey Water are 
developing resilience-
based approaches to 
manage their climate 
change risks and are also 
recognising the need for 
flexible adaptation. 


 

A number of the water companies utilised the MHW/WaterUK 
study - A Climate Change Adaptation Approach for Asset 
Management - to support their risk assessment.  This outlines 
the risks and impacts associated with climate change for the 
water sector.  However, it focuses on assets and does not 
address wider operational issues that could be affected by 



139  


climate change.  As such, many of the water company reports did not appear to 
consider wider operational risks in detail. 

A number of water companies recognised the limitations associated with their current 
climate change risk assessment approaches – particularly the reliance on expert 
judgement.  This, together with the other issues identified in relation to the risk 
assessments, suggests that there may be a need for additional support and training 
to develop greater risk literacy across the sector in future.  This may need to be 
accompanied by the development of new approaches for assessing climate change 
risks. 

Opportunities - The reports suggest that there are limited opportunities associated 
with the impacts of climate but there are opportunities associated with the water 
sector might respond to a changing climate. .  Whilst some water companies did 
indentify potential opportunities for the sector, many of which may well be exploitable 
in the future with more work/research, others identified none. Where opportunities 
were identified by some water companies very few currently have any plans to 
exploit them at the moment. 

Impact of regulatory processes on adaptation actions - The regulated nature of 
the water sector was particularly evident in the discussion of the water companies’ 
adaptation actions.  Here, the Adaptation Reports primarily focussed on adaptation 
actions that had been approved under the five yearly price review (AMP) process, 
which were accompanied by clear targets, resources and timescales.  As such, 
longer-term and wider adaptation actions tended to receive less 
attention, with very little detail provided in the majority of reports.  
In particular, those adaptation actions that were yet to be funded 
tended to focus on non-infrastructure adaptation, such as 
awareness raising, capacity building, embedding, monitoring 
and research. 

Designing for Climate 
Change 


 

Companies are 
changing their design 
standards to 
accommodate future 
climate change.  For 
example, Wessex 
Water is reviewing its 
design standards for 
sewerage to account for 
future increases in peak 
flows using UKCP09. 

Embedding adaptation - The water sector is clearly 
embedding climate change both through regulatory processes 
and its incorporation in business risk management processes 
and business plans. 

Focus on demand reduction - In several cases the adaptation 
actions of the water companies appeared to focus on demand 
reduction measures (e.g. metering and variable tariff structures) 
as opposed to twin-track approaches that consider both demand 
reduction and long-term infrastructure needs.   


 140  




141  

Infrastructure adaptation focuses on flood risk protection measures - The 
review of the adaptation reports indicates that investment in flood protection 
represents the main focus of water company adaptation to-date. 

Barriers to Adaptation and Interdependencies - In general the water reports 
illustrate that the water companies are aware of a range of barriers that affect their 
ability to adapt to climate change.  Some water companies suggested plans for 
overcoming barriers in future. 

There appeared to be a mixed level of awareness of interdependencies amongst the 
water companies.  In particular, whilst there was evidence of a number of companies 
actively engaging with interdependencies, some appeared to be at an earlier stage 
of identifying them, with others not currently having plans to address them in future. 

Varying levels of knowledge and preparedness across the sector - The 
evaluation of the reports illustrates that there is a wide variation in the level of 
understanding and preparedness for climate change across the sector.  In particular, 
whilst some water companies are undertaking detailed studies, engaging with a 
range of organisations, participating in research studies and actively implementing 
adaptation actions, others are only beginning to identify potential risks.  This 
suggests that there may be a need for additional support in future to help individual 
companies and the sector as a whole assess their climate change risks and identify 
effective adaptation actions. 




BARRIERS 

The review of the Adaptation Reports identified a number of barriers that were 
highlighted as representing a challenge to the water sectors’ ability to adapt to 
climate change. Most of the barriers identified tend to be on the supply side, rather 
than demand management issues. 


 

Education/behavioural change – there is a strong emphasis that customers and 
staff need to be educated on the importance of adaptation.  

Regulator – most of the companies identified the framework of economic regulation 
that OFWAT operates in and the five yearly price review process as a barrier to 
longer-term investment for adaptation. 

Regulation/legislation – the reports convey a strong sense that regulation and 
legislation constrain company planning, sometimes conflicting with adaptation 
objectives (conservation/sustainability/security of supply). Some regulatory and 
reporting cycles are unhelpfully aligned and UKCP09 was launched too late for most 
companies to incorporate in the 2009 Price Review process. 

Data and dealing with uncertainty – there is difficulty in using uncertain data 
(including UKCP09) to justify action/investment and there are several areas such as 
windspeed and extreme rainfall where there are information gaps. Many of the 
reports noted that the translation of climate change projections, such as rainfall and 
temperature, into effects, such as flooding or drought at the 
catchment scale, is currently limited and requires further research 
in future.   Whilst ongoing work with Defra and the Environment 
Agency on the use of UKCP09 in water resource planning was 
noted, many water companies felt that there was a general lack of 
industry-wide interpretation of UKCP09.   

Engaging Others on 
Adaptation 


 

Water companies, 
such as Severn Trent 
Water, are actively 
engaging with their 
stakeholders and 
interdependencies, 
with the company 
conducting workshops 
to explore its 
interdependencies in 
detail. 

Decisions/actions by other parties - there are a number of 
barriers that are outside the control of water companies, for 
example; third-party flood defences, interdependencies such as 
power suppliers, communications and transport; housing and 
population growth; planning decisions; and supply chains. This 
highlights the need for the companies and the sector as a whole 
to ensure that they have good relationships with these 
interdependencies and contingency plans in place. 

Cost - the potentially high costs associated with adapting to 
climate change were raised across the sector. This not only 
includes discussions about how much the customer is willing 
and/or able to pay, but also includes issues such as insurance 



142  




143  

and the difficulty of obtaining investment given the levels of uncertainty, timescales 
and affordability. 

Increased energy usage - the reports highlight the potential conflict between 
climate change adaptation and increased energy usage and carbon footprint.  In 
particular, treatment processes and improvements required under the Water 
Framework Directive, together with adapting to climate change may result in 
increased energy use and high embedded carbon for water companies.  As such, 
the need to develop sustainable adaptation paths was and warrants further research. 


  144  

INTERDEPENDENCIES 

The reports highlighted a large number of interdependencies, with many of these 
representing key cross-cutting interdependencies. The following broad groups of 
interdependencies were evident. 


 

Government, regulators 
and legislation - UK 
Government, Drinking 
Water Inspectorate, Ofwat, 
Environment Agency, 
Natural England, 
Consumer Council for 
Water, Environmental/EU 
Directives (Habitats and 
Water Framework 
Directives). 

Science/research - 
Research and modelling 
community, Research 
councils and research 
centres (Tyndall Centre, 
Met Office/Hadley Centre, 
Walker Institute, Grantham 
Institute), Local climate 
change partnerships 
(London Climate Change 
Partnership). UK Climate 
Impacts Programme, 
Consultancies, UK Water 
Industry Research 
(UKWIR). 


 

Emergency 
services/planning - 
Emergency services,  
Health service/hospitals,  
Local resilience forums, 
Mutual aid agreements, 
Emergency equipment 
stores, Bottled water 
stocks, Logistics contracts 
and multi-agency 
assistance. 

Agriculture/landuse – 
Farmers, Land managers, 
National Farmers Union 
(NFU), Forestry 
Commission and forestry 
organisations (National 
Forest, Wildlife Trusts, 
Crown Estate, National 
Parks). 

Water companies - Other 
water companies – e.g. 
water transfer or sewerage 
provision, WaterUK 
(WaterUK Climate Change 
Group). 

Flood and coastal 
defence - Flood defence 
policy, Shoreline 
Management Plan 
process, Coastal flood 
protection, Flood planning 
groups/land drainage 
bodies (Inland Drainage 
Boards). 


 

Utilities - Gas and 
electricity supply and 
distribution, Standby 
power, Liquid fuel, ICT - 
particularly mobile 
communications, 

Surface water 
management - 
Organisations involved in 
surface water 
management (local 
authorities, internal 
drainage boards and the 

Customers – Domestic, 
Commercial, Industrial 
(manufacturing and food 
production). 


 




145  

Telemetry. Highways Agency). 


 

Transport - Highways 
authorities, Rail  

Company – employees, 
contractors, 
shareholders/investors. 


 

Owners and operators of 
third-party assets - 
British Waterways. 

Suppliers – Chemicals, 
Emergency bottled water, 
Consumables. 

Others – Developers, 
White goods 
manufacturers, Media, 
Tourist organisations. 


   .    




146  

ANNEX I 

The full list of organisations from the water sector that provided adaptation reports. 


 

44.  Anglian Water 

45. Bournemouth and West Hampshire Water 

46. Bristol Water 

47. Cambridge Water Company 

48. Dee Valley Water 

49. Essex and Suffolk Water (joint report with Northumbrian Water) 

50. Northumbrian Water 

51. Ofwat 

52. Portsmouth Water 

53. Severn Trent Water 

54. Southern Water 

55. South East Water 

56. South Staffordshire Water 

57. South West Water 

58. Sutton and East Surrey Water 

59. Thames Water 

60. United Utilities 

61. Veolia Water Central 

62. Veolia Water East 

63. Veolia Water Southeast 

64. Welsh Water 

65. Wessex Water 

66. Yorkshire Water 




