



National adaptation programme: Analytical annex - economics of the national adaptation programme




www.gov.uk


  

The National Adaptation Programme Report: 
Analytical Annex 
Economics of the National Adaptation Programme 

Publication: 1 July 2013 

http://www.data.gov.uk/�


 

© Crown copyright (2013)  

You may re-use this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or 
medium, under the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit 
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/ or write to the 
Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or e-mail: 
psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk  

This document/publication is also available on our website at: 

https://www.gov.uk/government/policies/adapting-to-climate-change   

Any enquiries regarding this document/publication should be sent to us at: 

climate.ready@defra.gsi.gov.uk  


 

PB13942a 

http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/
mailto:psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk
https://www.gov.uk/government/policies/adapting-to-climate-change
mailto:climate.ready@defra.gsi.gov.uk


 

Contents 
1. Economics of the National Adaptation Programme ......................................................... 1 

1.1. Summary ................................................................................................................... 1 

1.2. Policy implications ..................................................................................................... 2 

2. What is the role for government in adaptation? ............................................................... 4 

2.1. Private action and government intervention .............................................................. 4 

2.2. Uncertainty ................................................................................................................ 5 

2.3. Barriers to adaptation ................................................................................................ 6 

2.4. Categorising adaptation ............................................................................................ 7 

2.5. Adaptive capacity .................................................................................................... 10 

3. The costs and benefits of adaptation ............................................................................. 11 

3.1. Local level costs and benefits ................................................................................. 11 

3.2. Overall costs and benefits of adaptation ................................................................. 13 

4. Growth and climate change adaptation ......................................................................... 17 

4.1 Adaptation protects growth and allocative efficiency ................................................ 18 

4.2 Other economic impacts of adaptation ..................................................................... 20 

4.3. Economic growth and social welfare ....................................................................... 21 

5. Future evidence needs .................................................................................................. 22 

5.1. The macroeconomics of climate change ................................................................. 22 

5.2 Next steps ................................................................................................................ 23 

Appendix 1: Supplementary material on adaptive capacity................................................ 26 

Appendix 2. Advantages and disadvantages of each appraisal methodology ................... 29 


 




  1 


                                           

1. Economics of the National Adaptation 
Programme 
This analytical annex contains the current evidence base for adaptation decision-making. It 
presents the analysis that informs the National Adaptation Programme’s approach to 
adaptation to climate change. Focus areas and programme actions in the main report are 
based on latest evidence and analysis.  

Understanding of adaptation, both in government and beyond, is an evolving process. 
Research will continue to ensure adaptation is cost effective, efficient and equitable (both 
privately and publically). 

A formal impact assessment is not required because the National Adaptation Programme 
is not of a regulatory nature. It is important, however, to lay out the evidence and analysis 
that underpins the National Adaptation Programme. This document sets out the rationale 
for government intervention and wider societal action to ensure the UK is resilient to 
climate change. 

It is not possible to provide an exact measurement of costs and benefits of a well-adapted 
UK. Adaptation needs to be embedded in a wide range of existing policies. The National 
Adaptation Programme report reflects a series of voluntary agreements across 
government and society more widely.  

1.1. Summary 
The National Adaptation Programme (NAP) report presents ongoing policies and voluntary 
agreements to ensure that the UK is resilient to the risks of climate change. To ensure the 
programme is well targeted, the NAP is based on a wide range of evidence and analysis.   

Two major pieces of government funded research form the basis of government 
understanding of adaptation to climate risks. Main risks and opportunities are compiled 
in the Climate Change Risk Assessment (CCRA).1 The CCRA draws together the latest 
advances in climate science and currently available evidence on climate change. Defra 
has recently published the Economics of Climate Resilience (ECR).2 The ECR sets out an 
economic framework for adaptation in the UK. Many other research projects also help 
develop specific objectives highlighted in the main NAP report. 


 

1 The CCRA was published in January 2012 and is available online at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/uk-climate-change-risk-assessment-government-report  
2 The ECR was published in March 2013 and is available online at: 
http://randd.defra.gov.uk/Default.aspx?Module=More&Location=None&ProjectID=18016 

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/uk-climate-change-risk-assessment-government-report
http://randd.defra.gov.uk/Default.aspx?Module=More&Location=None&ProjectID=18016


   2 


                                           

Effective national adaptation requires a societal effort from the private sector, 
government and local communities. Private actions to adapt are crucial given the 
projected impacts of climate change are highly localised. In the absence of factors which 
may lead a market to function inefficiently, a household or organisation will choose to 
adapt if the benefit of doing so exceeds the cost. However, there are barriers to adaptation 
which may prevent or delay action. It may be appropriate for government intervention to 
ensure markets do function efficiently.3 Section 2 focuses its attention on the role for 
government and analyses fundamental aspects of adaptation including the role of 
uncertainty and ‘adaptive capacity’.  

Appraisal needs to account for the full costs and benefits of all adaptation options. 
However, many costs and benefits of adaptation are difficult to quantify. This annex 
outlines appropriate appraisal methods and how an analyst can deal with issues such as 
uncertainty, data availability and proportionality.4 Section 3 reviews the costs and benefits 
of adaptation, both locally and overall for the UK.  

Appropriate adaptation is supportive of economic growth. It avoids unnecessary 
damages which may disrupt economic activity such as consumption, investment, the 
appropriate allocation of public finance and trade. Section 4 analyses the relationship 
between adaptation, productivity and economic growth. 

Finally, Section 5 makes recommendations for future evidence needs. 

1.2. Policy implications 
The development of evidence to inform the NAP has identified 6 policy implications. 

1) Uncertainty is not a legitimate reason to postpone decisions by government, 
business or society  

Uncertainty does not mean that action should be delayed. It means that decision-
making should be an iterative process and incorporate regular reassessment to 
consider the latest available information. Appraisal options exist that account for 
deep uncertainty. Risk management needs integration into policy development to 
account for the uncertainty of future climate change. 


 

2) Decisions today can create sunk costs for the future and ‘lock-in’ future 
vulnerability5  


 

3 It should be noted that there may be instances where government intervention is unable to improve 
efficiency and as a result it would not be to cost effective to do so 
4 Proportionality infers that the appropriate amount of time and resource expended on an assessment should 
reflect the size of the expected costs and benefits.  
5 A sunk cost is a cost that once incurred and cannot be recovered. Large sunk costs make reversal very 
expensive and could lock the UK into path which makes us vulnerable to climate change.  


 




  3 


Long-term investment decisions (eg development/building of national infrastructure) 
that lead to substantial sunk costs must be based on the best available information, 
analysis of scenarios and threshold points. These decisions should incorporate 
future flexibility/reversibility and account for wider sets of extreme scenarios and 
threshold points. This can prevent long-term investments becoming locked into 
future vulnerabilities and avoid unnecessary costs. 


 

3) Government policy should be developed in such a way that it does not crowd out 
private initiative  

The costs and benefits of adaptation fall mainly on private individuals and 
organisations. Government actions must not replace private initiative, which is likely 
to be more efficient. However, there are barriers to adaptation which may require 
future government intervention. 


 

4) Government needs to ensure that action on climate change adaptation is cost 
effective  

Policy should be based on a sound evidence base and a proportionate assessment 
of costs and benefits. Adaptation may increase or decrease the costs and benefits 
of a project; these need accounting for appropriately. This emphasises the need for 
analysis to follow the Green Book and supplementary guidance for the appraisal of 
climate change adaptation options. 


 

5) Adaptation can protect growth 
Adaptation is fundamentally an economic issue. 
Adaptation protects growth and ‘allocative efficiency’. Cost effective adaptation 
delivers a net benefit and avoids unnecessary damage costs of climate change that 
would hinder economic growth. 
Adaptation activities may have a range of other economic impacts in addition 
to their aim of avoiding damage. In some cases they may stimulate innovation 
and enterprise, but they may also divert resources from other beneficial uses. The 
benefits of adaptation need to be considered alongside the costs in order to 
evaluate the extent to which it is net beneficial as it is likely to vary across different 
sectors, local context and specific activities. The timing of those benefits also need 
to be considered. 


 

6) There remain wide gaps in the evidence base  
Government and research institutions need to work alongside each other to develop 
evidence and inform policy. Future evidence needs are discussed in Section 5 of 
this annex. 


 




  4 


                                           

2. What is the role for government in 
adaptation? 
Climate models indicate that many parts of the UK6 are likely to experience rising average 
temperatures, more heavy rainfall (leading to flooding), rising sea levels and faster coastal 
erosion, more heatwaves, droughts and extreme weather events as this century 
progresses.7 Further information is available on Gov.uk pages about scientific evidence to 
help us understand climate change and on Government Office for Science pages.8,9 The 
CCRA shows that projected climate change presents a set of opportunities and threats for 
the UK economy. 

2.1. Private action and government intervention 
Climate change impacts are not always a ‘market’ failure as they constitute a private cost 
(and in some cases a benefit) to individuals. In many cases the costs and benefits of 
adaptation are borne by the same individuals (or groups of individuals). If adaptation to 
climate change is in the private interests of individuals and organisations (ie cost effective) 
then in theory it should occur automatically. The value of adaptation will appropriately be 
reflected in market prices. Individuals and organisations will take advantage of 
opportunities and will act against the risk of threats through the market.  

However, barriers to adaptation do exist. These barriers prevent a socially efficient level of 
adaptation from occurring. It could result in too little or too much adaptation taking place, 
leading to a misallocation of resources. Government has a role to play to ensure 
adaptation actions are economically efficient. It also has responsibility to ensure public 
goods, such as national infrastructure (eg the road network) and non-market goods (eg 
environmental amenities) are resilient to climate change. Barriers are discussed in more 
detail in Section 2.3. 

Government also needs to avoid crowding out private investment into adaptation. Certain 
adaptation actions could provide a business opportunity, or are incentivised by self-
interest, which removes the need for government to provide them. Furthermore, climate 
change impacts are localised. Appropriate adaptation will vary according to geographic 
location. If organisations and individuals have the best knowledge about their local context, 
then it will be more efficient for adaptation to occur privately.  


 

6 Impacts will vary geographically across the country 
7 UK Climate Projections (UKCP09) can be found online at: http://ukclimateprojections.defra.gov.uk/  
8 https://www.gov.uk/government/policies/taking-international-action-to-mitigate-climate-change/supporting-
pages/scientific-evidence-to-help-us-understand-climate-change  
9 http://www.bis.gov.uk/go-science/climatescience  

http://ukclimateprojections.defra.gov.uk/
https://www.gov.uk/government/policies/taking-international-action-to-mitigate-climate-change/supporting-pages/scientific-evidence-to-help-us-understand-climate-change
https://www.gov.uk/government/policies/taking-international-action-to-mitigate-climate-change/supporting-pages/scientific-evidence-to-help-us-understand-climate-change
http://www.bis.gov.uk/go-science/climatescience


   5 


2.2. Uncertainty 
Uncertainty is fundamental to climate change. This is because of the time-scales over 
which climate change is expected to occur and the extent to which it will impact on society. 
There is also uncertainty about expected weather conditions as a result of changes in 
climate. Uncertainty can magnify barriers to adaptation and attract government 
intervention that leads to a crowding out effect.  

Appropriate adaptation to climate change is affected by uncertainty. This is linked with a) 
the projected paths of greenhouse gas emissions b) changes in socio-economic context c) 
impact of second order effects and d) adaptation response. Decision-makers face difficult 
trade-offs given the prevalence of these uncertainties. Table 1 below summarises some 
major sources of uncertainty which need to be accounted for. 

Table 1: Major sources of climate change uncertainty for 
decision makers  

Source of 
uncertainty 

Description 

Uncertainty of 
future climate 

• Natural Climate Variability is caused by the chaotic nature of 
the climate system and external factors like changes in solar 
radiation 

• We have only an incomplete knowledge of the climate system 
and this means we are unable to model it perfectly, eg: 

• Uncertainty around feedback mechanisms 
• Fat-tailed distributions of climate risks 

• There is uncertainty surrounding future greenhouse gas 
emissions. In turn emissions are dependent on a number of 
assumptions including population, economic growth and type and 
quantity of energy use 

Uncertainty of 
future climate 
impacts 

• We currently have incomplete knowledge of what climate impacts 
will be, which means we are unable to model them perfectly. 
Moreover impacts vastly depend on the specific location and 
context 

• The socio-economic context can affect the vulnerability of 
society to climate impacts (such as demographics, regional 
development, water consumption and environmental degradation)

• There is wide uncertainty and potential limitations of modelling 
knock-on effects of climate impacts on society and the economy 

Uncertainty in 
adaptation 
response 

• The level and type of adaptation response, particularly in relation 
to reactive adaptation action, will greatly vary according to the 
specific features of an organisation 

• There is also uncertainty and wide evidence gaps with relation to 


 




  6 


the level of adaptive capacity and the pervasiveness of barriers 
to adaptation 

Source: table based on ECR, CCRA, Vivid Economics (2013)10 

The presence of uncertainty risks ‘maladaptation’. These are unintended side-effects of 
implementing adaptation actions. Uncertainty also means it is unlikely to predict the correct 
future scenario and fully adapt to it.11 The risks of maladaptation and committing to adapt 
to a wrong scenario need careful consideration.  

Uncertainty does not mean that action should be postponed. It means that decision-
making must be iterative and regularly re-assess available information.12 Risk 
management needs to be integrated into the development and implementation of policy. 
Investment decisions that are long-term (e.g. development/building of national 
infrastructure) or that create substantial sunk costs are necessarily based on the best 
available information. These decisions should incorporate future flexibility/reversibility 
taking into account a wider set of more extreme scenarios and threshold points.  

2.3. Barriers to adaptation 
The existence of barriers to adaptation mean types of adaptation and amount of effort 
could be suboptimal. This provides a rationale for government intervention to ensure a 
socially efficient level of adaptation. The ECR identifies market failures, behavioural 
constraints, policy failures and governance failures as the most important barriers. 
Throughout this report we refer to ‘barriers to adaptation’ as a collective term for all cases 
which may require government to intervene in a market. 

A market failure exists when market prices do not lead to an efficient level of adaptation. 
These include informational failures, public goods and moral hazard.  

Information failures exist because organisations and individuals do not have 
perfect information on future climate impacts. This makes it hard for them to plan 

                                            
10 Vivid Economics, The macroeconomics of climate change, report prepared for Defra, May 2013 available 
online at: 
http://randd.defra.gov.uk/Default.aspx?Menu=Menu&Module=More&Location=None&Completed=0&ProjectI
D=18639  
11 For a further discussion on the role of government in adaptation see ‘Adapting to Climate Change 
Analysing the Role of Government’, available at 
http://archive.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/documents/analysing-role-government.pdf as well as the 
ECR project.  
12 For more information see detailed discussion see adaptation pathways by Ranger, N., Millner, A., Dietz, 
S., Fankhauser, S., Lopez, A and Ruta, A. (2010) ‘Adaptation in the UK: a decision making process’ 
Gratnham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment Policy Brief, available online at: 
http://www2.lse.ac.uk/GranthamInstitute/publications/Policy/docs/PB-Ranger-adaptation-UK.pdf. The ECR 
also sets of illustrative adaptation ‘roadmaps’ for each of its nine reports.  


  

http://randd.defra.gov.uk/Default.aspx?Menu=Menu&Module=More&Location=None&Completed=0&ProjectID=18639
http://randd.defra.gov.uk/Default.aspx?Menu=Menu&Module=More&Location=None&Completed=0&ProjectID=18639
http://archive.defra.gov.uk/environment/climate/documents/analysing-role-government.pdf
http://www2.lse.ac.uk/GranthamInstitute/publications/Policy/docs/PB-Ranger-adaptation-UK.pdf


   7 


efficiently. Knowledge about national and global climate impacts could also be seen 
as a public good. 

Public goods can be consumed and enjoyed without reducing their availability to 
others and their consumption cannot be prevented. They may occur in the case of 
infrastructure that protects from climate hazards (e.g. flood defences) or to ensure 
other types of infrastructure (e.g. transport networks) are resilient to future climate.  

Non-market values are an important part of social welfare but are not included in 
market prices nor explicitly traded. Often these are public goods (e.g. clean air) but 
can also be private (e.g. value of time). Their omission leads to a market failure. 
Government may need to intervene to ensure appropriate valuation of non-market 
values so they can account for them in the appraisal of adaptation options. 

Moral hazard exists when an organisation or household does not adapt to climate 
change despite it being a rational decision. The barrier is the belief that someone 
else will deal with the potential impacts for them (e.g. with subsidies from the 
government). 

Policy failures occur when the framework of regulation and policy incentives creates 
barriers to effective adaptation. This can happen in the presence of competing policy 
objectives. Similar to the concept of market failure, which as discussed above is a situation 
that prevents an efficient market solution, this concept must not be interpreted as a failure 
of policy, but as a systemic characteristic which prevents an efficient policy solution. 

Governance failures occur when institutional decision-making processes create barriers 
to effective adaptation. An example is where sectors are fragmented and many parties are 
involved in adaptation actions. In this case there could be a lack of coordination. 

Behavioural constraints exist because humans are not always perfectly rational. Inertia 
and focus on the short-term could result in an inefficient level of adaptation. Maladaptation 
is a possible form of behavioural constraint. For example, if a long-term investment 
decision ignores adaptation then inefficient retrofitting may become necessary at a later 
stage. 

2.4. Categorising adaptation 
The ECR analyses climate change adaptation by sector: agriculture and forestry, built 
environment, infrastructure, health and wellbeing, business, local government and natural 
environment. The chosen approach is consistent with previous publications and provides 


 




  8 


an economic framework for analysing adaptation actions.13 While there are other methods 
for categorising and analysing adaptation, it is naturally a very cross-cutting area.14  

Table 2 presents the NAP themes by category and identifies the rationale for action and 
issues faced.15 Henceforth, we refer to these as ‘policy areas’. Rationale for action is 
categorised according adaptation barriers identified above: (m) for market failure, (p) for 
‘competing policy objectives’16, (b) for behavioural constraints and (g) for governance 
failure.  These tables avoid specific discussion of adaptive capacity which is covered in 
more detail in Section 2.2. 

Table 2. Climate change adaptation analysed by policy areas 

Policy area Rationale for action 

Agriculture  Existing dependencies (m): external costs/benefits imposed on sector by another party 
eg value chains17, cross-sectoral dependencies18 

Competing policy objectives (p): there is a trade-off between flexibility for farmers to 
undertake large investments such as water reservoirs and existing regulations in place 

Changing farming practices (b): resistance to embrace new technologies and fear of 
taking actions deemed irrelevant 

Forestry 


 

Presence of externalities (m): notable proportions of forest are not actively managed. 
Where active management, failure to account for non-market values eg ecosystem 
services 

Lack of formal markets (p): failure of policy to internalise ecosystem service benefits. 
Current level of grants in place to address this are not likely to be sufficient to increase 
forest land-cover where land competes with more economically productive uses eg 
agriculture 

Short-sightedness (b): failure of commercial managers to plant with a view to future 
climate change in favour of present threats eg pests and disease 

                                            
13 This includes the CCRA and the ECR. 
14 Other ways to organise adaptation incldues by the type of social activity that it affects eg households, 
businesses, public organisations and third sectors. Another way is to organise adaptation by types of 
physical impact eg rain patterns, sea level rise, overheating, etc. Alternatively it could be by the type of 
resource affected eg land, water, etc. 
15 These are taken broadly from the sector reports published in the ECR. See individual reports for full 
discussion on the barriers to adaptation. 
16See Section 2.3 for a brief explanation of the economic term ‘policy failure’. Here  for clarity it is expressed 
as a conflicting policy objective that could represent a barrier to adaptation. 
17 The actions of some in the value chain can affect the resilience of others, eg farmers cannot grow climate 
resilient varieities until  successful research has developed them.  
18 Agricultural activities are inherently linked with the natural environment. Therefore, the resilience of the 
agriculture system and its adaptation actions can impact on the natural environment, and vice versa.  


    9 


Built environment 
and infrastructure 

Infrastructure dependencies (m): sectors having external costs on another sector that 
are ignored in decision-making 

Competing adaptation and mitigation objectives (p): there is a potential trade-off 
between policy objectives that aim to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and those aiming 
to address overheating and improve indoor air quality in buildings. Future analysis could 
look into this, and also explore the impacts of potential future increases of uptake of air 
conditioning 

Rental housing market not conducive to adaptation (b): landlords do not benefit in 
adaptation investment and short-term tenants have little incentive to invest either 

Intra-sector independency of transport infrastructure (m): transport is a complex 
network and impacts to one part of the network may lead to further impact on other areas 
through diversions, increased accident risk and demand spikes for different modes of 
transport   

Businesses and 
services 

Supply chain dependencies (m): lack of transparency and understanding of the supply 
chain can lead to external effects of one company on another 

Informational failures (m): can provide too much or too little information on the risks of 
climate change and appropriate responses 

Policy may limit supply chain diversification (p): regulatory requirements may inhibit 
supply chain diversification 

Choice of production strategy (g): businesses may trade-off flexibility and resilience, eg 
just in time delivery likely to lower costs/ increase efficiency but can hinder short-term 
resilience 

Health and wellbeing Dependencies (m): most notably being the requirement of most emergency services to 
rely on public infrastructure  

Vulnerable groups in society (b): these groups can be marginalised from emergency 
planning processes, or do not realise they are at risk at all 

Poor coordination/communication between organisations (g): this could be, for 
example, the sharing of information on vulnerable groups between voluntary organisations 
in the local community and public services such as hospitals 

Natural environment Reluctance of land owners (b/m): to adopt measures (e.g. natural flood defence) 
proposed by external parties. Also a clear example of differences between the private and 
social benefits of natural environment 

Difficulty to co-ordinate landowners (g): a natural environment problem may affect 
multiple landowners who all need to act together in public interest 

Source: adapted from ECR 


 


  10 

                                           

2.5. Adaptive capacity 
Adaptive capacity is the ability of individuals, organisations or entire sectors to adapt to 
climate change. This is strongly linked with resilience. Adaptive capacity is defined as: 

“The ability of a system/organisation to design or implement effective adaptation 
strategies to adjust to information about potential climate change (including climate 
variability and extremes), moderate potential damages, and take advantage of 
opportunities, or cope with the consequences”19  

Adaptive capacity can partially be explained by the aforementioned barriers to adaptation. 
If barriers prevent an efficient level of adaptation from occurring then it clearly determines 
the level of adaptive capacity. 20   

Market failures, for example, lower adaptive capacity when there is a diversity of 
responsibility for an adaptation decision between multiple organisations. This 
highlights cases where adaptation provides a social benefit but lacks private 
incentives to act. 

Policy failures21, for example, can lower adaptive capacity if information provided 
by government overwhelms, or is insufficient to influence, those who need to 
implement adaptation actions.  

Governance failures, for example, can lower adaptive capacity in organisations 
due to poor leadership. Inability to influence business partners and suppliers may 
pose risks under projected climate change. 

Behavioural constraints, for example, will lower adaptive capacity when there is a 
lack of awareness of climate change or lack of willingness to accept and account for 
the associated risks. 

However, even if all barriers are removed there will still be residual adaptive capacity 
constraints which mean certain groups are less able to undertake adaptation. This is 
mainly an issue of vulnerability for which government may wish to intervene on grounds of 
equity. For example, some households may lack the financial capacity to undertake 
adaptation actions even if their value is correctly priced in the market. 


 

19 From ECR which in turns refers to Ballard et al (2011), CCRA – modified IPCC definition to support project 
focus on management of future risks 
20 It is important to note that short-term responses to adaptation are a continuous process. Human 
adaptation has occurred throughout history in response to changing stimuli such as climate. From this 
perspective one might conclude that humans are already well adapted to the current climates which they 
inhabit and are not starting from a point of zero adaptation. 
21 ‘Policy failure’ is a well established economic concept explained in Section 2.3 but no value judgment is 
intended on specific policies. Just as a market failure is a problem which prevents the market from operating 
efficiently, the economic concept of policy failure must not be interpreted as a failure of the policy to bring 
about a particular solution, but is rather a systemic problem which prevents an efficient policy solution to a 
problem. 


 


  11 

                                           

More research is needed to develop understanding of adaptive capacity. Whilst the drivers 
of high and low adaptive capacity are becoming more apparent, it is not yet possible to 
compare and prioritise them effectively. 

Appendix 1 contains some definitional material and a summary of where we believe 
adaptive capacity is high and low at the household, organisational and sectoral level. 

3. The costs and benefits of adaptation 
To inform adaptation decisions it is necessary to analyse costs and benefits at both the 
local and national level. Analysis of local costs and benefits of adaptation options is 
fundamental given the heterogeneous nature of climate change impacts. In these cases, 
attention will focus primarily on direct impacts borne by the local community. 

Analysis at the national level is more complex.  It will not be enough to add up sector and 
local specific costs and benefits. For it to be representative, a wider consideration of 
indirect and non-localised effects needs careful aggregation to ascertain societal costs and 
benefits of adaptation. A drought, for example, will have direct impacts at a local level, but 
indirectly may have wider market and non-market knock-on effects (such as on food 
market prices if the supply of food is affected) and this would have to be considered in the 
policy appraisal.  

Effective adaptation needs to consider when climate change impacts have significant 
indirect effects which lead to knock-on consequences. Local analyses have no incentive to 
account for these effects if they fall outside their jurisdiction. In this situation an externality 
may be imposed on society whose welfare is affected but not accounted for.  

3.1. Local level costs and benefits 
Planning decisions, be they in the public or private sector, require a full set of costs and 
benefits to ensure appropriate actions are taken. Evidence on local level appraisal for 
adaptation options is currently sparse. Nevertheless, the varied nature of localised climate 
impacts and vulnerability will determine appropriate appraisal techniques for cost-benefit 
analysis. This could result in different conclusions for different locations even if identical 
options are assessed.  

Acknowledging this evidence gap, the ECR develops a toolkit for the analysis of appraisal 
options.22 A number of different appraisal techniques can be adopted in the context of 
adaptation. Here we provide a brief explanation of these techniques. More information on 


 

22 Cost benefit analysis is considered in the second ‘phase’ of the Economics of Climate Resilience.  A specific analysis 
of natural flood management options in  Pickering, North Yorkshire is included to demonstrate application of the 
approach. 


 


  12 

appraisal techniques and a discussion of their advantages and disadvantages based on 
the ECR project can be found in Appendix 2. 

Multi-Criteria Analysis (MCA): a mixed qualitative and quantitative approach 
which provides a ‘ranking’ of initiatives based on weighting and scoring of a set of 
monetary and non-monetary criteria. 

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis (CEA): a quantitative approach which ranks policy 
options based on the ratio between a specific output/benefit and costs. 

Scenario-Based Cost-Benefit Analysis (SBCBA): a quantitative approach which 
assesses costs and benefits across different scenarios. 

Robust Decision Making (RDM): a quantitative approach which assesses the 
proposed initiatives across all plausible states of the world and identifies the most 
robust initiative across these. 

Real Options Analysis (ROA): an extension of cost-benefit analysis which 
estimates the ‘option value’ associated with each initiative, ie the option to delay or 
adjust in the future. It calculates the Net Present Value (NPV) of each initiative 
given the particular actions that could be taken given different states of the world 
being realised and the probabilities of these occurring. 

The choice of the most appropriate methodology depends on an assessment of the 
availability of data and suitability to specific local circumstances. Figure 1 provides a flow 
diagram illustrating the process for choosing the appropriate methodology in developing a 
robust cost benefit analysis.  




Figure 1. Framework for gathering data and selecting appraisal 
methodology 


 

Source: ECR 

3.2. Overall costs and benefits of adaptation 
A comprehensive analysis of the overall costs and benefits is not yet possible to achieve. 
Evidence remains patchy and reflects the difficulty in scaling up individual and local 
adaptation costs and benefits to a representative national scale. The ECR reflects our 
progress in understanding this complex area.   

The ECR establishes situations across the policy areas where case for action is likely to 
exist from private adaptation and government intervention. The ECR assesses the extent 
of current and future adaptation anticipated in the absence of government intervention by 
sector.23  

Table 3 provides indicative findings of the potential value of adaptation facing each NAP 
policy area.24 These findings are based on UKCP09 central projections for climate change. 
They do not consider uncertainty explicitly and are compared against a baseline of no 
projected climate change. It is important to note that the list of impacts and illustrative 

                                            
23 Where government has responsibilities at risk of climate change, adaptation actions will need to be 
undertaken directly as opposed to intervening in private markets.  
24 Findings provided in Table 3 provide a summary of the ‘scale of the challenge’ identified in the ECR. 
Please see individual reports for a full discussion of these scenarios and the case for action 


 

  13 


 


  14 

future impacts is not a comprehensive list of the economic consequences of climate 
change. 

Table 3. ECR and illustrative future Impacts 

Policy Area Illustrative future impacts 

Agriculture 
Increased prevalence of drought could reduce wheat yield between 11% and 33% 
compared to no climate change.    

• Substituting towards drought resistant varieties may reduce this shortfall in 
yield to between 5% and 25%  

• Increasing irrigation can also reduce this shortfall and may even improve 
yield compared to no climate change. In this case the expected overall 
change in yield is between -14% and +48% 

Despite pro-active adaptation pest and disease impacts may reduce wheat yield by 
between 11% and 29%. 
Knowledge transfer and education for farmers on adaptation measures could 
increase yield between 19% and 80%. 

Forestry 
A primary difficulty is to mitigate uncertainties and exposure to pests and 
pathogens via diversification. Likely impacts of pests or pathogens are uncertain. 
Diversifying species and restocking has the potential to reduce but not fully 
mitigate the exposure to these. 

• The impact of green spruce aphid on the forest could to reduce yield by on 
average 3% 

• Species diversification and restocking could reduce the potential forest 
area affected by spruce in 2050 from between 26% and 22%. 

• Diversifying planting could reduce the potential impact of a species 
destroying disease on timber production by 50 million cubic metres.  

Built environment and 
infrastructure  

Climate change could lead to increased uptake and use of air cooling systems in 
buildings.  

• If the uptake of air conditioning systems continues at today’s rate by 2050, 
so that around 1% of households in those areas have cooling (compared 
with 0.6% in 2010), energy demand for cooling could triple between 2010 
and 2050 in London.  

• If in 2050 half of the households in London had air conditioning, energy 
demand for cooling could be around 37 times higher in 2050 compared to 
no climate change and current air conditioning take-up trends. 

Prolonged rainfall causing flooding will lead to road and rail delays and rail 
cancellations in the 2020s and 2050s which may have a severe impact if no 
adaptation occurs. 

• Adaptive actions include improving drainage management plans and 
improvement of the standard and capacity of drainage systems 

• Adaptive capabilities are likely to be lower in the 2020s reflecting their 
long-term nature of infrastructure assets 

• Greater certainty in benefits of adaptation for rail; substantial uncertainty 
on the benefits of adaptation exist for roads 

Businesses and 
services 

A 3-6 month suspension of production caused by a weather-related interruption of 
supply chains for a major car manufacturer could be the equivalent of output worth 
between £600 million and £1,100 million. 

• Adaptation actions could reduce this to 2-4 weeks, reducing production 


 


  15 

interruption by between £400 million and £1,000 million 
Climate change could prompt new or emerging markets. Demand for products to 
help society adapt could represent a benefit for certain sectors (for example 
chemical industries). 

Health and wellbeing 
The estimated costs associated with the potential mental health effects of the 2007 
floods in Hull (including treatment, lost work time and reduced quality of life) was in 
the range of £4 million to over £600 million, depending on assumptions. 
The costs of temporarily closing a hospital for 10 – 60 days could be in the range 
of£2 million to £20 million 

Natural environment 
An analysis of natural flood defences in Pickering, using robust decision making, 
compares the implementation package of 7 natural flood defence measures 
against a baseline in which no measures are implemented. 

• Under central estimates net benefits of implementing the measures are 
over £3.2 million (and this is believed to be a conservative estimate).  

• This is robust apart from only the most extreme of sensitivity analyses. 

Source: adapted from ECR 

Adaptation has also been analysed from the macroeconomic perspective. Models exist 
which attempt to integrate climate science into an economic framework. It has been 
estimated in the wider European context that the value of potential damages avoided could 
be in the ratio of 4:1 to the cost of adaptation25. These macroeconomic models provide 
useful illustration of the potential trade-off between adaptation to climate change and 
mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions.  

However, there is no comprehensive model of economic impact of climate change. They 
suffer from two main issues which limit their applicability to adaptation in the UK.26 Firstly 
they are high level, focusing on global or very large regions (e.g. Europe). This inhibits 
interpretation of findings specific to the UK without making restrictive assumptions about 
the heterogeneity of climate impacts at a local level. Secondly, they ignore interactions 
between sectors and the second-order impacts of climate change on economic activity, 
such as market adjustments to climate impacts. Future economic research in adaptation 
needs to join up our knowledge of bottom-up (e.g. sector specific analysis) and top-down 
(e.g. overarching) approaches. 

Conversely, projections of changes in climate variables are subject to large uncertainties 
which are often not being incorporated into economic models available in the literature.27 
These uncertainties are of different types, as discussed in Section 2.2. Firstly, most of the 
available models adopt ranges for global mean temperature that can be considered an 

                                            
25 These are called ‘adaptation integrated assessment models’ (AD-IAMs).  Calculation based on the ratio 
between the cost of adaptation and the difference between gross and residual damage from  table 3 pag 24 
in de Bruin, K.C., Dellink, R.B. and Agrawala, S. (2009) “Economic Aspects of Adaptation to Climate 
Change: Integrated Assessment Modelling of Adaptation Costs and Benefits” OECD Environment Working 
Papers No.6, OECD Publishing 
26 See discussion in Section 4 of this annex. For a full discussion, see the Macroeconomics of Climate 
Change project 
27 For a more in depth discussion see Macroeconomics of Climate Change project 


 


  16 

                                           

underestimate of the range of possible temperatures.28 Secondly, they often do not take 
into account the potential negative consequences of extreme weather events. Finally, they 
do not incorporate the potential existence of ‘tipping points’ in the climate system that, if 
passed, could result in irreversible changes to how the climate system functions, and 
potentially larger impacts on economic and social systems.29  

Figure 2 illustrates the consequences of some of these uncertainties, particularly those 
due to incomplete knowledge of the climate system. It provides 10 estimates of the 
probability of average global temperature changes happening. Equilibrium ‘climate 
sensitivity’, the expected global surface temperature change under a sustained doubling of 
atmospheric carbon dioxide, drives economic impacts. Due to uncertainties in the methods 
used to estimate the equilibrium climate sensitivity, it is usually expressed in terms of a 
range of values with an associated probability distribution. These probability distributions 
display ‘fat upper tails’. This means that, whilst considered unlikely, it is not possible to rule 
out high values of temperature change which would have significant economic impacts. 


 

28 Ibid 
29 For further discussion see Macroeconomics of Cliamte Change project, which in turns refer to Lenton et 
al., 2008 




Figure 2. Probability densities of the estimated range of 
equilibrium climate sensitivity from various studies (the 
equilibrium climate sensitivity is the expected global surface 
temperature change under a sustained doubling of 
atmospheric carbon dioxide)30 


 

4. Growth and climate change adaptation 
Growth and climate change are fundamentally related. This is because climate change is 
an input to economic activity.31 Usually the damage to economic activity is assumed to 
increase proportionately more than changes in climate.32  

Figure 3 demonstrates the impact of increasing greenhouse gas emissions and resulting 
climate change on economic activity. These could be direct impacts. Sectors like 
agriculture and water are dependent on climate and weather patterns. Changes to these 
systems will alter the ways in which some sectors operate. Climate change will also have 

                                            
30 Vivid Economics, The macroeconomics of climate change, report prepared for Defra, May 2013 which 
quotes EPA (2010) 
31 For a full discussion of aspects of climate change with macroeconomic relevance see  Vivid Economics, 
The macroeconomics of climate change, report prepared for Defra, May 2013 
32 For example Integrated Assessment Models make assumptions about the convexity of the damage 
function caused by climate change. It is often assumed to be quadratic. 


 

  17 




wider economic impacts. For example, many sectors are dependent on the availability of 
water. Water demand deficits are expected to increase with climate change.33  

Figure 3 Impact of climate change on the economy  


 

Source: adapted from Vivid Economics (2013) 

Adaptation plays a role in determining economic growth. Its main function is to protect 
long-term growth through, for example, ensuring the allocative efficiency of current and 
future resources. Failure to adapt could lead to unnecessary damages and inefficiency. 
Adaptation may also provide opportunities.   

The following sub-section outlines analysis on the relationship between adaptation and 
growth through avoided damage. Section 4.2 discusses the additional positive and 
negative impacts on growth that could arise from adaptation. Section 4.3 considers 
adaptation in the wider context of social welfare as opposed to growth.  

4.1 Adaptation protects growth and allocative efficiency  
Allocative efficiency is able to protect economic growth.34 It means resources are being 
used in the most efficient way possible. This includes accounting for the opportunity cost of 
foregone investment elsewhere in the economy. Failure to adapt to climate change would 

                                            
33 The CCRA report on water concludes the UK on average is projected to have rising household demand for 
water and a decrease in public supply. The CCRA can be found online at: 
http://randd.defra.gov.uk/Default.aspx?Menu=Menu&Module=More&Location=None&Completed=0&ProjectI
D=15747#RelatedDocuments  
34 In terms of avoiding economic costs 


 

  18 

http://randd.defra.gov.uk/Default.aspx?Menu=Menu&Module=More&Location=None&Completed=0&ProjectID=15747#RelatedDocuments
http://randd.defra.gov.uk/Default.aspx?Menu=Menu&Module=More&Location=None&Completed=0&ProjectID=15747#RelatedDocuments


 

  19 

                                           

lead to a misallocation of resources. It would leave the UK at risk from suffering 
unnecessary damage costs of climate change. In such scenarios it would be cheaper to 
invest in adaptation than face the consequences of inaction.35  

Resources for adaptation need to be allocated over time. Proactive adaptation can be 
hindered by short-term inertia. This presents risks to allocative efficiency for long-term 
investment decisions (for example infrastructure) which are not resilient to climate change 
impacts. For some measures ignoring adaptation to improve resilience may save money in 
the short-term but will cost more in the long-term to retrofit or fix. For others, the most 
economically efficient approach will be to design in the capacity to respond flexibly as the 
impacts of climate change become more certain.  

The introduction of adaptation technologies can avoid impacts on growth through disrupted 
production and misallocation of resources. For example, this could be flood defences, or 
methods to prevent overheating in buildings. Understanding future climate change risks 
can incentivise businesses to invest in adaptation technology in the short-term36. The 
effectiveness of investment will be more pronounced when unused capacity is higher.37 

The Environment Agency Thames Estuary 2100 plan is a long-term flood risk 
management plan for the tidal Thames which is also considering adaptation options in the 
short-term. It concludes that the current Thames Barrier is viable until 2070. Over the next 
25 years investment will be made in actively maintaining and improving the existing 
system. 

Adaptation can help protect long-term investments and generate competition38.Businesses 
could compete on the level of their resilience to weather and climate; this would make 
them less likely to face disruption. Demand for their products would increase as a result. 
Firms can achieve this by taking ‘low regrets’ actions. ‘Low regrets’ means an adaptation 
action is cost effective in the present regardless of what future climate might be. For this to 
occur privately in markets organisations need to understand when it is more cost effective 
to take planned adaptation measures as opposed to reactive ones. 

Low regrets actions often occur in cases where significant co-benefits are present such as 
natural ecosystem-based flood control.39 The ECR conducted a cost-benefit analysis for 


 

35 Adaptation costs and damage costs are of course dependent on mitigation efforts in the short-term.  
36 Adaptation investment could feasibly displace investment in other areas. In these cases businesses and 
organisations will need to decide which type of investment is most valuable. 
37 Cost effective adaptation could also increase growth (and therefore income) relative to a counterfactual of 
accepting full climate damages and lead to additional future investment. However, note that cost-effective 
adaptation from a theoretical point of view would not necessarily lead to increased growth relative to the 
counterfactual at all points in time. 
38 Competition in markets reduces prices and improves quality. It drives an increase in efficiency and 
reduces costs.  If rising efficiency leads to an increase in market share then this will provide an incentive to 
innovate. 
39 Ranger, N., Millner, A., Dietz, S., Fankhauser, S., Lopez, A and Ruta, A. (2010) ‘Adaptation in the UK: a 
decision making process’ Gratnham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment Policy Brief, 


 


  20 

                                                                                                                                                

the implementation of natural flood defence measures in Pickering, North Yorkshire. It 
provides evidence of the importance of co-benefits and strong case for the implementation 
of a mix of adaptation measures.40  

To protect economic growth we need to build resilience to extreme weather events and 
climate change. Inaction can risk making investment decisions that lock us into 
unnecessary damages.41 An efficient level of adaptation will ensure expected damages 
only occur where it is cost effective to accept them. The UK needs to allocate its limited 
resources efficiently and use them where they are most valuable. 

4.2 Other economic impacts of adaptation  
The primary role of adaptation is protecting growth to avoid unnecessary damage costs. 
Like many other economic activities, adaptation is likely to have a range of positive and 
negative secondary effects in addition to its main intention. It could sometimes create 
opportunities to support growth by enhancing productivity. These could take the form of 
co-benefits to adaptive actions which also help to protect future growth. For example it 
may stimulate enterprise in business offering adaptation goods and services. It could also 
promote innovation from which new goods and services stem and create new markets. 
While we discuss these as two separate analytical concepts, in practice the same 
adaptation activity may help protecting growth while also supporting it by providing 
opportunities and spillover effects.  

However, adaptation activities, whether embarked by government, businesses or other 
organisations, will obviously have costs. The innovation and enterprise benefits in 
adaptation may be offset or outweighed by the displacement of resources from other areas 
of the economy where they could also be productively used. The overall net effect is likely 
to vary. Some adaptation activities could potentially have larger net benefits through 
delivering co-benefits such as those illustrated below. In other cases adaptation actions 
might be costly. This reinforces the need to accurately evaluate the rational for action (as 
discussed in Section 2) and to appraise costs and benefits (see Section 3).  

The largest benefits in terms of avoided damage will likely occur in the future, while costs 
will often be born in the short term. This highlights the importance, in the context of 
adaptation, to focus on ‘win-win’ and ‘no-regret’ actions: those activities that carry a range 
of short-term benefits and low costs.  

Below some examples are presented for illustrative purposes of the type of co-benefits 
that action on adaptation could bring. Overall we know little about the impact of adaptation 


 

available online at: http://www2.lse.ac.uk/GranthamInstitute/publications/Policy/docs/PB-Ranger-adaptation-
UK.pdf  
40 The ECR report on appraising flood management initiatives can be found online at 
http://randd.defra.gov.uk/Default.aspx?Module=More&Location=None&ProjectID=18016  
41 This is confounded by the extent of sunk costs 

http://www2.lse.ac.uk/GranthamInstitute/publications/Policy/docs/PB-Ranger-adaptation-UK.pdf
http://www2.lse.ac.uk/GranthamInstitute/publications/Policy/docs/PB-Ranger-adaptation-UK.pdf
http://randd.defra.gov.uk/Default.aspx?Module=More&Location=None&ProjectID=18016


 

  21 

                                           

on economic growth. This is likely to vary across different sectors, locations and specific 
activities. Therefore it is highlighted as a key evidence gap in Section 5. 

K-Matrix analyse a set of goods and services under the banner of adaptation and 
resilience for climate change (A&RCC) activities.42 It demonstrates the potential of 
business enterprise in adaptation related products. Sales of these activities were worth 
£65.8 billion as a global industry in 2010/11. The share attributed to the UK is estimated to 
be £2.1 billion in the same time period. It is an emerging market which had a domestic 
growth rate of 3.9% for 2010/11, with forecasted growth rates to increase year-on-year and 
reaching 7.1% in 2017/18. On its own this does not indicate either a positive or negative 
effect on the economy as a whole. In an economically efficient system, the size of the 
adaptation sector should be driven by the optimum scale of the adaptation response, 
rather than adaptation policies be designed to support this sector at the expense of others. 
However, the expected need for adaptation makes these activities likely to become 
increasingly significant.  

Enterprise in an emerging set of activities may encourage innovation through technological 
progress. The need to adapt will change over time and stimulate innovation naturally 
through a need to use resources in more efficient and effective ways. More broadly, a 
culture of innovation can be stimulated through providing appropriate incentives43.  

Such incentives are currently being tested by Defra, in collaboration with the Technology 
Strategy Board, to bring new climate resilience products to market. A design competition is 
being funded to develop innovative products and services solutions to increase 
infrastructure climate change adaptation. Three innovations are being funded: a stackable 
flood barrier; a zero energy rainwater harvester; and catchment scale modelling to improve 
urban drainage systems design. Another round of this competition will run from 2013. 

4.3. Economic growth and social welfare 
Adaptation is capable of protecting economic growth and delivering wider opportunities. 
However, the value of adaptation goes beyond growth and contributes to social welfare 
more widely. Growth is associated with traditional economic indicators. These include 
aggregate variables such as Gross Domestic Product (GDP), investment and rates of 
unemployment. Social welfare is the aggregate of all interactions of private individuals in 
economic markets. There exist many determinants of social welfare which are not suitably 
captured by economic indicators. 


 

42 For the report and full breakdown of A&RCC activities, see K-Matrix (2012) ‘Adaptation and resilience 
(climate change)’ report available online at 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/31721/12-p144-adaptation-
and-resilience-climate-change-2010-11.pdf 
43 Where market failures which prevent an efficient level of innovation 

https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/31721/12-p144-adaptation-and-resilience-climate-change-2010-11.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/31721/12-p144-adaptation-and-resilience-climate-change-2010-11.pdf


 

  22 

                                           

Non-market goods are important contributors to an individual’s welfare but are typically 
ignored by national indicators like GDP because they are not traded in markets and have 
no price. There are many examples of non-market goods. These could be environmental 
amenities (eg air quality or climate) or individual circumstances (e.g. personal health, 
marital status). To account for the full value of adaptation we need to understand how non-
market goods are affected by climate change and how this impacts on our welfare.44   

Cost effective adaptation decisions should account for whether climate change will 
improve or deteriorate non-market goods and what their value is. To estimate the implicit 
price of non-market goods it is necessary to employ techniques that derive the willingness 
to pay for an improvement in quality or willingness to accept compensation for a reduction. 
This allows the value of non-market goods to be expressed in monetary equivalents.45 
These values should be incorporated in social cost-benefit analysis when choosing 
between alternative adaptation actions. 

It is also important to account for equity in decision-making for adaptation. Willingness to 
pay for improvements to non-market goods is constrained by income and positively 
correlated. Appropriate welfare weights should be incorporated to ensure those least able 
to pay for non-market goods are still able to enjoy them. Furthermore, the long time 
horizons associated with climate change means it is also important to consider the welfare 
of future generations appropriately. 

5. Future evidence needs 

5.1. The macroeconomics of climate change  
Defra has commissioned and recently published an appraisal of existing modelling 
techniques that estimate the macroeconomic impacts of climate change and extreme 
events with and without adaptation.46 Its purpose is to inform policymakers of the state of 
current modelling techniques and recommend direction for future research. The report 
develops a checklist of 9 criteria against which modelling techniques are assessed. 
Recommendations are made on how to improve these techniques. This will help inform 
policymakers of the advantages and limitations of employing particular macroeconomic 
models of climate change. 


 

44 By means of an example, climate change risks affecting ecosystem functionality and the quality of 
environmental goods we are able to consume.  
45 A review of specific techniques to value non-market goods is beyond the scope of this document.  For a 
detailed discussion see Fujiwara, D. and Campbell, R. (2011) ‘Valuation techniques for social cost-benefit 
analysis: stated preference, revealed preference and subjective well-being approaches’ available online at: 
http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/d/green_book_valuationtechniques_250711.pdf  
46 Vivid Economics, The macroeconomics of climate change, report prepared for Defra, May 2013 

http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/d/green_book_valuationtechniques_250711.pdf


 

  23 

The report highlights that current modelling of climate change does not reflect state-of-the-
art macroeconomics. In particular, they are only able to account for growth exogenously. 
This means that economic growth is assumed to depend on external forces only, which 
means that climate change is assumed to have no influence on growth. Accounting for 
growth endogenously allows the model to determine growth based on the projected 
impacts of climate change. Furthermore current modelling lacks account of financial 
assets, public finance and sophisticated trade dimensions though these can theoretically 
be incorporated. 

Three main recommendations and way forward for the research project are given in Table 
4 below. 

Table 4.Recommendations of Vivid Economics (2013) 

Recommendation Way Forward 

There is some disconnect between 
latest advances in academic research 
and answers to relevant policy 
questions 

The next step is to develop areas of policy concern and 
ascertain how they fit with the current academic 
literature. Development of well-informed policy 
questions by government is fundamental to stimulate 
academic research which will impact policy.  

Future modelling for adaptation needs to be based on 
substantial, high quality bottom-up analysis. Of 
particular importance is to understand better the 
significance of indirect macroeconomic impacts. 

We need to stimulate a fundamental 
debate about modelling strategies 

There is a trade-off against a single complex model 
which could explore multiple policy questions and a 
suite of simple models that seek to answer them 
individually. 

There remains concern about the 
quality assurance of macroeconomic 
models if they are to inform policy 

These revolve around the underlying assumptions, 
code and calibration data of modelling. This is crucial to 
ensure any models implemented can stand up to public 
scrutiny. 

Source: Vivid Economics (2013) 

5.2 Next steps 
Adaptation is the central component of dealing with the impacts of climate change. It will 
avoid unnecessary damage costs. The focus areas and programme actions identified in 


 


  24 

the NAP report are grounded in the current evidence we have on the risks and the 
economic costs of climate change. 

In many cases adaptation will be an automatic and natural response. Households will alter 
observable behaviour such as consumption patterns. Organisations will alter factors of 
production according to relative prices and the availability of resources. In these cases, no 
intervention action is necessary and adaptation will be autonomous. 

However, adaptation will also require concerted action: 

Barriers to adaptation exist and could prevent an efficient level of adaptation 
from taking place. Households, organisations and government need to be aware 
of these barriers and take appropriate action to overcome them. Government 
should develop its thinking on when intervention can in theory improve efficiency, 
whether it is capable of improving efficiency and when it risks crowding out private 
investment. 

There is a need to understand better the value of improving adaptive capacity 
in terms of reducing vulnerability to climate change. The varied nature of 
households and organisations means that certain groups will be more vulnerable to 
climate change and lack the capacity to adapt. Analysis could highlight the need to 
intervene on grounds of equity (households) or because it provides significant risk 
to economic growth (organisations).  

Large evidence gaps still remain on the costs of inaction (or the benefits of 
undertaking adaptation). Further research is required to understand the costs of 
indirect/ second order and international impacts of climate change. Also, little is 
known on climate change impacts if certain thresholds or tipping points are 
reached. 

Some costs and benefits are currently difficult to quantify and risk being 
omitted completely. This could lead to inappropriate selection of adaptation 
options or for no adaptation to be taken at all. This is particularly the case for ‘stock’ 
adaptation measures where the time horizons are very long, need to be planned as 
opposed to reactive and are subject to substantial uncertainty. Government needs 
to ensure that iterative and flexible appraisal options are selected for long-term 
investment decisions. 

From the macroeconomic perspective there is a need to build a better 
understanding of the value of adaptation to the UK. Achieving this requires a 
comprehensive set of bottom-up analyses, quantification of indirect impacts and 
appraisal of adaptation options. From this corresponding costs and benefits can be 
estimated.  

Further evidence is needed to understand the relationship between 
adaptation and growth/productivity. Adaptation actions are inextricably linked 


 


  25 

with growth, whether through avoiding unnecessary damages or providing new 
opportunities to improve productivity. However, evidence is currently limited on how 
this will develop over time and against projected future climate change.  


 


  26 


 

Appendix 1: Supplementary material on 
adaptive capacity 
Adaptive capacity is a cross-cutting issue that is relevant to all 6 policy areas identified in 
this analysis. It determines the ability of households, organisations and government to 
undertake ‘planned’ adaptation.47 The nature of adaptive capacity is also dependent on 
whether adaptation is better described in terms of a ‘flow’ or a ‘stock’. 

Flow adaptation happens when benefits and costs occur simultaneously. It is more 
likely to be reactive and autonomous. Short-run responses are likely to be limited to 
changes in variable inputs. For example, in agriculture this could be switching 
between available crop varieties. 


 

Stock adaptation requires investment over the long-run to build up adaptation 
capital stick. It is likely to require planning. This includes investments that provide a 
stream of adaptation benefits over time. For example, sea walls protect coasts from 
sea level rises for a number of years. It also includes long-term investment planning 
such as national infrastructure which will need to be robust to future climate. 

Table 5. Summary of features of high and low adaptive 
capacity for households and organisations 

Organisations and individuals features Description 

                Higher adaptive capacity when...  

Resources Good understanding of risks to resources 
Organisations have in-house capability to 
respond to climate change 

Processes 

Flexible planning and processes 
embedded into decision-making 


 

This can include flexibility of supply chains 
and substitutability of suppliers and how 
footloose and organisation is.   

Partnerships and collaboration  Are voluntary organisations/ local 
authorities in place to support community 
resilience? 

Operational planning already accounts Clear process of risk management is in 

                                            

47 Planned adaptation is anticipatory and reflects conscious concerns about the risks of climate change. In 
some cases this can be directly influenced governments or collectives as a public policy initiative (ECR 
Synthesis Report, 2013).  Examples include the Heatwave Plan for England which outlines actions to ensure 
health and social sectors are prepared. Alternatively, adaptation may be reactive. This is a natural response 
to climatic stimuli without the need for direct intervention.  For example, during a heatwave people may buy 
air conditioning units or make more fundamental behaviour choices such as investment in clothing. 


 


  27 

for risks similar to those expected to 
increase from climate change  

place 

Access to risk spreading mechanisms Availability of insurance to offset risk 

Organisation 

Agents of change or champions Community members setting up support 
groups 

Strong leadership and culture Ability to influence business partners, 
suppliers  

Support networks Provide support to small organisations 
and individuals who struggle to plan in the 
long-term 

                             Lower adaptive capacity when... 

Resources 

Lack of awareness Not aware of risks of climate change and 
a lack of willingness to accept the nature 
of a risk  

Lack of financial support and skills Individuals of low socio-economic status 
and small/ medium-sized organisations 

Lack of specialised skills and training Ability to understand and respond to 
climate change impacts 

Poorly targeted information 
Overwhelm or provide insufficient 
information to individuals/organisations  

Processes 

Limited ability to influence policy 
making 

Restrictions on adaptive actions that can 
be taken such as renting premises from 
landlords.  

Lack of engagement with vulnerable 
groups 

Action needed to identify and aid to 
groups who are most vulnerable to 
climate change.   

Organisation 

Where diversity of responsibility exists 


 

Multiple organisations facing different 
objectives – situations where adaptation 
provides a social benefit but lacks private 
incentive   

Competing demands arise from 
different users in the same catchment 
area 

Multiple sectors all requiring the same 
factor input e.g. water needed by farming, 
households and industry. 

Source: Adapted from ECR 

Table 6. Summary of features of high and low adaptive 
capacity at sector level 

Sectoral characteristic Adaptive capacity 

Higher adaptive capacity in sectors with... 
Low complexity Few organisations making decisions and 

respond to a single regulator, such as 
oligopolistic/ natural monopoly markets 
e.g. power sector 

Co-ordination between 
organisations  

Operational planning procedures in place 
e.g. healthcare/ hospitals 


 


  28 

Regulated sectors  Where regulatory requirements take due 
account of current and projected climate 
risks 

Decision lifetimes are short  Short lifetimes make decisions more 
flexible.  Allow for regular review and 
evolution of decisions and account for 
increased knowledge of climate risks over 
time. 

Prior experience Already experienced impacts similar to 
those expected from climate change e.g. 
extreme weather conditions. 

Lower adaptive capacity in sectors with... 

High complexity Many interacting organisations with 
diverse requirements, roles and 
responsibilities and where sector is 
fragmented. 

Interdependency of adaptive  
capacity with others 

Sectors where there is a reliance on the 
actions of others such as rental housing 
and social care. 

Interdependency of operations Limited ability to manage/ control risks. 
This could be because of a dependency 
on public infrastructure and provision of 
services 

Reliance on the natural 
environment and management of 
variation in weather  

Leads to short-term focus in business 
planning. Constraints of natural 
environment can inhibit ability to respond 
e.g. impacts of drought/ floods 

Low activity levels but with long 
decision lifetimes 

Fewer opportunities to make decisions 
e.g. housing, tree planting, land-use 
change, major infrastructure investments 

Decisions to address one risk can 
increase vulnerability to another 

Failure to consider all economic costs 
(and benefits) of adaptation in decision 
making.  

Source: Adapted from ECR 


 


  29 


 

Appendix 2. Advantages and disadvantages of 
each appraisal methodology 
Methodology Brief Description Advantages Disadvantages 
Multi-Criteria Analysis (MCA) Part or wholly qualitative-based 

approach, which provides a 
‘ranking’ of initiatives based on 
monetary and non-monetary 
criteria 

Allows appraisal to be 
conducted in the absence of/ 
limited amount of quantitative 
data 


 

Limited to relative 
assessments of alternative 
policy options 

Outputs are appraisal-specific 
– i.e. cannot be generalised 
more widely 

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis (CEA) Quantitative approach which 
identifies the policy option 
providing a specific 
output/benefit at the lowest cost 

Useful when a specific 
output/objective is needed to 
be met 

Can be used when 
comprehensive quantitative 
cost data is available for 
monetising costs but not 
benefits 

Not applicable when a single 
initiative is being appraised, or 
when considering multiple 
initiatives providing different 
levels of the required benefit 

Implicitly ignores potentially 
significant co-benefits 

Scenario-Based Cost-Benefit 
Analysis (SBCBA) 

Quantitative approach which 
assesses costs and benefits (in 
monetary form) across different 
scenarios/states of the world 

Accounts for uncertainty 
surrounding flood risk without 
being computationally or data 
intensive 

Provides numeric outputs, 
allowing for cardinal 
comparisons between 
initiatives 

Easily understood for non-
technical audiences. 

Allows for the application of 
risk-based rules 

Potentially difficult to gain 
consensus on the appropriate 
scenarios to use 

Risk of not capturing the 
extent of uncertainty 
surrounding climate change, 
especially under ‘deep 
uncertainty’ 

Robust Decision Making (RDM) Quantitative approach which 
assesses the proposed 
initiatives across all plausible 
states of the world, and identifies 
the most robust initiative across 
these 

Captures deep uncertainty – 
leaves ‘no stone unturned’ 

Provides numeric outputs 

Provides a clear picture of 
which initiatives are optimal in 
different states of the world 

Can be computationally and 
data intensive 

Potentially difficult to interpret 
for non-expert audiences 

Value function for deriving 
costs and benefits needs to be 
well calibrated 

Ranges of plausible parameter 
values need to be known 

Real Options Analysis (ROA) Extension of CBA which 
estimates the ‘option value’ 
associated with each initiative 
i.e. the option to delay or adjust 
in the future.  Calculates the 
NPV of each initiative given the 
particular actions that could be 
taken given different states of 
the world being realised, and the 
probabilities of these occurring. 

Accounts for learning about 
the nature or extent of flood 
risk going forward.  – captures 
the value in delaying or 
adjusting a particular initiative 

Useful when comparing large 
irreversible options with 
smaller-scale flexible options. 

Can be computationally or 
data intensive – requires the 
assignment of probabilities to 
scenarios at various future 
time periods 

– Source: Frontier Economics




	1. Economics of the National Adaptation Programme
	1.1. Summary
	1.2. Policy implications

	2. What is the role for government in adaptation?
	2.1. Private action and government intervention
	2.2. Uncertainty
	Table 1: Major sources of climate change uncertainty for decision makers 

	2.3. Barriers to adaptation
	2.4. Categorising adaptation
	Table 2. Climate change adaptation analysed by policy areas

	2.5. Adaptive capacity

	3. The costs and benefits of adaptation
	3.1. Local level costs and benefits
	Figure 1. Framework for gathering data and selecting appraisal methodology

	3.2. Overall costs and benefits of adaptation
	Table 3. ECR and illustrative future Impacts
	Figure 2. Probability densities of the estimated range of equilibrium climate sensitivity from various studies (the equilibrium climate sensitivity is the expected global surface temperature change under a sustained doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide)




	4. Growth and climate change adaptation
	4.1 Adaptation protects growth and allocative efficiency 
	4.2 Other economic impacts of adaptation 
	4.3. Economic growth and social welfare

	5. Future evidence needs
	5.1. The macroeconomics of climate change 
	Table 4.Recommendations of Vivid Economics (2013)

	5.2 Next steps

	Appendix 1: Supplementary material on adaptive capacity
	Table 5. Summary of features of high and low adaptive capacity for households and organisations
	Table 6. Summary of features of high and low adaptive capacity at sector level

	Appendix 2. Advantages and disadvantages of each appraisal methodology




