

  

to both emissions reduction and climate change adaptation. The transposition of EU 
environmental law into domestic legislation will need to at least sustain current levels of 
protection and enforcement.  

• In January 2017, the Government presented the second UK Climate Change Risk 
Assessment to Parliament. This was informed by the ASC’s Evidence Report for CCRA2 
published in July 2016. The Government has endorsed the six areas of climate change risk 
identified by the ASC as the most urgent priorities for the next NAP. We expect the next NAP 
to include ambitious objectives, proposals and policies in these areas, and to describe how 
progress against objectives will be effectively monitored and evaluated.  

3. Our second assessment of the National Adaptation Programme 
The current NAP, published in July 2013, included 31 objectives and more than 370 actions 
split into six main themes: built environment; infrastructure; healthy and resilient 
communities; agriculture and forestry; natural environment; and business. Following the 
publication of CCRA2, the National Adaptation Programme is due to be updated in the 
next twelve months. 

The ASC’s statutory assessment of the NAP aims to determine the level of progress being made 
to prepare for climate change, focusing solely on England where policy responsibilities are 
devolved to Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales. The assessment of progress is not 
straightforward. It relies on a combination of interpretation of available datasets and expert 
judgement by the ASC. Even where it is clear that actions are directly addressing risks and 
delivering benefits, other pressures, such as demographic change, may still mean the 
vulnerability to climate change impacts is increasing. 

The ASC therefore assessed the NAP by asking three questions in each area identified as a 
priority for adaptation.  

• Is there a plan? Are there policies and plans in place that address the relevant climate risks? 

• Are actions taking place? Are NAP actions and other commitments being delivered that 
could help to reduce the impacts of climate change? Since our first assessment of the NAP in 
2015 the proportion of NAP actions classed as complete has risen from 29 to 51%, with a 
further 35% considered on track or ongoing by those responsible for their delivery. 

• Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? The most important element of the 
assessment examines the available evidence to conclude whether vulnerability to the 
impacts of climate change is increasing or decreasing. 

The overall conclusion from the ASC’s second assessment is that, despite some areas of 
progress, the level of risk has increased for a significant number of priorities (see Figure 1 
above). The measures set out in the current NAP are not sufficient to avoid the impacts of 
climate change increasing. 

Critically, more areas have been assessed as ‘red’ in terms of vulnerability than in 2015. Areas 
where concern has increased since our last assessment include the management of surface 
water flood risk - for both existing buildings and as a result of new development - and aspects of 
the natural environment, such as soil health, the resilience of terrestrial and freshwater habitats 
to climate change, and biodiversity in the farmed countryside. 


  


10    Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


 

Figure 1 also highlights five adaptation priorities where stronger policies and plans are urgently 
needed (shown in the left-hand column). As well as surface water management and soil health, 
stronger policies and plans are needed to avoid health and wellbeing impacts during periods of 
high temperatures, to manage risks to marine fisheries and aquaculture, and to increase the 
resilience of digital and telecommunications infrastructure. 

Table 1 below summarises our assessment for the ten adaptation priorities where we have 
assigned a red rating, either on the basis of current policies and plans, or where the evidence 
suggests vulnerabilities are increasing. 

Table 1. Adaptation priorities assigned a ‘red’ rating in the second assessment of the NAP 

Adaptation 
priority 

Is there a 
plan? 

Is progress 
being 
made? 

Rationale for RAG score 

Natural environment (Chapter 3) 

Terrestrial 
habitats 

The target for 50% of terrestrial habitats to be in good 
condition by 2020 is unlikely to be met. Woodland 
planting rates are below the Government's 2013 target 
of 5,000 additional hectares per year. 

Freshwater 
habitats 

Indicators of freshwater habitat condition and species 
abundance show downward trends. Only 20% of water 
bodies in England are meeting 'good' or 'high' 
ecological status. The Breeding Wetland Bird Index has 
dropped to its lowest level since it began in 1975. 

Farmed 
Countryside 

Most of the available indicators for the farmed 
countryside continue to show long-term declines in 
species composition. Only farmland bats show a 
positive trend in abundance. 

Soil health 
and carbon 
sequestration 

The percentage of blanket bog Sites of Special Scientific 
Interest in good condition declined from 19% to 10% 
between 2003 and 2016. The last national surveys of soil 
condition in England in 2003 and 2007 suggest there 
have been losses in soil organic carbon since the 1970s. 
There is no plan in place to achieve the ambition for all 
soils to be managed sustainably by 2030. 

Commercial 
fisheries and 
aquaculture 

There is no plan set out in the NAP or elsewhere to 
increase the resilience of marine fisheries and 
aquaculture to climate change. The proportion of UK 
fish stocks that are managed at full reproductive 
capacity and are being harvested sustainably varies 
over the long-term but remains low, at about 30%. 

Executive summary 11 

Amber Red

Amber Red

Amber Red

Red Red

Red Amber




Table 1. Adaptation priorities assigned a ‘red’ rating in the second assessment of the NAP 

People and the built environment (Chapter 4) 

Surface water 
flood 
alleviation 

Evidence suggests a significant and increasingly severe 
lack of capacity in the sewer network to cope with 
heavy rainfall events. The scale of the investment to 
tackle this issue has yet to be assessed and the 
ownership of the problem is fragmented between 
national and local government and the water industry. 

Development 
and surface 
water flood 
risk 

New development is highly likely to be adding pressure 
to existing drainage networks. There is little confidence 
amongst industry professionals that current policy is 
delivering high quality sustainable drainage systems 
(SuDS) in new development that achieve a range of co-
benefits and can be adapted to cope with future 
change. DCLG did not present the findings of its SuDS 
policy review in time to inform this report. 

Property-
level flood 
resilience 

The six year flood defence investment plan includes 
proposals to protect 2,900 households from flooding 
using property-level resilience (PLR) measures. This 
compares with a cost-effective potential for at least 
150,000 households to benefit from PLR. The number of 
high risk households is expected to increase to over 
200,000 by the time Flood Re is withdrawn in 2039. 

Health 
impacts from 
heat and cold 

There remain no plans in place to adapt the built 
environment (including homes, hospitals, care homes, 
schools and prisons) to be resilient to increasing 
temperatures. The lack of overheating standards for 
new development means the number of buildings that 
overheat will increase. 

Infrastructure (Chapter 5) 

Digital and 
ICT infra-
structure 

There is no apparent plan by industry or Government to 
address the critical telecommunications and data 
infrastructure vulnerabilities identified by the National 
Flood Resilience Review. As we reported in 2015, there 
is an absence of evidence, from both Government and 
the industry, to allow the ASC to assess the resilience of 
the sector. 

Source: See the individual chapters of this report for more details. 



Grey


12    Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 

Amber Red

Red Red

Amber Red

Red Amber


Red  

4. Priority risks and recommendations 
The results of our evaluation are summarised below according to the six priority areas of 
risk identified by CCRA2, highlighting both positive and negative developments over the 
past two years, and listing our highest priority recommendations. 

The full list of recommendations is included at the end of this Executive Summary, presented in 
the order they appear in the chapters of this report. 

4.1 Flooding and coastal change risks to communities, businesses and 
infrastructure 

Progress in managing risks from river and coastal flooding has not been accompanied by 
similar advances in managing surface water flood risk. CCRA2 identified flooding as the 
greatest risk from climate change for businesses and infrastructure as well as for four million 
homes in England in vulnerable areas. Ten years on from the widespread flooding in 2007, that 
was predominantly caused by heavy rainfall overwhelming local drains and sewers, surface 
water flooding still receives less attention than is necessary to avoid risks escalating. For 
example, surface water flooding was ruled out of scope by the recent National Flood Resilience 
Review. The policies in place to prevent new development adding further pressure to the ageing 
sewerage network are weak and not enforced. More money has been allocated to flood and 
coastal erosion risk management as a result of recent storms but around a quarter of the £700 
million announced in the 2016 Budget has not yet been allocated to projects. 

Priority recommendations in this area are: 

• RECOMMENDATION 12: More and better co-ordinated action is needed to manage the 
lack of capacity within drainage systems to cope with possible increase in the frequency 
and severity of heavy rainfall. Defra and the National Infrastructure Commission should 
initiate a comprehensive assessment to quantify the need for investment and other policy actions 
to manage surface water flood risk, including, but not limited to, retrofitting SuDS. Urgent 
investments need to be considered by water companies and Ofwat as part of the 2019 price 
review, and the comprehensive assessment should be in place to inform local planning policy and 
major investment decisions in the 2024 price review. 

• RECOMMENDATION 13: Policy is needed urgently to address the outstanding barriers to 
deliver high quality, effective SuDS in new development that achieve the full range of 
potential environmental co-benefits. In particular, there is a need for: 

o More comprehensive and ambitious national standards for SuDS. 

o The automatic right to connect new development to the existing sewerage network to be 
made conditional on the national SuDS standards being met. 

o A clear policy on who should maintain and adopt SuDS by default. 

• RECOMMENDATION 14: Defra should develop a long-term strategy to manage flood risk 
down to tolerable levels in each part of the country, so that as Flood Re is withdrawn 
properties can remain insurable at reasonable cost. This should include: 

o Monitoring the impact of the actions adopted following the Bonfield Review to achieve, in 
five years’ time, an ‘environment where it is standard practice for properties at high risk to 
be made resilient’. 


  


Executive summary 13 


   

o Actively communicating the risk and possible adaptation actions to households and 

communities that are expected to remain or become at high flood risk by the 2030s.  

o Ensuring that Flood Re incentivises households to take up property-level resilience 
measures, which insurers should allow to be implemented during post-flood repairs. 

4.2 Risks to natural capital including terrestrial, coastal, marine and freshwater 
ecosystems, soils and biodiversity 

Despite continued action and individual success stories, the overall vulnerability of the 
natural environment to climate change has not reduced since our last report and in some 
respects has increased. Most of the current policies and plans in place to support the resilience 
of the natural environment, including the biodiversity strategy for England, are coming to an 
end in 2020. The decision to leave the European Union creates further uncertainty, and an 
urgent need and opportunity to draw up new environmental policies that prevent climate 
change causing irreversible damage to the UK’s native wildlife and other aspects of our natural 
capital. 

Priority recommendations relating to natural capital are: 

• RECOMMENDATION 5: A critical part of the next National Adaptation Programme should 
be a long-term plan for the natural environment that takes climate change into account, 
builds on the level of ambition of current EU policies, and is consistent with the framework 
developed by the Natural Capital Committee. In line with the ASC's previous advice, there should 
be associated targets, actions, and a monitoring and evaluation framework. 

• RECOMMENDATION 10: To support adaptation efforts, a plan should be put in place to 
deliver the aspiration for all soils to be managed sustainably by 2030. The plan should 
include a scheme to monitor uptake of soil conservation measures, and specific proposals to 
reverse the ongoing loss of lowland peat soils, in order to provide mitigation and adaptation 
benefits. 

• RECOMMENDATION 11: A target for restoring all designated upland blanket bog habitats 
to favourable condition by 2030 should be adopted in order to contribute to both adaptation 
and mitigation efforts. 

• RECOMMENDATION 7: Research on the risks to the marine food chain and ecosystem 
from rising sea temperatures, deoxygenation and ocean acidification should be 
undertaken over the course of the next National Adaptation Programme period, to inform 
future marine and fisheries policies. The research should assess the extent to which adaptive 
actions could increase the resilience of marine habitats and species to climate change. 

4.3 Risks to domestic and international food production and trade 

A more proactive strategy is needed to ensure the availability of safe, affordable, 
nutritious food in the UK. This is a long-term risk for which action needs to begin now. The 
resilience of the UK food system will depend on the stewardship of natural resources here and 
overseas, and the effective management globally of food production changes and supply chain 
shocks. There is the potential for domestic production to increase in a warmer climate but this 
will be constrained unless more action is taken to address the declining quality of soils and 
projected water deficits in the most productive regions. 


   

14    Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


   

Priority recommendations related to food production and trade are: 

• RECOMMENDATION 9: New agricultural land management policies should take account 
of the need to improve water quality and the condition of habitats and soils, in order to 
build resilience to climate change. Targets should be set that focus on outcomes, and 
monitoring undertaken to understand if these targets are being met. 

• RECOMMENDATION 10: To support adaptation efforts, a plan should be put in place to 
deliver the aspiration for all soils to be managed sustainably by 2030. The plan should 
include a scheme to monitor uptake of soil conservation measures, and specific proposals to 
reverse the ongoing loss of lowland peat soils, in order to provide mitigation and adaptation 
benefits. 

4.4 Risks to health, wellbeing and productivity from high temperatures 

Increasing seasonal average and extreme temperatures, combined with a growing, ageing 
population, is expected to more than triple the number of heat-related deaths by the 
middle of the century, from 2,000 currently to 7,000 per year. There are as yet no policies in 
place to begin to adapt the built environment and existing buildings for increasing 
temperatures and heatwaves. A lack of relevant standards means new developments, including 
hospitals and care homes, will add to the number of buildings that overheat in warmer weather. 

Recommendations 12 and 13 above promote the use of good quality SuDS and green 
infrastructure. These measures can contribute towards managing the urban heat island effect. 
Priority recommendations directly related to risks from high temperatures are: 

• RECOMMENDATION 16: As recommended in our 2015 report, a standard or regulation 
should be put in place to reduce the risk of overheating in new homes. 

• RECOMMENDATION 17: Further action should be taken to assess and reduce the risks of 
overheating in existing buildings, with the priorities being hospitals, schools, care homes 
and prisons. This could be undertaken for example through the relevant standards agencies 
such as the Care Quality Commission and Ofsted. 

4.5 Risks of shortages in the public water supply, and for agriculture, energy 
generation and industry, with impacts on freshwater ecology 

Climate change is projected to reduce the amount of freshwater that can be sustainably 
withdrawn, whilst warmer weather and the growing population are expected to increase 
demand. The current system of abstraction licences needs to be reformed urgently so that 
water resources can be allocated more efficiently between different users and to protect the 
environment when water is scarce. The 2014 Water Act commits the Government to report to 
Parliament in 2019 on progress towards abstraction reform. The Water Act also placed a new 
‘resilience duty’ on Ofwat, the industry regulator. New water resource management plans from 
water companies, due for consultation in early 2018, will look at least 25 years ahead and assess 
the vulnerability of water resources in a range of climate scenarios. The draft Strategic Policy 
Statement to Ofwat for the next price review, published in March 2017, underlined the 
importance of water efficiency and other demand-side measures in reducing pressure on water 
resources. The statement also placed new emphasis on investment in wastewater and drainage 
networks to prevent flooding, as part of improving network resilience. A National Policy 
Statement on major new water infrastructure is planned. 


  


Executive summary 15 


 

The priority for the Government and the water industry as part of the updated National 
Adaptation Programme should be the successful delivery of the proposals identified above in 
the next five years. Progress on enabling measures such as greater uptake of water metering by 
households also needs to continue. Because of the proposals already in the pipeline, there are 
no additional specific recommendations on water resources made in this report. However, these 
proposals must be delivered in line with the commitments made. For example, some aspects of 
abstraction reform rely on new primary legislation, requiring it to be made a priority for 
Parliamentary time. 

4.6 New and emerging pests and diseases, and invasive non-native species, 
affecting people, plants and animals 

Risks from new and emerging pests and diseases, and invasive non-native species, are 
potentially very high for people, animals and the natural environment. The warmer 
conditions expected with climate change will allow some pests, disease-carrying insects and 
other animals, and invasive non-native species, to extend their range. 

The ASC’s Evidence Report for CCRA2 identified an urgent need for further research to inform 
government policy and operational measures, such as additional surveillance of emerging 
pathogens and the monitoring of problem species. Nationally and internationally there is a need 
for more research to understand how pest and disease outbreaks can be contained. Continued 
collaboration with other countries – particularly within Europe – on surveillance and monitoring 
will be needed. The next NAP needs to develop the evidence base in these areas, together with 
the other issues highlighted as a ‘research priority’ in our CCRA Evidence Report, in order to 
inform future policies. 

4.7 Cross-cutting recommendations for the next NAP 

The Adaptation Sub-Committee has now assessed the current NAP twice, and as a result 
makes a number of general recommendations for the updated programme (Box 1). 

These build on the cross-cutting recommendations first made in 2015 for the NAP to be more 
strategic and focused, develop a stronger evidence to monitor and evaluate key policies, and 
include an element of public engagement.  

Box 1. Overarching recommendations for an updated National Adaptation Programme 

RECOMMENDATION 1: To ensure that activity and investments have a significant, cost-effective impact 
on reducing vulnerabilities, the second NAP should: 

• set clear priorities for adaptation; 

• ensure objectives are outcome-focused, measurable, time-bound and have clear ownership; 

• prioritise the core set of policies and actions that will have the biggest impact; 

• build on the breadth of community and business engagement in the first NAP; and 

• include effective monitoring and evaluation. 

RECOMMENDATION 2: The second NAP should address the important interdependencies between climate 
change risks and policy responses which fall within and across the remits of different government 
departments, and national, local and devolved governments, to ensure relevant policies and activity are co-
ordinated across the programme. 

16    Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 




Box 1. Overarching recommendations for an updated National Adaptation Programme 

RECOMMENDATION 3: To ensure continuous improvement in the approach to reducing climate change 
risks, the second NAP should have a strong focus on evidence and evaluation: 

• there is the need and opportunity to work through UK Research and Innovation and the individual
research councils to develop the evidence base in time to inform the third UK Climate Change Risk 
Assessment in 2022, making full use of the new UK Climate Projections in 2018; 

• more attention needs to be paid to the evaluation of existing policies and approaches in order to learn
lessons for future initiatives; and 

• the costs and benefits of more ambitious policy options need to be considered and appraised. 

RECOMMENDATION 4: The Government should explore cost-effective ways to communicate the risks from 
climate change, and the actions that can be taken to reduce vulnerabilities. Priorities include: 

• engaging vulnerable groups and communities exposed to specific risks such as higher temperatures, 
coastal change, and increases in flood risk; 

• challenging the relevant professional bodies (such as the Landscape Institute, the Royal Town Planning 
Institute, and the Institution of Civil Engineers), and trade associations (for example the National 
Federation of Builders), to increase their level of engagement with members regarding climate change, 
and to improve the training, guidance and professional accreditation they offer; and

• raising awareness amongst the general public including through community groups and national 
membership organisations such as the National Trust, the Royal Horticultural Society, and the RSPB. 

Source: See Chapter 2: The National Adaptation Programme for more details. 

Priority recommendations of a cross-cutting nature also appear in the infrastructure, 
business and local government chapters of this report. 

Climate change poses multiple threats to UK infrastructure, making oversight by Government 
and regulators important because of the potential for systemic impacts. Whilst improvements 
continue to be made to increase the resilience of infrastructure services in individual sectors, 
recent severe weather events have highlighted important interdependency risks between 
networks. Storm Desmond showed that failures of electricity and telecommunications networks, 
and bridges, quickly and unpredictably affect other services, heightening disruption and 
hampering the efforts of the emergency services. A lack of information sharing by infrastructure 
operators regarding vulnerable assets continues to be cited by members of Local Resilience 
Forums as a barrier to more effective action. 

• RECOMMENDATION 21: To assist with the assessment and management of
interdependencies the Cabinet Office should review information sharing arrangements
between infrastructure operators, as well as between operators and Local Resilience
Forums. Further steps may be necessary to ensure that the legal duties within the Civil
Contingencies Act are being fulfilled in practice, including the duty for Category 1 and Category 2
responders to cooperate and share information.

Businesses in England are exposed to a range of physical, financial and reputational risks from 
climate change. More businesses need to consider the resilience of their assets and operations in 
severe weather, as well as the consequences of indirect impacts from disruption to supply chains 
and distribution networks. The investment community is becoming increasingly interested in 

Executive summary 17 


  

the effects of climate change on risk-adjusted returns. Pressure is growing on companies to 
disclose how their assets and liabilities could be impacted, with investors expecting greater 
maturity in the assessment of climate change risks and the adaptation actions being taken. 

• RECOMMENDATION 22: The Government should promote voluntary disclosure of climate 
change risks by both large and small companies, including the risks in relation to supply 
chains. 

o The investment community should further emphasise the need for meaningful disclosure 
of how companies assess and manage climate change risks, in line with the 
recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures. 

o The Financial Reporting Council's UK Stewardship Code should ask investors to consider 
company performance and reporting on adapting to climate change. 

o As a form of disclosure, the Government should promote corporate natural capital 
accounting and reporting, as recommended by the Natural Capital Committee. 

Local authorities have a critical role to play in delivering many aspects of the current National 
Adaptation Programme. However, council budgets are stretched, and in the context of other 
priorities, climate change adaptation is often overlooked. The closure of the Environment 
Agency’s Climate Ready Support Service in March 2016, together with six of Climate UK’s nine 
regional climate change partnerships in England, means momentum in the sector is at risk of 
stalling. Pressure to meet the need for more housing has led to climate change in effect being 
deprioritised in the land-use planning system. 

• RECOMMENDATION 26: To stimulate activity and improve monitoring and evaluation, 
local authorities should be included within the scope of the third round of reporting under 
the Adaptation Reporting Power. Defra should identify the most efficient and effective means 
for local authorities to report on the action they are taking and the progress being made to 
prepare communities for climate change. 

• RECOMMENDATION 28: The Government should review the effectiveness of the land-use 
planning system in achieving reductions in greenhouse gas emissions from buildings and 
transport, and enhancing the resilience of communities and the built environment to the 
impacts of climate change. The review should consider both strategic and local land-use 
allocation, and building and infrastructure design. 

5. Next steps 
Under the Climate Change Act, the Government is required to respond to this progress 
report by 15 October 2017. The Government also has to update its National Adaptation 
Programme ‘as soon as is reasonably practicable' following the publication of CCRA2 in 
January 2017. We expect a new NAP to be published in the next twelve months. We will 
assess the revised NAP in our next progress report to Parliament in June 2019. 

In the meantime the ASC will conduct a number of in-depth studies to supplement the existing 
evidence base in key areas. We expect to publish a non-statutory report next summer that 
presents the results of this analysis. We will also seek feedback from a range of stakeholders on 
the approach we have taken in this and our 2015 report to assessing the National Adaptation 
Programme, to make sure our analysis and advice is as helpful and effective as possible. 


   

18    Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


 

Full list of recommendations 
Table 2 provides the full list of recommendations made in this report, in the order they appear in 
the individual chapters. Priority recommendations are shown in bold. 

Table 2. Recommendations from the second statutory assessment of the NAP 

Recommendation Owner Timescale 

The National Adaptation Programme (Chapter 2) 

1. To ensure that activity and investments have a significant, cost-
effective impact on reducing vulnerabilities, the second NAP should: 
-- set clear priorities for adaptation; 
-- ensure objectives are outcome-focused, measurable, time-bound and 
have clear ownership; 
-- prioritise the core set of policies and actions that will have the biggest 
impact; 
-- build on the breadth of community and business engagement in the 
first NAP; and 
-- include effective monitoring and evaluation. 

Defra 
Next NAP 
report in 

2018 

2. The second NAP should address the important interdependencies
between climate change risks and policy responses which fall within and 
across the remits of different government departments, and national, 
local and devolved governments, to ensure relevant policies and activity 
are co-ordinated across the programme. 

Defra 
Next NAP 
report in 

2018 

3. To ensure continuous improvement in the approach to reducing
climate change risks, the second NAP should have a strong focus on 
evidence and evaluation: 
-- there is the need and opportunity to work through UK Research and 
Innovation and the individual research councils to develop the evidence 
base in time to inform the third UK Climate Change Risk Assessment in 
2022, making full use of the new UK Climate Projections in 2018; 
-- more attention needs to be paid to the evaluation of existing policies 
and approaches in order to learn lessons for future initiatives; and 
-- the costs and benefits of more ambitious policy options need to be 
considered and appraised. 

Defra 
Next NAP 
report in 

2018 

4. The Government should explore cost-effective ways to communicate
the risks from climate change and the actions that can be taken to 
reduce vulnerabilities. Priorities include: 
-- engaging vulnerable groups and communities exposed to specific 
risks such as higher temperatures, coastal change, and increases in flood 
risk;  
-- challenging the relevant professional bodies (such as the Landscape 
Institute, the Royal Town Planning Institute, and the Institution of Civil 
Engineers), and trade associations (for example the National Federation 
of Builders), to increase their level of engagement with members 
regarding climate change, and to improve the training, guidance and 
professional accreditation they offer; and 
-- raising awareness amongst the general public including through 
community groups and national membership organisations such as the 
National Trust, the Royal Horticultural Society, and the RSPB. 

Defra 
Next NAP 
report in 

2018 

Executive summary 19 




Table 2. Recommendations from the second statutory assessment of the NAP 

Natural environment (Chapter 3) 

5. A critical part of the next National Adaptation Programme should be a
long-term plan for the natural environment that takes climate change 
into account, builds on the level of ambition of current EU policies, and 
is consistent with the framework developed by the Natural Capital 
Committee. In line with the ASC's previous advice, there should be 
associated targets, actions, and a monitoring and evaluation framework. 

Defra By 2019 

6. Action should be taken to enhance the condition of priority habitats and
the abundance and range of priority species. This action should maintain or 
extend the level of ambition that was included in Biodiversity 2020. An 
evaluation should be undertaken of Biodiversity 2020, including the extent to 
which goals have been met and of the implications for resilience to climate 
change.  

Defra By 2021 

7. Research on the risks to the marine food chain and ecosystem from 
rising sea temperatures, deoxygenation and ocean acidification should 
be undertaken over the course of the next National Adaptation 
Programme period, to inform future marine and fisheries policies. The 
research should assess the extent to which adaptive actions could 
increase the resilience of marine habitats and species to climate change. 

Defra By 2022 

8. Goals and actions to achieve sustainable yields by 2030 should be included
in new policies that will replace the Common Fisheries Policy. Indicators of 
sustainable management should also be reviewed to ensure they take 
account of changing distributions of fish species due to climate change. 

Defra By 2019 

9. New agricultural land management policies should take account of
the need to improve water quality and the condition of habitats and 
soils, in order to build resilience to climate change. Targets should be set 
that focus on outcomes, and monitoring undertaken to understand if 
these targets are being met.  

Defra By 2020 

10. To support adaptation efforts, a plan should be put in place to
deliver the aspiration for all soils to be managed sustainably by 2030. 
The plan should include a scheme to monitor uptake of soil conservation 
measures, and specific proposals to reverse the ongoing loss of lowland 
peat soils, in order to provide mitigation and adaptation benefits.  

Defra By 2019 

11. A target for restoring all designated upland blanket bog habitats to
favourable condition by 2030 should be adopted in order to contribute 
to both adaptation and mitigation efforts.  

Defra By 2019 

20    Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 




Table 2. Recommendations from the second statutory assessment of the NAP 

People and the built environment (Chapter 4) 

12. More and better co-ordinated action is needed to manage the lack of
capacity within drainage systems to cope with possible increase in the 
frequency and severity of heavy rainfall. Defra and the National 
Infrastructure Commission should initiate a comprehensive assessment 
to quantify the need for investment and other policy actions to manage 
surface water flood risk, including, but not limited to, retrofitting 
sustainable drainage systems (SuDS). Urgent investments need to be 
considered by water companies and Ofwat as part of the 2019 price 
review, and the comprehensive assessment should be in place to inform 
local planning policy and major investment decisions in the 2024 price 
review.  

Ofwat 

2019 Price 
Review and 
2024 Price 

Review 

13. Policy is needed urgently to address the outstanding barriers to
deliver high quality, effective SuDS in new development that achieve 
the full range of potential environmental co-benefits. In particular, there 
is a need for: 
-- More comprehensive and ambitious national standards for SuDS.  
-- The automatic right to connect new development to the existing 
sewerage network to be made conditional on the national SuDS 
standards being met. 
-- A clear policy on who should maintain and adopt SuDS by default. 

DCLG 2020 

14. Defra should develop a long-term strategy to manage flood risk
down to tolerable levels in each part of the country (as we first 
recommended in 2015), so that as Flood Re is withdrawn properties can 
remain insurable at reasonable cost. This should include: 
-- Monitoring the impact of the actions adopted following the Bonfield 
Review to achieve, in five years’ time, an “environment where it is 
standard practice for properties at high risk to be made resilient”. 
-- Actively communicating the risk and possible adaptation actions to 
households and communities that are expected to remain or become at 
high flood risk by the 2030s.  
-- Ensuring that Flood Re incentivises households to take up property-
level resilience measures, which insurers should allow to be 
implemented during post-flood repairs. 

Defra 2020 

15. The Environment Agency, with Coastal Groups, should review the
ambition within, and progress being made in implementing, Shoreline 
Management Plans (SMPs), and prepare communities for the coastal 
adaptation that will need to take place between now and the middle of the 
century. 

EA 2020 

16. As recommended in our 2015 report, a standard or regulation should 
be put in place to reduce the risk of overheating in new homes. 

DCLG 2020 

17. Further action should be taken to assess and reduce the risks of
overheating in existing buildings, with the priorities being hospitals, 
schools, care homes and prisons. This could be undertaken for example 
through the relevant standards agencies such as the Care Quality 
Commission and Ofsted.  

Department of 
Health, 

Department 
for Education, 

Department 
for Justice 

2020 

Executive summary 21 




Table 2. Recommendations from the second statutory assessment of the NAP 

18. The Cabinet Office should, in consultation with Local Resilience Forums:
-- Commission an independent review of the planning scenarios 
underpinning local Risk Registers to ensure they i) they are consistent with 
plausible worst case scenarios, and ii) use the results to help LRFs assess the 
resources needed to manage these  events. 
-- Strengthen the Emergency Planning Guidance to clarify and test 
responsibilities for coordination amongst Category 1 and Category 2 
responders, as well as between neighbouring LRFs. 

CO 2020 

Infrastructure (Chapter 5) 

19. Defra should review and strengthen its guidance for ARP3 to elicit more
comparable data and conclusions about the adaptation of infrastructure. Use 
of consistent incident reporting and indicators of network resilience will 
allow performance to be tracked over time. Reporting protocols should be 
developed in partnership with sector organisations, the Cabinet Office, the 
National Infrastructure Commission, and the new National Infrastructure 
Resilience Council. 

Defra 2018 

20. Defra should ensure that all major infrastructure operators in the digital
and ICT sector take part in the third round of the ARP. This will ensure that 
the sector has considered risks, and that operators, individually and 
collectively, have developed risk management plans. 

Defra 2019 

21. To assist with the assessment and management of
interdependencies the Cabinet Office should review information sharing 
arrangements between infrastructure operators, as well as between 
operators and Local Resilience Forums. Further steps may be necessary 
to ensure that the legal duties within the Civil Contingencies Act are 
being fulfilled in practice, including the duty for Category 1 and 
Category 2 responders to cooperate and share information. 

Cabinet Office 2018 

Business (Chapter 6) 

22. The Government should promote voluntary disclosure of climate
change risks by both large and small companies, including the risks in 
relation to supply chains. 
-- The investment community should further emphasise the need for 
meaningful disclosure of how companies assess and manage climate 
change risks, in line with the recommendations of the Task Force on 
Climate-related Financial Disclosures. 
-- The Financial Reporting Council's UK Stewardship Code should ask 
investors to consider company performance and reporting on adapting 
to climate change. 
-- As a form of disclosure, the Government should promote corporate 
natural capital accounting and reporting, as recommended by the 
Natural Capital Committee. 

Defra/BEIS By 2020 

22    Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 




Table 2. Recommendations from the second statutory assessment of the NAP 

23. The Government should consult on the measures needed in the next NAP
to provide appropriate information and advice to support adaptation activity 
by businesses in England. For example, the Government could work with 
bodies such as the Confederation of British Industry, the Institute of Directors, 
the Federation of Small Businesses, Local Enterprise Partnerships, local 
chambers of commerce, and key individual sector associations, to promote 
use of the guidance and tools that were developed by the Environment 
Agency and Climate UK before their closure. 

Defra/BEIS 2018 

24. The Government should examine how public procurement rules could be
used to promote the disclosure and management of climate change risks 
including within supply chains. For example, the Crown Commercial Service 
could require companies tendering for contracts to explain how risks have 
been considered and addressed both within tenders and by their overall 
business.  

Defra/Crown 
Commercial 

Service 
By 2020 

Local government (Chapter 7) 

25. The Government should set out in the next NAP how it will ensure local
authorities have access to the technical expertise, guidance, and practical 
tools they need following the closure of the Environment Agency's Climate 
Ready Support Service, Climate UK, and Climate Local. There is potential for 
professional bodies such as the Royal Town Planning Institute and the 
Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management to take a 
greater role in providing information, training and advice. 

Defra/DCLG 2018 

26. To stimulate activity and improve monitoring and evaluation, local
authorities should be included within the scope of the third round of 
reporting under the Adaptation Reporting Power. Defra should identify 
the most efficient and effective means for local authorities to report on 
the action they are taking and the progress being made to prepare 
communities for climate change. 

Defra 2018 

27. The next NAP should develop stronger sub-national approaches to
climate change adaptation that promote business and infrastructure 
resilience, healthy communities, and investment in natural capital. For 
example, there is the opportunity to build on current arrangements and work 
with London and the core city regions, the metro mayors, and the Local 
Enterprise and Local Nature Partnerships. 

Defra 2018 

28. The Government should review the effectiveness of the land-use
planning system in achieving reductions in greenhouse gas emissions 
from buildings and transport, and enhancing the resilience of 
communities and the built environment to the impacts of climate 
change. The review should consider both strategic and local land-use 
allocation, and building and infrastructure design. 

DCLG 2019 

Executive summary 23 


  

1.2.2 The Paris Agreement 

A global agreement to curb greenhouse gas emissions was reached in Paris in December 
2015. The Paris Agreement aims to keep the global temperature increase to well below 2oC 
above pre-industrial levels by the end of this century, whilst pursuing efforts to avoid 
more than a 1.5oC increase. Current national commitments need to be significantly 
strengthened, and soon, to avoid more than 2oC of warming occurring this century. 

The Paris Agreement calls for a global stocktake of national commitments, termed Nationally 
Determined Contributions (NDCs), every five years. At present, even full implementation of 
current NDCs would probably result in a rise in global surface temperature of well above two 
degrees, with a central estimate of 2.7°C.16 If NDCs are not fulfilled, global temperatures could 
rise by more than 4°C by 2100.17 

The combination of the warming that has taken place, together with the further warming that is 
already inevitable, means the National Adaptation Programme needs to prepare the country for 
more significant changes in the UK climate than experienced to date. Even in the best case 
scenario, of warming limited to 1.5 to 2°C, there are likely to be considerable national as well as 
global impacts beyond those already observed. 

The potential also exists for disruptive shifts in the climate, with an increasing chance of severe, 
pervasive and irreversible impacts associated with higher magnitudes of warming. Possible 
abrupt and irreversible changes could include extreme sea level rise as a result of major ice loss 
from Greenland and Antarctica, changes in ocean currents, and dieback of the Amazon 
rainforest. Progressive, chronic impacts could include substantial species extinctions, large risks 
to global and regional food production, and a combination of high temperatures and humidity 
compromising normal human activity.18 

This makes it all the more important for the next NAP to consider a range of climate change 
scenarios, and not just to assume the Paris Agreement will succeed in meeting its aims. Policies 
and approaches in the NAP need to be stress-tested, using extreme, but plausible, scenarios 
involving four degrees or more of warming this century. Doing so will identify those policies and 
actions that deliver benefits in any event, as well as those that might become necessary with 
higher levels of warming. 

1.2.3 Adoption of the fifth carbon budget 

The fifth carbon budget at the level recommended by the Committee on Climate Change 
was set by Parliament in July 2016. This sets maximum emissions at 1,725 MtCO2e over the 
five year period from 2028 to 2032.19 Whilst existing policies and current progress in 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions suggest the second and third carbon budgets (to 
2022) are likely to be met, there is a significant policy gap that needs to be filled as a 
matter of urgency if the fourth and fifth budgets are to be achieved. 

Policies that reduce UK greenhouse gas emissions and those to promote adaptation need to 
complement each other, to achieve the deep emissions reductions needed whilst also increasing 
the country’s resilience to climate change. If successful, there will be a range of co-benefits for 

16 Gütschow et al. (2015) INDCs lower projected warming to 2.7 ̊C: significant progress but still above 2 ̊C. 
17 CCC (2015) The scientific and international context for the fifth carbon budget, 
https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/the-scientific-and-international-context-for-the-fifth-carbon-budget/  
18 IPCC (2014) Fifth Assessment Report, Working Group 1.  


      

30                                                            Progress in preparing for climate change  |   Committee on Climate Change 


 

                                                           

https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/the-scientific-and-international-context-for-the-fifth-carbon-budget/


  

the economy, for people and for the natural environment. There are also potential trade-offs 
that must be born in mind: approaches to emissions reduction should avoid adverse 
consequences and unnecessary impacts in a changing climate. Synergies and trade-offs 
between mitigation and adaptation polices include those in the following key areas: 

• Electricity generation. The UK power sector will have to be largely decarbonised by the end 
of the 2020s, with around 75% of electricity generation coming from low-carbon sources 
including renewables, nuclear power and Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS). There is the 
potential for a decentralised system of energy production to be more resilient to extreme 
weather, by making improvements to the flexibility of the electricity system and the network 
of energy assets (including greater use of energy storage and interconnection) in order to 
deliver increased security of supply and greater reliability.  

• Transport. During the 2020s there will need to be rapid take-up of electric road vehicles, 
lower emission conventional vehicles, more trips on public transport or walking and cycling, 
wider electrification of the rail network, and more efficient freight operations using lower 
carbon fuels. The reduction in fossil fuel use for transport promises a range of co-benefits in 
terms of air quality, water quality, and people’s health and wellbeing, helping to offset some 
of the impacts of climate change. Autonomous vehicles, if shared between users, may mean 
less space is needed in urban areas for parking. This land might be much better used for 
parks, urban wetlands and other green spaces important for managing climate change risks 
such as flooding, overheating and water scarcity. 

• Buildings. Energy efficiency retrofit programmes need to consider the thermal comfort of 
buildings in both winter and summer. High levels of insulation (including for hot water 
pipework), and energy efficient lighting and appliances, can help reduce energy use whilst 
also avoiding homes overheating in the summer months. Schemes also need to consider and 
promote natural ventilation, and measures that avoid excessive solar gain in summer, such 
as shutters and heavy curtains, external window shading, and the use of trees and other 
plants for shade and screening. 

• Land use and agriculture. Progress in reducing greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture 
has stalled in recent years, and changes to the land use, land-use change and forestry 
(LULUCF) inventory will include emissions from UK soils (including peat soils) from 2017. New 
policies are needed to promote carbon sequestration in the landscape, through greater 
woodland coverage and better soil management. Such policies will also help counter the 
risks of climate change for the water cycle, biodiversity and agricultural production. Further 
sequestration of emissions within the agriculture and land use sectors are likely to be 
required as part of the UK’s contribution towards meeting the goals of the Paris Agreement, 
helping to offset residual emissions from other sectors such as aviation. 

1.2.4 The decision to leave the European Union 

Much of the UK’s existing environmental legislation arises from our membership of the EU. 
A wide range of new policies and programmes on the environment and climate change 
adaptation will be needed to replace those that no longer apply once we have left. 

The full implications of leaving the European Union will not be apparent for some time. 
Statements by ministers since the referendum have indicated that it will not be straightforward 
to transfer into UK law all the legislation that has governed the use of land and led to 
improvements in environmental quality over the past four decades. A further complication arises 


  


Chapter 1: Introduction 31 


   

in that environmental policy is a devolved responsibility, so differences in both the speed of 
replacement and approach could occur between England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. 

The process of developing equivalent policies, legislation and scrutiny arrangements in UK law 
creates both risks and opportunities for the National Adaptation Programme. Leaving the EU 
offers the opportunity to develop new approaches that are more attuned to the UK context than 
those negotiated collectively with European partners. Replacing the Common Agricultural Policy 
(CAP) with a system of support that more effectively balances the need to produce food with the 
need to maintain and enhance natural capital for the benefit of future generations could be the 
biggest benefit. Improved outcomes from land use policy could include greater storage of 
carbon in soils and forests, greater extent, condition and connectivity of habitats, and more 
effective flood risk management at the catchment scale. 

There is a risk that the new UK approaches, where they are required, are less ambitious than the 
EU regulations being replaced, and that this will lead to reverses in the environmental 
improvements secured over several decades. Even with strong and tailored replacement 
legislation, questions of monitoring and enforcement remain. Without the European 
Commission and the Court of Justice of the European Union, the UK Government will be held to 
account by Parliament and by civil action pursued through the UK courts. It is important that this 
significant change in the way legislation is monitored and enforced does not undermine the 
delivery of important outcomes in practice. 

The Government proposes a 25-year environment plan in order to achieve an ambition to “be 
the first generation to leave the environment in a better state than we inherited it”. Such a policy 
framework, if delivered in this Parliament, would need to: 

• Be clear about what the meaning of the commitment, how it will be achieved, and how 
success will be measured. 

• Address the legislative impact of leaving the EU. 

• Reflect the Paris Agreement goal to achieve net zero greenhouse gas emissions later this 
century. For the UK this implies a significant reliance on carbon sequestration through 
improved soil management, expanded forestry, and agriculture systems and practices that 
emit substantially less methane and nitrous oxide. 

• Reflect the changes already underway in the UK’s natural systems due to the warming to 
date, and recognise that further change is inevitable. 

• Enable the strengthening of ecosystem resilience to current and future changes by 
addressing the deep-seated pressures affecting England’s semi-natural and farmed 
landscapes, such as poor air quality, diffuse water pollution, and damaging land 
management practices. 

1.2.5 The second UK Climate Change Risk Assessment 

Whilst this progress report reviews the delivery and effectiveness of the current NAP, 
which was published in 2013, its recommendations will be presented in the context of the 
latest UK Climate Change Risk Assessment presented to Parliament in January 2017.  

The second UK Climate Change Risk Assessment was informed by the ASC’s independent 
Evidence Report, which identified six urgent areas of climate change risk to be tackled as a 



     

32                                                            Progress in preparing for climate change  |   Committee on Climate Change 


   


priority.20 These priorities were endorsed by the Government in their formal report to 
Parliament.21 The updated NAP, in 2018, should make clear how these risks will be addressed 
and the means by which progress, in addressing vulnerabilities, will be monitored and 
evaluated. 

• Flooding and coastal change. The impacts of flooding and coastal change in the UK are 
already significant and expected to increase as a result of climate change. Improving 
protection for some communities will be possible whilst others will face the prospect of 
significantly increased risks. If unmanaged, risks will affect property values, business 
revenues and in extreme cases the viability of communities. These potentially severe, 
localised impacts are not yet being fully planned for. Warming of 4oC or more implies 
inevitable increases in flood risk across all UK regions, even in the most ambitious adaptation 
scenarios considered in producing CCRA2.  

• Heat-related health impacts. The average number of hot days in the UK has been 
increasing since the 1970s. Temperatures similar to those experienced in the 2003 European 
heatwave, are expected to become the norm in summer by the 2040s. There are as yet no 
policies in place to adapt existing buildings and ensure new developments do not overheat 
in hot weather. Delaying the introduction of legal requirements to ensure homes, hospitals, 
care facilities, schools and prisons, as well as business premises, are safe and operable in high 
temperatures will increase risks, lead to longer-term wellbeing impacts, and reduce 
productivity in hot weather. 

• Water scarcity. Population growth will increase the demand for water, whilst climate 
change is projected to make rainfall less dependable. The potential for water shortages is 
most acute in London and the south east but routine deficits between available water and 
demand may emerge in northern and western UK areas by mid-century. There is an urgent 
need for longer-term water resource planning to assess the scale of risks, more co-ordinated 
action to ensure resilient supplies especially in times of drought, and further steps to achieve 
the ambitious reductions in water demand and leakage that are likely to be required. 

• Risks to natural capital. Climate change presents a substantial risk to the UK’s native 
wildlife and to the vital goods and services provided by natural capital, including food, 
timber and fibre, clean water, and carbon storage. Projected increases in soil aridity and 
wildfire risks, changes in the availability and temperature of freshwater, and the acidification 
and warming of UK seas, will exacerbate existing pressures including pollution, habitat loss, 
threats from invasive species, and the over-exploitation of natural resources. New 
approaches that safeguard and enhance the natural environment whilst maintaining 
agricultural production are needed urgently. 

• The international food system. The UK’s imported food comes from relatively few 
countries and many of these will be significantly impacted by climate change, for example 
southern France, Spain, the United States, and countries across Africa. Extreme weather 
events affecting international production, trade, and supply chains, could make food prices 
more volatile. Longer-term incremental changes in climate are likely to alter the agricultural 
productivity of regions that are important for global food production. The resilience of the 
UK food system in the long-term will depend on the stewardship of natural resources here 

20 ASC (2016) UK Climate Change Risk Assessment 2017: Evidence Report, https://www.theccc.org.uk/UK-climate-
change-risk-assessment-2017/  
21 Defra (2017) UK Climate Change Risk Assessment 2017. 


  


Chapter 1: Introduction 33 


 

                                                           

https://www.theccc.org.uk/UK-climate-change-risk-assessment-2017/
https://www.theccc.org.uk/UK-climate-change-risk-assessment-2017/


  

and overseas, as well as how international markets respond to the pressures from climate 
change. 

• New and emerging pests and diseases. The warmer, wetter conditions expected with 
climate change will allow some pests and disease vectors to extend their range. Disease 
outbreaks are difficult to predict, have widespread direct as well as indirect impacts on the 
environment, communities and economies, and are very expensive to manage once 
established. There is an urgent need for further research to inform government policy and 
operational measures, such as additional surveillance of emerging pathogens and 
monitoring of existing problem species. Nationally and internationally there is a need for 
more research and collaboration – particularly with other countries in Europe - to understand 
how pest and disease outbreaks and the spread of invasive non-native species can be 
contained. 

1.3    Structure of this report 
The chapters that follow this introduction provide the ASC’s second and final assessment 
of the current NAP. The structure of this report differs slightly from the ASC’s first 
assessment of the NAP in 2015, in order that related climate change risks and policy areas 
are considered together, as they were in the ASC’s evidence report for CCRA2. 

The first NAP presented objectives, policies and proposals under six main themes (outlined in 
Chapter 2). This approach led to some fragmentation of closely related policy areas and 
outcomes. We have therefore consolidated four of the NAP’s themes into two chapters, in line 
with our approach to CCRA2: 

• In the first NAP, actions to promote healthy and resilient communities were presented 
separately from those concerning the built environment. Climate change will affect people’s 
health and wellbeing in a number of ways including through the impact of weather events 
on homes, offices and public buildings, and whether health and social care facilities are able 
to safeguard patients and vulnerable groups. CCRA2 therefore combined these themes in to 
a single chapter called People and the Built Environment. 

• Policy and action on the natural environment were separated in the NAP from agriculture and 
forestry. Productive farming, forestry and fishing industries, and a healthy and resilient 
natural environment, are objectives that need to be pursued together, otherwise one could 
be achieved at the expense of the other in a way that is not sustainable in the long-term. 
CCRA2 combined these themes in to a single Natural Environment and Natural Assets chapter. 

The remainder of this report is structured as follows: 

• Chapter 2 presents our overall assessment of the current National Adaptation Programme 
published in 2013, and makes overarching recommendations on how the NAP should be 
improved in future, based on the experience of progress to date, and in the context of the 
significant events and developments since our last progress report described at the 
beginning of this chapter. Recommendations for action in specific risk areas are presented in 
subsequent chapters. 

• Chapter 3 covers our assessment for the Natural environment, including commercial land 
use such as agriculture and forestry. The chapter also includes the marine environment, 
fisheries and aquaculture. 



     

34                                                            Progress in preparing for climate change  |   Committee on Climate Change 


 


• Chapter 4 is our combined assessment regarding People and the built environment. The
chapter focuses on flood risk management, coastal change, emergency planning for severe
weather events, as well as wellbeing impacts from overheating, poor air quality, and new and
emerging pests and diseases.

• Chapter 5 assesses the resilience of new and existing Infrastructure, adopting the same
structure as in our 2015 progress report to Parliament.

• Chapter 6 updates our assessment of adaptation action in the Business sector.

• Chapter 7 is a cross-cutting chapter on Local government, looking at the critical role that
local authorities play in enabling, supporting and delivering adaptation within communities.

Chapter 1: Introduction 35 




Chapter 2: The National 
Adaptation Programme 




Key messages 

Context 

The formal presentation of a new UK Climate Change Risk Assessment to Parliament in January 2017 
initiated a second, five-year climate change risk management cycle. To help the Government develop 
its revised National Adaptation Programme (NAP), due in 2018, this chapter provides an overview of 
the progress being made by the current NAP and the ASC’s overarching advice on how it should be 
updated and improved. Specific recommendations on individual risks are presented in the subsequent 
chapters. 

Summary of progress 

The ASC’s first assessment of the NAP in 2015 welcomed its comprehensive nature and the level 
of stakeholder involvement in its development. However, we noted that the objectives set by 
the first NAP describe processes rather than outcomes against which progress can be measured. 
In aiming to be comprehensive and inclusive, the first NAP lacked clear priorities and an overall 
sense of purpose. 

The Government responded to the ASC’s first assessment in October 2015. The response supported the 
majority of recommendations in principle, but in only a third of cases has additional action been taken. 
Almost all of the original NAP actions are now reported to be complete or ‘on track’ by those 
responsible, and there has been a notable drop in NAP-related activity and focus since the ASC’s first 
assessment. With some exceptions, despite progress with NAP actions, in many areas the vulnerability 
to climate change is not reducing and in some it has increased. It is therefore timely for the National 
Adaptation Programme to be refreshed and updated. 

The Adaptation Sub-Committee looks forward to a more ambitious set of policies and proposals in the 
second NAP that, when delivered, will reduce demonstrably the country’s vulnerability to climate 
change. 

Recommendations for further progress 

The chapters that follow make a number of recommendations in specific areas of climate risk. The 
recommendations below are overarching, relating broadly to the NAP itself. 

RECOMMENDATION 1: To ensure that activity and investments have a significant, cost-effective impact 
on reducing vulnerabilities, the second NAP should: 

• set clear priorities for adaptation; 

• ensure objectives are outcome-focused, measurable, time-bound and have clear ownership; 

• prioritise the core set of policies and actions that will have the biggest impact; 

• build on the breadth of community and business engagement in the first NAP; and 

• include effective monitoring and evaluation. 

RECOMMENDATION 2: The second NAP should address the important interdependencies between climate 
change risks and policy responses which fall within and across the remits of different government 
departments, and national, local and devolved governments, to ensure relevant policies and activity are co-
ordinated across the programme. 

RECOMMENDATION 3: To ensure continuous improvement in the approach to reducing climate change 
risks, the second NAP should have a strong focus on evidence and evaluation: 

• there is the need and opportunity to work through UK Research and Innovation and the individual
research councils to develop the evidence base in time to inform the third UK Climate Change Risk 
Assessment in 2022, making full use of the new UK Climate Projections in 2018; 

Chapter 2: The National Adaptation Programme 37 




Key messages 

• more attention needs to be paid to the evaluation of existing policies and approaches in order to learn
lessons for future initiatives; and 

• the costs and benefits of more ambitious policy options need to be considered and appraised. 

RECOMMENDATION 4: The Government should explore cost-effective ways to communicate the risks 
from climate change and the actions that can be taken to reduce vulnerabilities. Priorities include: 

• engaging vulnerable groups and communities exposed to specific risks such as higher temperatures, 
coastal change, and increases in flood risk; 

• challenging the relevant professional bodies (such as the Landscape Institute, the Royal Town Planning 
Institute, and the Institution of Civil Engineers), and trade associations (for example the National
Federation of Builders), to increase their level of engagement with members regarding climate change, 
and to improve the training, guidance and professional accreditation they offer; and 

• raising awareness amongst the general public including through community groups and national 
membership organisations such as the National Trust, the Royal Horticultural Society, and the RSPB. 

2.1 The first National Adaptation Programme 

2.1.1 Summary of the current National Adaptation Programme 

The first National Adaptation Programme was published in July 2013, following a period 
of extensive consultation with stakeholders across the public, private and third sectors.  

Under the 2008 Climate Change Act, the Secretary of State has a duty to lay programmes before 
Parliament setting out (a) the objectives of the Government in relation to adaptation, (b) the 
Government’s proposals and policies for meeting those objectives, and (c) the time-scales for 
introducing those proposals and policies. The Act also specifies that these objectives, policies 
and proposals must address the risks identified in the most recent Climate Change Risk 
Assessment, as well as contributing to sustainable development. 

Defra is the lead government department responsible for co-ordinating the preparation of the 
NAP. For the first NAP Defra took an open and consultative approach, termed ‘co-creation’, 
whereby stakeholders were encouraged to help write the NAP’s objectives and propose 
activities for inclusion in the programme. 

The first NAP was structured according to six main themes: Built Environment, Infrastructure, 
Healthy & Resilient Communities, Agriculture & Forestry, Natural Environment, and Business, each 
forming a chapter. A cross-cutting Local Government chapter was also included, to reflect the 
important role that local authorities play in climate change adaptation across the country. 

The requirement of the Act to set out ‘policies and proposals for meeting the objectives’ was 
embodied in more than 370 specific actions. The majority of these actions were owned by 
central Government departments and their agencies. The remaining actions were owned by 
local government, trade bodies, universities, utility companies, regulators, voluntary groups and 
environmental charities. This widespread ownership of actions resulted from the co-creation 
process. 

38 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 




2.1.2 Approach to evaluating the National Adaptation Programme 

The ASC has established a method for evaluating progress being made by the NAP in 
reducing the country’s vulnerability to climate change. The method was presented in our 
first report to Parliament in 2015 and is used again here. 

Measuring progress in adapting to climate change can be difficult. Unlike monitoring 
greenhouse gas emissions, there is no single adaptation metric to track over time. The 
availability of relevant data can be limited and adaptation is context specific, with risks and 
opportunities in some parts of the country being much greater than in others.  

The statement of the Government’s objectives in the first NAP tended to be in the form of 
activities or processes (for example ‘Objective 8: To develop regulatory frameworks to support 
and promote a resilient and adaptive infrastructure sector’) rather than achieving specific 
adaptation outcomes (such as reducing the vulnerability, in some quantifiable way, of target 
groups or sectors to the identified risks). There are few stated goals in the current NAP against 
which progress can be meaningfully measured. Even where the stated objectives are being 
achieved, vulnerability to climate change impacts may still be increasing. 

To enable a robust assessment, the ASC divided each of the main themes of the NAP into 
specific priority areas that we consider the most important for managing the risks from climate 
change. For example, adaptation priorities within the natural environment theme include: soil 
health, water availability and quality, and the condition of important habitat types (for example 
terrestrial, marine and coastal). 

For each adaptation priority, the ASC has considered: 

• Is there a plan? We assess whether there is an explicit policy or plan in place that aims to
address the relevant climate risks. For example, the National Planning Policy Statement
explicitly considers climate change and provides a framework for planning decisions that
take account of flood and coastal erosion risks, in particular.

• Are actions taking place? We consider whether the specific actions listed in the NAP have
been delivered, or are on track. The actions in the NAP are effectively the ‘policies and
proposals’ described in the Act. In order to be comprehensive, the assessment is not
restricted to only those actions listed in the NAP. Any significant, relevant action taking place
outside of the NAP or initiated since also forms part of the assessment. Those responsible for
the actions listed in the NAP were asked to provide an update to inform this report.

• Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? This is our overall evaluation of
progress. Even where plans are in place, and actions are being taken, our assessment may
conclude that vulnerabilities are still increasing. The assessment takes account of the scale of
the current and future risks, the effectiveness of current policies, and the impact of relevant
plans and actions. Where possible, the evaluation is based on a suite of indicators that the
ASC has developed. These provide information that help show, over time, changes in
exposure and vulnerability, and observed climate impacts, within each priority area.
Consideration is given to the time that some actions can take to deliver measurable changes
in vulnerability.

For each adaptation priority we have assigned a red-amber-green (RAG) score to summarise our 
evaluation of progress. A ‘grey’ rating is given where there is insufficient evidence to form a 
judgement. Annex 2.1 explains the criteria used in arriving at these scores. The results for 

Chapter 2: The National Adaptation Programme 39 


  

individual areas are presented in the chapters that follow. A summary is presented below in 
Section 2.2. 

Before presenting the overall results of the second assessment we describe what has happened 
since our first report to Parliament in 2015 in terms of: 

• the Government’s response to the recommendations made by the ASC two years ago; and 

• the current status and delivery of the 370+ actions in the original NAP. 

2.1.3 The Government’s response to our progress report in 2015 

The Adaptation Sub-Committee made 36 recommendations to the Government and others 
in our first progress report on the NAP in 2015. There were 11 priority recommendations 
on issues where the evidence suggested the country’s vulnerability to climate change 
impacts was increasing. The Government agreed in principle with the majority of the 
recommendations, but few commitments were made in response to review policies or to 
take additional action. 

The Government responded to our first progress report on 15 October 2015. Their response 
considered each of the ASC’s recommendations in turn, and responded in one of three general 
ways (Figure 2.1): 

• The Government agreed with the specific suggestions in nearly a third of the ASC’s 
recommendations, and committed itself (or has subsequently done so) to changing its 
approach or to taking additional action. For example, the Government agreed to develop a 
new national action plan on managing surface water flood risk, subsequently published in 
February 2017. Also as recommended, there has been an increased emphasis on natural 
approaches to flood risk management, with £15 million allocated in November 2016 towards 
new natural flood management demonstration projects. However, this followed the severe 
storms of winter 2015/16 rather than as an immediate response to our report. 

• For over half of our recommendations the Government considered existing activity to 
be sufficient to manage the issues highlighted, even though current policies and activity 
were taken into account in our assessment. As a result, in some cases, the same or similar 
recommendations appear in this report. For example, the Government considered existing 
requirements to share information on infrastructure assets and network vulnerability 
between operators and Local Resilience Forums (LRFs) to be sufficient. A recent repeat of our 
2015 survey of LRF members found access to operators’ data on local infrastructure assets 
continues to be an obstacle to managing the risks of infrastructure failure. 

• In a small number (around 15%) of cases, the Government disagreed with our analysis 
or considered other priorities to be of overriding importance. For example, there is a 
compelling case for new building standards to be set to avoid new homes and other 
buildings adding to the number that already overheat in warmer weather, and will need to 
be adapted in future. The Government stated in its response that it was mindful of burdens 
on developers. This issue is discussed again below. 

Of the 11 priority recommendations relating to areas of increasing vulnerability, one was fully 
accepted by Government: the need for a new surface water action plan, mentioned above. One 
other recommendation, relating to better reporting of water company activity to prevent sewer 
flooding, was accepted by Ofwat. Across the remaining recommendations, there were two 
particular areas of concern regarding the Government’s response: 


     

40 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


 


• Promoting sustainable drainage systems (SuDS) in new development. The Government
rejected a series of priority recommendations in this area, saying it was too soon to judge
whether the new policy introduced in April 2015 to promote SuDS through the planning
system was having the desired effect. In response to pressure in the House of Lords during
the passage of the 2016 Housing and Planning Act, the Government conceded an
amendment requiring them to review the impact of the new policy. The Housing Minister
subsequently committed, on record, to do so in time to inform this report.22 The results were
due in April 2017 but were not available at the time of writing.

• Preventing heat-related health impacts. The Government rejected the ASC’s
recommendation for a new building standard to avoid new homes overheating, because of
being ‘mindful of other commitments, for example to reduce net regulation on
homebuilders’. The Government also declined to take further steps on two closely-related
priority recommendations, to tackle overheating in existing homes, hospitals and care
homes, and to act to reverse historic declines in urban greenspace. Instead, the Department
for Communities and Local Government commissioned further research on overheating
through the Zero Carbon Hub. This was published in March 2016. The Zero Carbon Hub
closed at the end of March 2016 as a consequence of the zero carbon homes target being
withdrawn.23

Figure 2.1. The Government’s response to ASC recommendations in 2015 

Source: ASC analysis. 
Notes: There were 36 recommendations in our 2015 report but some had several elements, making a total of 40 
recommendations overall. The forty elements have been categorised as follows: 
• Accepted: the Government committed to take additional action in its response, or has done so since.
• Partially accepted: the Government agreed with the analysis but considered existing activity to be

sufficient.
• Rejected: the Government disagreed with the analysis, or considered other priorities to be more important.

22 See Hansard, 27 October 2016, 4pm, Neighbourhood Planning Bill (seventh sitting), column 297. 
23 See: http://www.zerocarbonhub.org/news/zero-carbon-hub-close  

0 2 4 6 8 10 12

Local Government

Business

Agriculture & Forestry

Natural Environment

Infrastructure

Healthy & Resilient Communities

Built Environment

National Adaptation Programme

Recommendations

Accepted

Partially
accepted

Rejected

Chapter 2: The National Adaptation Programme 41 

http://www.zerocarbonhub.org/news/zero-carbon-hub-close


  

2.1.4 Delivery of NAP actions since 2015 

Half of the 370+ actions contained in the first NAP are now marked as complete by their 
owners, with the majority of the remaining actions considered ‘on track’. The ongoing 
actions generally have no timescale for delivery, and few of the completed actions have 
been replaced by significant new activity. As a result there has been a notable reduction in 
effort and focus on the National Adaptation Programme since 2015. 

Through Defra, the Adaptation Sub-Committee commissioned updates from those identified as 
responsible for each of the actions in the first NAP. Figure 2.2 shows the status of actions within 
each of the NAP’s themes, for 2015 and 2017. These updates show the following:  

• The proportion of completed NAP actions has risen from 29% in 2015 to 51% in 2017. 

• The proportion of actions either complete or on track has remained the same (86%). 

• The percentage of actions for which we have not received an update has increased from 4% 
in 2015 to 7% in 2017. 

• The number of actions that have been dropped, revised or delayed has fallen but this may 
include cases where we have not been given an update. In some instances no update was 
possible because the organisations or programmes involved no longer exist. 

Some actions deemed complete in 2015 have been followed by further action. As a result, some 
actions have been reclassified from ‘complete’ to ‘on track’ by their owners, and in others 
additional actions have been added.24 New actions include updating policies, improving 
communications, and integrating climate change into future plans. 

The full text of the updates received is available as an annex to this report available on the CCC 
website (Annex 1: Update on NAP actions). 


  

24 For example, the number of actions for the infrastructure theme has increased from 91 to 95 since 2015. 


     

42 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


 

                                                           




Figure 2.2. Status of actions in the current National Adaptation Programme 

Source: ASC analysis of returns received from action owners, the majority commissioned through Defra (those 
relating to government departments and their agencies), with other organisations contacted directly by the ASC. 

2.2 Summary of the ASC’s second assessment of the NAP 
Following the approach presented in Section 2.1.2, the ASC has allocated a RAG score to 
each of the adaptation priorities considered in this report (Figure 2.3). The number of 
adaptation priorities given a ‘red’ rating has increased since our 2015 report. 

This second assessment follows the same approach and same criteria to determine RAG scores 
as in 2015 (Annex 2.1). Combining some of the NAP themes in this assessment has reduced the 
number of adaptation priorities. As a result, in some areas, the results of this assessment cannot 
be directly compared with our 2015 report. 

Where the results of our 2015 and 2017 assessments can be compared: 

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100



2017




2015




2017




2015




2017




2015




2017




2015




2017




2015




2017




2015




2017




2015Local Government Business Natural Environment Agriculture &Forestry Healthy &Resilient Communities Infrastructure Built Environment

Number of actions

Complete On-track Revised/Delayed Dropped No update

Chapter 2: The National Adaptation Programme 43 




• The number of areas where plans and policies are assessed as ‘red’ has increased since
2015 (Figure 2.3, ‘Is there a plan?’). These include: soil management; fisheries; new
development in areas of surface water flood risk; and the resilience of ICT infrastructure.

• More areas have been assessed as ‘red’ in terms of trends in vulnerability (Figure 2.3, ‘Is
progress being made?’). These include three aspects of flood risk management: surface water
risk management, new development in areas of surface water flood risk, property-level flood
resilience; and four aspects of the natural environment: the condition of terrestrial habitats,
and freshwater habitats, soil health and carbon sequestration, and biodiversity in the farmed
countryside.

• Some areas assessed previously as green have moved to amber, within each of the
three components of the assessment. Some current plans and policies are due to expire,
and in a number of important areas action has decreased or has been postponed or
cancelled since 2015. For example, the current biodiversity strategy for England expires in
three years. The process of public consultation on the proposed 25 year plan for the
environment has been delayed. This has affected our assessment of plans and policies in the
natural environment chapter.

• The number of areas assessed as ‘grey’ has decreased (where there is insufficient data to
form a judgement). Important new data sources include the adaptation reports compiled as
part of the second round of ARP reporting, published in 2015 and 2016.

Figure 2.3. Summary of progress by the National Adaptation Programme 

Source: ASC assessment of policies and plans, actions, and progress, for each adaptation priority. 
Notes: Adaptation priorities are presented according to the themes in the National Adaptation Programme. 
The colours depict the proportion of 'adaptation priorities' within each theme, categorised as either: 
• Red: plans and policies, delivery of actions, or progress in addressing vulnerabilities, are lacking.
• Amber: adaptation priority partially addressed in plans, some actions delivered, some progress in some

areas.
• Green: plans are in place, actions are being delivered, progress is being made.
• Grey: insufficient evidence to form a judgement.

Built Environment

Infrastructure

Healthy & Resilient
communities

Agriculture & Forestry

Natural Environment

Business

Is there a plan? Are actions taking 
place?

Is progress being 
made?

Proportion of adaptation priorities

0 100% 0 100% 0 100%

44 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 




Figure 2.4 presents the results of the assessment, using the first and third components of 
the assessment: Is there a plan? and Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 
Those adaptation priorities in the top row and left-hand column are the most pressing in 
terms of the next NAP. 

Two priorities have been given a ‘double-red’ rating (top left-hand corner of Figure 2.4); where 
the evidence suggests vulnerabilities are increasing and plans and policies that address the risks 
from climate change are not yet in place. 

Figure 2.4. Adaptation priorities: are plans in place, and is progress being made? 

Source: ASC assessment of policies and plans, and progress, for each adaptation priority. 
Notes: Adaptation priorities have been categorised as follows: 
• Red: plans and policies do not account for climate change risks, indicators of vulnerability are increasing.
• Amber: plans and policies partially address climate change risks, indicators of vulnerability show mixed

progress.
• Green: plans and policies are in place, indicators of vulnerability are generally falling.
• Grey: insufficient evidence to form a judgement.

Key to changes since 2015: ↑ increased concern, ↓ decreased concern, ↔ no change since 2015, 
new: not part of 2015 assessment, n/a: scope of assessment changed so comparison with 2015 not possible. 

• River and coastal flood alleviation (↓)
• Resilience of water and energy infrastructure (↓)
• Water demand by industry (↓)


RED


GREEN

RED AMBER GREEN

• None
• Water demand in the 

built environment (↑)
• Crops and livestock (n/a)

• NoneGREY • Resilience of digital and ICT infrastructure (↑)

• Marine and coastal
habitats (n/a)
• Resilience of port and 

airport infrastructure (↓)
• Infrastructure

interdependencies (↔)
• Business supply chain

interruptions (↔)
• Business opportunities

from climate change (↑)

• Development in areas at river and
coastal flood risk (n/a)
• Capacity of people to recover from flooding (↔)
• Coastal change risk management (new)
• Pathogens, air quality and UV radiation (↔)
• Effectiveness of emergency planning system (↑)
• Water management in the

natural environment (n/a)
• Commercial forestry (↑)
• Design and location of new infrastructure (↔)
• Resilience of road and rail infrastructure (↔)
• Business impacts from extreme weather (↔)

AMBER
• Health impacts from

heat and cold (n/a)
• Commercial fisheries

and aquaculture (new)

Is there
a plan?


Is progress beingmade in managing vulnerability

? • None

• Development and
surface water 
flood risk (n/a)
• Soil health and carbon 

sequestration (↑)

• Property-level flood
resilience (n/a)
• Surface water flood

alleviation (↑)
• Resilience of

terrestrial habitats (↑)
• Resilience of

freshwater habitats (↑)
• Biodiversity in the farmed 

countryside (↔)

Chapter 2: The National Adaptation Programme 45 


  

2.3 Advice on the second National Adaptation Programme 

2.3.1 Creating a greater sense of purpose and priority 

With many of the actions in the first NAP completed and a new CCRA in place, it is timely 
for the National Adaptation Programme to be refreshed. In doing so the Government has 
the opportunity to state its objectives, proposals and policies for managing climate 
change risks, taking on board lessons from the first exercise. Within the broad scope of 
adaptation requirements, there is a need for the Government to focus its efforts on 
tackling the most urgent climate change risks and opportunities, and ensure that policies 
are having the intended effect in reducing vulnerability.  

The ASC’s first assessment of the NAP in 2015 welcomed its comprehensive nature and the level 
of stakeholder involvement in its development. However, the objectives set by the first NAP 
describe processes, rather than outcomes against which progress can meaningfully be assessed. 
The first NAP, in aiming to be comprehensive and inclusive, lacked clear priorities and an overall 
sense of purpose. The ASC made a general recommendation in its 2015 report to address this. 
This second assessment further emphasises the importance of that recommendation, which we 
repeat, in summary form, as our first overarching recommendation. 

RECOMMENDATION 1: To ensure that activity and investments have a significant, cost-effective 
impact on reducing vulnerabilities, the second NAP should: 

• set clear priorities for adaptation; 

• ensure objectives are outcome-focused, measurable, time-bound and have clear ownership; 

• prioritise the core set of policies and actions that will have the biggest impact; 

• build on the breadth of community and business engagement in the first NAP; and 

• include effective monitoring and evaluation. 

The Government accepted the thrust of this recommendation in its formal response in October 
2015 to our first report. The response proposed a two-tier approach to adaptation actions in the 
next NAP. The first tier would focus on the highest impact and most needed policies and actions 
with clear timeframes, targets, and monitoring and evaluation. The second tier would capture a 
summary of much broader activity across the public sector and beyond that supports the 
Government’s adaptation objectives. 

2.3.2 The NAP as a programme, greater than the sum of its parts 

For the NAP to be successful, it has to do more than just summarise existing policies and 
programmes. It needs to address the risks of climate change in a strategic and integrated 
way. It needs to provide a strong message nationally and locally that adaptation is 
important and should be made a priority. 

The National Adaptation Programme has the potential to improve the cost-effectiveness of 
individual policies, and deliver robust early benefits, as well as reduce the long-term risks from 
climate change. To be an effective national plan, the second National Adaptation Programme 
must: 

• galvanise, enhance and coordinate the measures being taken by individual parts of 
government, and the wider public, private and third sectors; 



     

46 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


   


• make sure sufficient financial and other resources are allocated to adaptation activity where 
there is a clear cost-benefit case and progress would not otherwise occur; 

• ensure sufficient evidence is collected and disseminated to guide policy development and 
continuous learning at the national and local levels; and 

• provide the ASC with the data it needs to conduct its assessment and provide robust advice. 

The ASC’s evidence report for the second UK Climate Change Risk Assessment (CCRA2) 
highlighted the following six domains where interacting risks, and policies, need to be 
managed as part of the next National Adaptation programme.25 

There are also important interdependencies between the six domains that need to be 
considered when designing policies, so that interventions lead to the desired outcomes in the 
most cost-effective way. 

• Natural capital. A healthy natural environment is vital for UK food and water security, 
economic prosperity and wellbeing. Increases in soil aridity and water scarcity, changes in 
average and extreme temperatures, the timing of seasonal events and ocean acidification, 
are the most significant climate change risks to the UK’s natural capital. 

• Water security. Water security encompasses inland and marine water quality, freshwater 
availability and the management of flood risk. Water security risks interact strongly with 
those affecting the natural environment (mainly through soil condition and biodiversity). 
How water is managed in the future will have implications for agricultural production, public 
health and wellbeing, natural capital and infrastructure service provision. 

• Food security. Food availability, affordability, safety and nutrition are strongly dependent 
on environmental conditions in the UK and abroad. UK food security depends on stable 
international markets and global trade as well as domestic production. Food production in 
the UK is dependent on natural capital, particularly soils and water, and current deep-seated 
pressures on the natural environment could limit domestic production in the future. 

• Wellbeing. Quality of life, material living conditions, and the sustainability of socio-
economic and natural environments will be impacted by climate change mainly through 
flooding, heat risks, and vector-, food- and water-borne diseases. These risks can affect 
health, life expectancy, living costs, properties and livelihoods, habitats and landscapes, 
historic places and green spaces. Loss of green space, in turn, exacerbates health risks 
through its effect on urban temperature and air quality, and by limiting opportunities for 
recreation and physical exercise. 

• Economic prosperity. Economic prosperity (encompassing resources, growth, productivity 
and a skilled and flexible labour market) will be influenced by how businesses adapt to 
changing climate risks both in the UK and abroad. The level of risk will be to at least some 
degree outside the control of individual businesses, such as the resilience of key 
infrastructure where perceptions of risk can affect inward UK investment. Successful 
management of risks by businesses will help safeguard public health and wellbeing, 
including of their employees, and the health of the natural assets they rely on.  

• Global security. Global security encompasses international laws, institutions and values of 
societies and is the basis for successful international cooperation. Global security is needed 
to preserve UK economic interests abroad. Climate change compounds economic, 

25 Street, R. et al. (2016) UK Climate Change Risk Assessment 2017, Chapter 8: Cross-cutting issues. 


  

Chapter 2: The National Adaptation Programme 47 


 

                                                           


  

environmental and geopolitical pressures, with impacts on populations, economies, 
livelihoods and natural resources around the world. It will challenge water security, 
agriculture and transport networks, affecting countries’ economies and could exacerbate 
state fragility in some cases. 

RECOMMENDATION 2: The second NAP should address the important interdependencies between 
climate change risks and policy responses which fall within and across the remits of different 
government departments, and national, local and devolved governments, to ensure relevant policies 
and activity are co-ordinated across the programme. 

A common issue encountered in conducting this assessment is the paucity of robust and 
relevant evidence, both on the actions being taken and also regarding how policies and 
activity affect the country’s vulnerability to climate change. 

This has been particularly evident in the business and local government sectors, but was also 
apparent in the infrastructure analysis and in respect of public health risks in the built 
environment. The ASC is heavily reliant on datasets collected for the operational needs of 
individual organisations, or as required by regulators and government bodies. Data are collected 
for different purposes, on different timescales, and in different ways. This makes it problematic 
to compare performance between sectors and organisations, such as between different types of 
infrastructure, and even, for example, between individual water companies. 

The NAP therefore needs to consider how to improve data collection and enhance the evidence 
base. Gaps in data need to be filled, and existing data sources made more relevant and 
consistent. This would help inform future Government adaptation programmes and priorities, 
allow improved performance benchmarking between organisations, and help the ASC to 
perform its statutory roles. There is a specific need to take forward the research gaps identified 
during the process of compiling CCRA2 (Box 2.1). We will be reviewing existing data sources and 
the current indicator set we have developed as we prepare for our next progress report in 2019. 
We are ready to help the Government consider where improvements in the evidence base 
would be most valuable as part of the revised NAP. 

RECOMMENDATION 3: To ensure continuous improvement in the approach to reducing climate 
change risks, the second NAP should have a strong focus on evidence and evaluation: 

• there is the need and opportunity to work through UK Research and Innovation and the 
individual research councils to develop the evidence base in time to inform the third UK Climate 
Change Risk Assessment in 2022, making full use of the new UK Climate Projections in 2018; 

• more attention needs to be paid to the evaluation of existing policies and approaches in order to 
learn lessons for future initiatives; and 

• the costs and benefits of more ambitious policy options need to be considered and appraised. 


           

48 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


 


Box 2.1. The need for an interdisciplinary research programme to inform CCRA3 

Lord Krebs, as outgoing chair of the ASC, wrote in February 2017 to the chief executives of the UK 
research councils to highlight the significant gaps in the scientific evidence base that were identified 
by the second UK Climate Change Risk Assessment. CCRA2 identified over 20 cross-cutting research 
needs as well as around 200 specific evidence gaps within the sectors considered. A full list of the gaps 
is available on the CCC’s website (see link below). 

The letter called for the research councils to work together to address these evidence needs in time for 
future climate change risk assessments, beginning with CCRA3 due to be completed in 2022, and to 
enable timely and cost-effective actions by a range of stakeholders. 

The UK has significant strengths in climate change science and impacts research, but many of the 
evidence needs are multi-disciplinary and do not fall within the remit of any one research council. 
There is therefore a need for joint work and coordination relating to economics, behaviour and human 
health, land use, infrastructure and the built environment, and natural systems. 

In particular, the letter proposed an integrated, UK-wide spatial modelling capability that would be 
able to link climate change processes in the following areas: 

• the natural environment (e.g. flooding, droughts and species migration);

• impacts on humans (e.g. health, social, economic and cultural impacts);

• agriculture (e.g. crop productivity, soil condition);

• infrastructure (e.g. energy, transport, water and digital systems); and

• the built environment.

Current science and modelling capability could be brought together and focussed upon evaluating the 
costs and benefits of adaptation policies and actions in these areas. 

Professor Andrew Thompson responded in March 2017 on behalf of the research councils. The letter 
pledged financial support for CCRA3 from the Natural Environment Research Council (NERC), and 
suggested the newly formed UK Research and Innovation (UKRI) would be best placed to consider the 
need for an interdisciplinary research programme. Baroness Brown has begun to discuss this with 
Professor Sir Mark Walport, appointed as UKRI’s first Chief Executive in February 2017. 

Source: Both letters and the list of CCRA2 research gaps can be found at: https://www.theccc.org.uk/uk-climate-
change-risk-assessment-2017/review-and-engagement/research-conference/ 

2.3.3 The importance of public engagement in the next NAP 

In our 2015 report we recommended that the Government should engage the general 
public about climate change and its consequences for the UK. The Government endorsed 
the recommendation in principle, but felt it appropriate to continue to focus on individual 
issues such as flood risk, and provide specific incident-based advice to vulnerable groups, 
for example during periods of high temperatures. This approach only addresses 
immediate issues, it does not prepare the country for the inevitable and increasingly 
severe changes to come. 

Despite the scientific consensus on climate change, and the growing evidence of the impacts 
already being felt in the UK, the National Adaptation Programme does not currently include any 
element of public engagement. Individual ‘present day’ hazards are communicated as they arise, 
led by the relevant departments and agencies (for example, Public Health England regarding 

Chapter 2: The National Adaptation Programme 49 

https://www.theccc.org.uk/uk-climate-change-risk-assessment-2017/review-and-engagement/research-conference/
https://www.theccc.org.uk/uk-climate-change-risk-assessment-2017/review-and-engagement/research-conference/


  

high temperatures during heatwaves). This fragmented approach does not give the public the 
information they need to make informed long-term choices. Properties will need to be adapted 
to higher temperatures and heightened flood risks, requiring planning and investment by 
owners and occupiers, in advance of heatwaves and flooding if health and economic impacts are 
to be avoided. 

Awareness of the expected impacts of climate change enables people to plan for the future and 
take action for their own benefit. Failure to provide authoritative advice to the general public 
will leave ministers increasingly exposed to criticism as these impacts become clearer. As with 
other issues involving complex science, it is important that the public are given robust and 
unambiguous advice from one or more trusted voices.  

Information and advice is especially important in the following areas and for the groups and 
communities affected: 

• Sea level rise and coastal change. Sea levels are expected to rise by several metres over the 
course of the coming centuries. The upper limit of sea level rise projections has increased in 
recent years as more evidence has been gathered. Sea level rise of more than one metre by 
the end of this century cannot be ruled out, and this would mean some communities in the 
UK would no longer be viable. Shoreline Management Plans for the English coastline are in 
place and help govern long-term coastal management policies, including in those areas 
where coastlines will have to be allowed to erode or where defences will need to be moved 
inland. Despite existing engagement effort from the Environment Agency, and Coastal 
Groups, the affected communities have not yet been engaged in earnest. 

• High temperatures. The observed trend in rising average temperatures is set to continue, 
with high confidence that a typical summer will become increasingly uncomfortable and 
potentially dangerous for the young, the old and the vulnerable. People need advice about 
how to adapt their homes over time so that internal temperatures remain safe and tolerable 
in hot weather. Reliance on air conditioning needs to be avoided as far as possible, as air 
conditioning adds to the urban heat island effect, increases electricity bills, and increases 
household CO2 emissions. 

• Severe rainfall and flooding. Climate models are consistent in projecting more intense 
rainfall, and higher peak river flows, to varying degrees across the country. The Environment 
Agency’s long-term investment scenarios for flood and coastal risk management suggest 
that risks will remain or become increasingly severe in many parts of the country despite 
investment in flood defences. Those communities who are most exposed to rising risks, and 
unlikely to be protected by community defences, are largely unaware and need time to take 
appropriate steps. Without additional individual and community-level action the costs of 
flood insurance will inevitably rise in areas of significant flood risk as the Flood Re subsidised 
insurance scheme begins to be withdrawn from 2021. Flood Re’s value as a transitional 
measure will be undermined if those householders it has been designed to support do not 
realise that the scheme is time-limited. 

RECOMMENDATION 4: The Government should explore cost-effective ways to communicate the 
risks from climate change and the actions that can be taken to reduce vulnerabilities. Priorities 
include: 
• engaging vulnerable groups and communities exposed to specific risks such as higher 

temperatures, coastal change, and increases in flood risk; 



     

50 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


   


• challenging the relevant professional bodies (such as the Landscape Institute, the Royal Town 
Planning Institute, and the Institution of Civil Engineers), and trade associations (for example the 
National Federation of Builders), to increase their level of engagement with members regarding 
climate change, and to improve the training, guidance and professional accreditation they offer; 


and 


• raising awareness amongst the general public including through community groups and national 
membership organisations such as the National Trust, the Royal Horticultural Society, and the 
RSPB. 


                                          

Chapter 2: The National Adaptation Programme 51 


 

Annex 2.1. Criteria for the ASC’s Red-Amber-Green assessment of adaptation priorities 

Is there a plan? Are actions taking place? Is progress being made in managing 
vulnerability? 

Green: 

Where needed, plans 
or policies are in place 
to fully address the 
adaptation priority in 
the context of climate 
change. 

Green: 

All relevant NAP actions 
are complete or on track, 
other relevant plans and 
policies are being 
implemented. 

Green: 

• Indicators suggest vulnerability to climate
change impacts is reducing, or stable.

• There is a high uptake of low-regret actions.
• Long-term decisions are accounting for

climate change projections.

Amber: 

Plans or policies are in 
place that partially 
address the 
adaptation priority. 

Amber: 

Not all relevant NAP 
actions are on track, with 
partial delivery of other 
relevant plans and 
policies. 

Amber: 

• Indicators suggest some areas of vulnerability
are increasing.

• There is scope to increase low-regret actions.
• Decisions are partially or inconsistently

accounting for climate change.

Red: 

Policies or plans do 
not exist or do not 
address the identified 
risks. 

Red: 

Policies are not being 
implemented and 
relevant actions are 
behind schedule. 

Red: 

• Indicators suggest most areas of vulnerability
are increasing.

• There is minimal uptake of low-regret actions.
• Decisions do not take climate change

projections in to account.

Grey: 

No apparent activity 
underway. 

Grey: 

 There is insufficient evidence to make a 
judgement. 

What are we looking 
for? 

Statements of 
government policy (or 
plans, strategies, etc.) 
setting out what will 
be done, how, and 
when, that will help 
manage the existing 
impacts of extreme 
weather and reduce 
climate change risks. 

What are we looking 
for? 

That commitments made 
by the Government or 
others are being fulfilled. 
These could be in the 
form of output and 
process measures, such 
as households protected 
by new flood defences, 
amounts of money 
spent, reports published, 
etc. 

What are we looking for? 

• Improvements over time as measured by
indicators of exposure or vulnerability to
climate impacts, and/or data on impacts from
actual weather-related events.

• Evidence of whether the Government is on
track to meet the goals that have been set in
policy announcements or legislation.

• Evidence of whether additional cost-effective
action could be taken to reduce risks further.

• Evidence that robust decisions are being
taken that will help manage long-term
vulnerabilities.

52 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 




Chapter 2: The National Adaptation Programme 53 




Chapter 3: Natural environment 




Key messages 

Context 

A well-functioning natural environment is essential for sustaining biodiversity and providing a range of 
essential goods and services including clean water, food, flood protection, climate regulation and 
amenity value. Improving the condition, extent and connectivity of the natural environment will help to 
increase resilience to climate change and has benefits across all of six priority risk areas identified in the 
ASC's evidence report for the second UK Climate Change Risk Assessment (CCRA2). CCRA2 identified 
the need for urgent action in the next five years to reduce human pressures on, and improve the 
condition of semi-natural habitats, soils and water bodies. Taking such action would reduce risks from 
increasing temperatures and extreme weather events including flooding and water shortages. CCRA2 
also identified a need for further research on the risks to wildlife, agriculture and forestry from pests and 
diseases, the changing suitability of land for different uses, and risks to the marine environment. 
Climate change could bring opportunities for new species colonisations and improved crop and tree 
growth, but these opportunities can only be realised if existing pressures on the natural environment 
are addressed. 

Summary of progress 

Despite continued action and individual success stories, the vulnerability of the natural 
environment to climate change, taken as a whole, has not been reduced since our last progress 
report in 2015 and in some respects has increased.  

Most of the current policies and programmes in place to support building the resilience of the natural 
environment to climate change - such as Biodiversity 2020 - will end in the next five years. Long-term, 
ambitious plans are therefore needed, with clear objectives, appropriate actions, and a scheme to 
monitor and evaluate progress over time. 

The UK's decision to leave the EU creates further policy uncertainty. The transposition of EU 
environmental law into domestic legislation and policy will need to at least sustain current levels of 
protection if further environmental degradation is to be avoided. EU exit presents the opportunity to 
draw up environmental policies that are tailored specifically to UK requirements and context, and that 
support adaptation effectively. 

Overview of progress 

Adaptation priority Is there a plan? Are actions taking 
place? 

Is progress being 
made in managing 

vulnerability? 

1. Terrestrial habitats

2. Freshwater habitats

3. Marine and coastal
habitats Amber


Red Red


Amber

AmberAmber

Chapter 3: Natural environment 55 

Green

Amber Green




Key messages 

4. Farmed Countryside

5. Soil health and
carbon sequestration 

6. Water management

7. Crops and livestock

8. Commercial forestry

9. Commercial
fisheries and 
aquaculture 

Note: See Annex 2.1 for a description of the criteria used to assign Red-Amber-Green (RAG) scores. 

Since our last report, almost all of the actions under the natural environment, agriculture and 
forestry themes of the National Adaptation Programme have been completed or are ongoing. 

There have been some good examples of progress in managing vulnerability to climate change, 
measured through indicators of habitat condition, species diversity and abundance, and technological 
capability. These examples all relate to areas with clear plans, actions and accountability. For example: 

• 115,000 hectares of new priority habitat has been created since 2011, broadly in line with the
Biodiversity 2020 target to create 200,000 hectares of new habitat by 2020.

• 63% of coastal priority habitats are now recorded as being in favourable condition, greater than the
50% target set out in Biodiversity 2020.

• Following a period of stagnation, total factor productivity of UK agriculture - a measure of the
technological capability of the sector- rose by 5.5 points between 2013 and 2015.

• The number of different conifer species being planted on the Public Forest Estate has increased
from eight to 18 between 2012 and 2015. Increasing the diversity of species planted will help to
improve resilience to pests and diseases and changing climatic conditions.

Despite these positive steps, on the whole, vulnerability is not being managed. Most indicators of 
the condition and extent of habitats, and abundance and diversity of species, are either 
improving too slowly to meet Government targets, or are declining. 

For example: 

• Only 25% of terrestrial Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) habitats are currently in favourable
condition compared to the Biodiversity 2020 target of 50% by 2020. Declines in terrestrial species

Amber Amber


Red Red


Amber

Amber

Amber

Green

Green


Red


Green

Green

Amber

Amber

56 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 

Green

Red Green

Amber


  

Key messages 

such as woodland birds and butterflies continue to be recorded. 

• Farmland species continue to decline in abundance. Butterfly populations have fallen by 27% since 
1990. The abundance of farmland pollinator species fell by 32% between 1980 and 2010. Farmland 
bat species have seen an increase, however. 

• The target to plant 5,000 hectares of new woodland every year was missed in 2014, 2015 and 2016. 

• Only 20% of water bodies in England are achieving 'good' or 'high' ecological status, down from 
23% in 2010. 

• The Breeding Wetland Bird Index has dropped to its lowest level since the 1975 starting baseline. 

• The proportion of UK fish stocks that are sustainably managed continues to fluctuate around the 
30% level. 

Recommendations for further progress 

The UK's decision to leave the EU affects many of the plans and proposals for managing the natural 
environment and for building resilience to climate change. In order to ensure that EU-exit benefits 
adaptation, and does not increase the risks from climate change to the natural environment, long-term 
goals, policies and enforcement mechanisms are needed. These should as a minimum reflect the level 
of ambition of current EU policies, and opportunities exist to improve on them. This context applies to 
all of our recommendations below. 

The previous Government's proposed 25-year environment plan would be an appropriate place to 
articulate outcomes and actions to manage climate risks to the natural environment. A long-term plan 
needs to be published as soon as possible, and should take account of the need for a step change in 
measures to improve the resilience of the natural environment to climate change. 

RECOMMENDATION 5: A critical part of the next National Adaptation Programme should be a long-term 
plan for the natural environment that takes climate change into account, builds on the level of ambition of 
current EU policies, and is consistent with the framework developed by the Natural Capital Committee. In line 
with the ASC's previous advice, there should be associated targets, actions, and a monitoring and evaluation 
framework. (Owner: Defra. Timing: by 2019). 

RECOMMENDATION 6: Action should be taken to enhance the condition of priority habitats and the 
abundance and range of priority species. This action should maintain or extend the level of ambition that 
was included in Biodiversity 2020. An evaluation should be undertaken of Biodiversity 2020, including the 
extent to which goals have been met and of the implications for resilience to climate change. (Owner: Defra. 
Timing: by 2021). 

RECOMMENDATION 7: Research on the risks to the marine food chain and ecosystem from rising sea 
temperatures, deoxygenation and ocean acidification should be undertaken over the course of the next 
National Adaptation Programme period, to inform future marine and fisheries policies. The research should 
assess the extent to which adaptive actions could increase the resilience of marine habitats and species to 
climate change. (Owner: Defra. Timing: by 2022). 

RECOMMENDATION 8: Goals and actions to achieve sustainable yields by 2030 should be included in new 
policies that will replace the Common Fisheries Policy. Indicators of sustainable management should also be 
reviewed to ensure they take account of changing distributions of fish species due to climate change. (Owner: 
Defra. Timing: by 2019). 

RECOMMENDATION 9: New agricultural land management policies should take account of the need to 
improve water quality and the condition of habitats and soils, in order to build resilience to climate change. 
Targets should be set that focus on outcomes, and monitoring undertaken to understand if these targets are 
being met. (Owner: Defra. Timing: by 2020). 


  


Chapter 3: Natural environment 57 


   

Key messages 

RECOMMENDATION 10: To support adaptation efforts, a plan should be put in place to deliver the 
aspiration for all soils to be managed sustainably by 2030. The plan should include a scheme to monitor 
uptake of soil conservation measures, and specific proposals to reverse the ongoing loss of lowland peat soils 
in order to provide mitigation and adaptation benefits. (Owner: Defra. Timing: by 2019).  

RECOMMENDATON 11: A target for restoring all designated upland blanket bog habitats to favourable 
condition by 2030 should be adopted in order to contribute to both adaptation and mitigation efforts. 
(Owner: Defra. Timing: by 2018). 


                        

58 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


 


3.1 Climate change and the natural environment 
Climate change presents a range of risks and some opportunities for biodiversity, the 
natural environment, and the provision of ecosystem services.  

The goods and services provided by biodiversity and the natural environment cut across all of 
the other chapters of this report and include clean water, hazard regulation (including flooding), 
climate regulation, and food provision. The ASC's evidence report for CCRA2 identified fourteen 
specific areas of climate change risk and opportunity for the natural environment (Figure 3.1). 

Figure 3.1. Risks and opportunities for the natural environment identified by CCRA2 

Source: Brown, I., et al. (2016) UK Climate Change Risk Assessment Evidence Report: Chapter 3, Natural Environment 
and Natural Assets.  
Notes: The urgency associated with each risk and opportunity (shown in top row) was determined by the ASC on 
the basis of the evidence presented in the CCRA chapter. See Chapter 2 of the CCRA Evidence Report (Warren, R., 
et al. (2016) UK Climate Change Risk Assessment Evidence Report: Chapter 2, Approach and Context) for a description 
of the urgency scoring methodology. 

This chapter assesses the resilience to climate change of natural capital assets (referring to 
all aspects of the natural environment including biodiversity) in terms of their condition, 
extent and provision of ecosystem services.  

Ne9: Risks to agriculture, 
forestry, landscapes & 
wildlife from pathogens 
pests & invasive species

Ne4: Risks to soils from 
increased seasonal aridity 
and wetness

MORE ACTION NEEDED RESEARCH PRIORITY SUSTAIN CURRENT ACTION WATCHING BRIEF

Ne1: Risks to species and 
habitats from changing 
climate space

Ne3: Changes in 
suitability of land for 
agriculture & forests

Ne5: Risks to natural 
carbon stores & carbon 
sequestration

Ne6: Risks to agriculture 
& wildlife from water 
scarcity & flooding

Ne7: Risks to freshwater 
species from high water 
temperatures

Ne8: Risks of land 
management practices 
exacerbating flood risk

Ne10: Extreme 
weather/wildfire risks to 
farming, forestry, wildlife 
& heritage

Ne11: Saltwater intrusion 
risks to aquifers, farmland 
& habitats

Ne12: Risks to habitats & 
heritage in coastal zone 
from sea level rise; loss of 
natural flood protection

Ne13: Ocean acidification 
& higher water 
temperature risks for 
marine species, fisheries 
and marine heritage

Ne14: Risks & 
opportunities from 
changes in landscape 
character

Ne2: Opportunities from 
new species colonisations

Chapter 3: Natural environment 59 




Following the structure of the CCRA2, this chapter combines the natural environment and 
agriculture & forestry themes in the current National Adaptation Programme (NAP). Other 
aspects of natural capital that are more closely linked to the built environment or human health 
are covered in Chapter 4: People and the built environment, including natural flood management, 
green infrastructure such as sustainable drainage systems (SuDS), urban greenspace, and air 
quality. The adaptation priorities for this chapter are shown in Table 3.1 below. 

Table 3.1. Natural environment adaptation priorities 

Natural assets including 
biodiversity 

Regulating services Provisioning services 

Terrestrial habitats 

Freshwater habitats 

Marine and coastal habitats 

Farmed countryside 

Soil health and carbon 
sequestration 

Water management 

Crops and livestock  

Forestry 

Fisheries and aquaculture 

Notes: The structure of this chapter follows the Natural environment and natural assets chapter in the Evidence 
Report for the 2017 UK Climate Change Risk Assessment. Biodiversity cuts across all aspects of natural capital, but 
for the purposes of reporting it is included mainly in the natural assets section of this chapter.  

Since our last progress report to Parliament in 2015, the policy framework for managing 
the natural environment in England has changed significantly. 

The vote in favour of the UK leaving the European Union has profound implications for the way 
that the natural environment will be managed post-2019. Many elements of EU legislation that 
are set out in Directives are already transposed into UK law, and some other regulations will be 
transferable. However, not all environmental legislation, such as the Common Fisheries Policy 
can be carried over directly. Many of the domestic regulations that cover EU Directives will also 
need amending to make sense in a domestic-only context. The Great Repeal Bill aims to preserve 
all of those rules and laws that are practicable to apply directly to the UK, thus allowing 
Parliament to consider each piece of legislation separately in the future. The process of leaving 
the EU also needs to consider how to effectively replace the current level of enforcement 
delivered by the European Commission and the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU). 

Numerous reports and position statements have already been published that assess or 
comment on the risks and opportunities from EU exit for the UK's natural environment.26 Each 
section in this chapter considers these risks and opportunities in the context of progress towards 
different adaptation priorities. 

The previous Government made commitments to publish a long-term plan for the environment, 
and a separate plan for food, farming and fishing. A framework for both plans was originally 
intended for publication in 2016. It is not yet clear at the time of writing whether one or both 

26 For example, the Lords Energy and Environment Sub-Committee report on the impact of EU exit on Environment 
and Climate Change; the Environmental Audit Committee report on the future of the natural environment under EU 
exit, and the All Party Parliamentary Committee report on environmental policy and regulation. Numerous reports 
and position statements on the implications of EU exit have also been produced by organisations including the 
IEEP, Soil Association, CIWEM; Green Alliance; and the National Farmers Union. 

60 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 




plans will go ahead. The need for long-term plans is covered in the relevant sections of this 
chapter. 

3.2 Habitats and species 
Risks to wildlife and semi-natural habitats were identified as amongst the most urgent to 
address in the next five years in CCRA2. A number of indicators of habitat condition and 
extent, and of species abundance point to a continuing increase in vulnerability to climate 
change. 

In order to build resilience, CCRA2 identified that more action was needed to reduce existing 
pressures, increase the size and improve the condition of habitats, restore degraded ecosystems, 
and deliver coherent ecological networks. While substantial efforts are being made, there are 
clear indications that vulnerability to climate change is not yet being reduced. The condition and 
extent of most habitats is not improving at a rate that is in line with current targets, and species 
populations continue to decline in many cases.  

Terrestrial habitats 

Is there a plan? The current biodiversity strategy for England (Biodiversity 2020) 
includes targets for protecting terrestrial habitats and species, 
and will apply until 2020. The previous Government's proposed 
25-year environment plan would offer an opportunity to set out 
a coherent long term strategy. The timescale for its production 
is awaited.  

Are actions taking 
place? 

Seven NAP actions specifically relate to terrestrial habitats. Most 
of these are complete or on track, although some have been 
dropped or revised. The Government has not yet reported on 
progress against its target to restore 15% of degraded 
ecosystems for climate change adaptation and mitigation 
purposes, though work on a methodology has started. 

Is progress being 
made in 
managing 
vulnerability? 

The Biodiversity 2020 goals were intended to improve the 
condition and increase the extent of terrestrial habitats. 
Meeting these goals would improve the resilience to climate 
change. However, at the current rate of progress, the target 
of 50% of terrestrial SSSI habitats being in favourable 
condition by 2020 is unlikely to be met.  

Woodland planting rates are below the target set by the 
Government in 2013 of 5,000 additional hectares per year. 

Is there a plan? 

Biodiversity 2020 sets a plan for increasing the resilience of terrestrial habitats and species 
in the short-term, but long-term plans remain unclear. 

The most recent England-specific plan for increasing the resilience of terrestrial habitats and 
species is Defra's Biodiversity 2020 strategy, published in 2011. The strategy sets out a number of 
actions to improve the condition, extent and connectivity of habitats. The importance of these 

Amber

Amber

Chapter 3: Natural environment 61 


Red  

three characteristics of resilience to climate change is explained in the Lawton Review,27 and in 
the ASC's 2013 and 2015 progress reports.  

Biodiversity 2020 will, as the name suggests, no longer apply after 2020. A long-term plan for the 
environment is needed that includes proposed outcomes and actions to adapt the natural 
environment to climate change.  

The EU Habitats and Birds Directives are already transposed into UK law. The degree of 
protection afforded to habitats, sites and species needs to be at least maintained after EU-
exit.  

The EU Habitats and Birds Directives set out the means by which Member States will meet their 
international objectives for habitats and species under the Bern Convention. Among other 
things, the Directives require the UK to take action to maintain and restore natural habitats to 
'favourable' status. Both Directives are transposed into a number of UK laws including the 1981 
Wildlife and Countryside Act and the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2010. 
These laws designate European Special Areas of Conservation (SACs) and Special Protection 
Areas (SPAs) in the UK. It is not yet clear whether and how these laws will be altered in the light 
of EU-exit. The Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations for example contain multiple 
references to compliance with the Habitats Directive, reporting to European institutions, and 
provisions for domestic institutions to take account of how SPAs and SACs in England contribute 
to the overall coherence of the European Natura 2000 network. Any changes to these laws for a 
UK-only setting will need to ensure the degree of protection currently provided through SPAs 
and SACs is maintained.  

Are actions taking place? 

Since our last report, further progress has been made across the seven NAP actions related 
to terrestrial habitats. 

For example: 

• Natural England is continuing to use its vulnerability mapping tool to prioritise actions for 
increasing resilience across its range of work. It is also in the process of updating its 
adaptation manual to include advice on species of conservation concern. 

• In autumn 2016, the Joint Nature Conservation Committee (JNCC) reported to Defra on the 
sufficiency of the UK SPA network for protecting species listed under the EU Birds Directive, 
and will undertake further work to assess the changes needed to take account of shifting 
species distributions due to climate change.28 

• Defra has published a new biodiversity indicator showing the impact of temperature change 
on the timing of phenological events such as bud-burst. 

• The Ministry of Defence has undertaken climate risk assessments across its priority sites for 
biodiversity, with over 100 sites now assessed. 

• Defra has included consideration of climate change in its review of the Invasive Non-native 
Species Framework Strategy.  

27 Defra (2010) Making Space for Nature. 
28 See: http://jncc.defra.gov.uk/page-7309  


     

62 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


 

                                                           

http://jncc.defra.gov.uk/page-7309




• Work is also continuing through the Food and Environment Research Agency (FERA) and the
UK Met Office to look at closer integration of weather and plant disease data to help manage
plant health risks.

The National Adaptation Programme Biodiversity Working Group continues to review progress 
across the biodiversity sector, and provide advice to Government. The group provided evidence 
and other input into CCRA2, and is currently undertaking work to scope out options for 
biodiversity, agriculture and forestry for the next NAP in 2018. 

Some NAP actions are delayed or have been revised. 

Outcome 1D of Biodiversity 2020 aims to ensure that 15% of degraded ecosystems important for 
climate change adaptation and mitigation are being restored. In the Government's response to 
our 2015 recommendation (no.2629), a report on progress was due to be published in 2016.This 
has yet to be completed though work to identify suitable data has been undertaken.  

There was limited take-up of the Countryside Stewardship Woodland Creation Capital Grant in 
its first year. In March 2017, the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs Committee pointed to a 
"complex and overly bureaucratic" grant application process as a key barrier.30 The Government 
has reported that improvements have been implemented for the 2017 round of grants. These 
improvements include offering agreements for two year rather than one year periods, providing 
more information to potential applicants in advance of the scheme opening, and speeding up 
the processing of applications. The Forestry Commission will evaluate these changes through 
monitoring applicant numbers for the 2017 scheme. 

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

In overall terms, the resilience of terrestrial habitats has not improved since the NAP was 
published in 2013, with most available vulnerability indicators suggesting slow progress 
or a decline relative to the targets set out in Biodiversity 2020.  

Indicators of habitat condition and species abundance have been collected over the past 50 
years to assess the changing state of the natural environment. These indicators also provide a 
useful measure of resilience to climate change, because bigger, coherent habitats in good 
condition are more likely to be able to withstand pressures from changing external conditions. 
In the absence of evidence on what an optimal level of habitat condition, extent and species 
composition would be for resilience to climate change, we use the current Biodiversity 2020 
targets as a sensible set of outcomes to aim for. 

While 94% of all protected terrestrial habitats in England are now classed as in either favourable 
or unfavourable recovering condition31, only around 25% of terrestrial SSSIs are currently in 
favourable condition, which is a lower figure than for freshwater and coastal protected habitats 
(Figure 3.2). The Biodiversity 2020 target for 50% of SSSI terrestrial habitats to be in favourable 
condition by 2020 is unlikely to be met on the basis of current trends.

29 'Defra and Natural England should continue to take action to deliver all of the outcomes in the England 
Biodiversity 2020 strategy and publish within a year of this report a plan setting out how they intend to deliver key 
goals important for adaptation, namely: improving the condition of priority habitats and protected sites (Outcome 
1A); increasing the extent of priority habitats by 200,000 hectares (Outcome 1B); and ensuring that 15% of degraded 
ecosystems important for climate change adaptation and mitigation are being restored (Outcome 1D). The action 
plan should also provide clarity on the interpretation of ‘favourable ecological condition’ in the context of climate 
change'. 
30 See: https://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201617/cmselect/cmenvfru/619/619.pdf  
31 The definition of 'unfavourable recovering' is that there is a plan in place to restore favourable status. It does not 
necessarily denote an improvement in condition towards favourable status. 

Chapter 3: Natural environment 63 

https://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201617/cmselect/cmenvfru/619/619.pdf




Figure 3.2. Condition of English SSSIs in 2016 by habitat type 

Source: Natural England, see: 
https://designatedsites.naturalengland.org.uk/NEInterimReports/ConditionByHabitat.aspx 

According to data collected for the ASC, 115,000 hectares of new priority habitat has been 
created since 2011.32 The rate of creation is broadly in line with the Biodiversity 2020 goal to 
create 200,000 hectares of new habitat by 2020. Neither the habitat types that make up this total 
nor the condition of these new habitats is currently known. Further work to assess the impact of 
meeting this goal would be valuable. 

To improve the coherence and extent of woodland habitats, in 2013 the Government set an 
aspiration to increase woodland cover in England to 12% of total land area by 2060, compared 
to a baseline of around 10% today. To achieve this, a Forestry Policy Statement called for 5,000 
hectares of new woodland to be created each year up to 2060. In 2014 some 4,000 additional 
hectares of woodland (net) were recorded, with figures in 2015 and 2016 dropping to 2,000 
hectares (Figure 3.3). The Government has also committed to a short-term goal of planting 11 
million trees by 2020, but no data on progress is available. 

32 ADAS (2017) for the ASC. Research to provide updated indicators of climate change risk and adaptation action in 
England.  


0102030405060708090100Terrestrial Freshwater Coastal Percentage


Destroyed or part
destroyed

Unfavourable declining

Unfavourable no change

Unfavourable recovering

Favourable

64 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 

https://designatedsites.naturalengland.org.uk/NEInterimReports/ConditionByHabitat.aspx




Figure 3.3. Total area of woodland in England against the target planting rate 

Source: Forestry Commission, http://www.forestry.gov.uk/forestry/infd-7aqknx 

The area of woodland that is certified as sustainably managed is a useful indicator of the 
condition of woodland habitats. Woodland certification assesses management practices against 
agreed environmental standards, including that wood products are harvested legally and 
sustainably, and that important wildlife habitats are identified and are not negatively impacted 
by management. The total area certified in England has increased slightly from 23% of all 
woodland in 2001 to 27% in 2015, but remains lower than the UK average of 44%.  

Against a backdrop of slow progress on improving habitat condition and extent compared to 
targets, indicators for woodland species of conservation importance show continuing declines. 
Around 25% of woodland bird species in the Woodland Bird Species Index are in long-term 
decline. Since 1990, woodland butterfly abundance has declined by 48%, reaching a low point in 
2012. 

More widely, continued monitoring and surveillance is also required to assess how the risks from 
pests and diseases and invasive non-native species are changing over time. Continued close 
collaboration with European partners will be needed in the context of EU exit. 

RECOMMENDATION 5: A critical part of the next National Adaptation Programme should be a 
long-term plan for the natural environment that takes climate change into account, builds on the 
level of ambition of current EU policies, and is consistent with the framework developed by the 
Natural Capital Committee. In line with the ASC's previous advice, there should be associated targets, 
actions, and a monitoring and evaluation framework. (Owner: Defra. Timing: by 2019). 

RECOMMENDATION 6: Action should be taken to enhance the condition of priority habitats and 
the abundance and range of priority species. This action should maintain or extend the level of 
ambition that was included in Biodiversity 2020. An evaluation should be undertaken of Biodiversity 

1280000

1290000

1300000

1310000

1320000

1330000

1340000


20132014201520162017201820192020Hectares

Total area

Government
target area

Chapter 3: Natural environment 65 

http://www.forestry.gov.uk/forestry/infd-7aqknx




2020, including the extent to which goals have been met and of the implications for resilience to 
climate change. (Owner: Defra. Timing: by 2021). 

Freshwater habitats 

Is there a plan? River Basin Management Plans set out how the water 
environment will be improved between now and 2021. Longer 
term plans are unclear as the status of requirements under the 
Water Framework Directive, once the UK leaves the EU, is 
currently unknown. 

The Environment Agency monitors water companies' 
performance in terms of abstraction of water and release of 
treated water into the environment. Companies can be 
penalised for over-abstraction and pollution. 

Are actions taking 
place? 

The four NAP actions related to improving the resilience of 
freshwater habitats are complete or on track. 

Is progress being 
made in 
managing 
vulnerability? 

Indicators of freshwater habitat condition and species 
abundance have shown downward trends. Only 20% of 
water bodies in England are achieving 'good' or 'high' 
ecological status, down from 23% in 2010. 

The Breeding Wetland Bird Index has dropped to its lowest 
level since the index began in 1975. An index of wintering 
wetland birds has shown declines since 2007, though the 
current level remains above the 1975 starting index level. 

Is there a plan? 

River Basin Management Plans set out how to improve the condition of freshwater 
habitats. These run until 2021. It is not clear what plans will be in place after this date. 

The EU Water Framework Directive (WFD) commits Member States to achieving good ecological 
status in freshwater bodies, through the implementation of River Basin Management Plans 
(RBMPs). The WFD aimed to achieve ‘good status’ for all water bodies by 2015, or by the 
extended deadlines of 2021 and 2027. The current set of River Basin Management Plans in 
England are due to expire in 2021.  

The Government has yet to set out how it plans to maintain the objectives and mechanisms set 
out in the WFD for protecting water bodies, after the UK leaves the EU. One option is to retain 
RBMPs in their current form, with their legal status retained through appropriate legislation.  

There are checks and balances in place to control water companies' environmental 
performance, including how much pressure is put on the freshwater environment.  

In its 2014 Price Review methodology, Ofwat introduced an abstraction incentive mechanism 
(AIM), which rewards or penalises water companies depending on their levels of abstraction 
during times of low flow in environmentally sensitive sites.33 The Environmental Permitting 

33 See: http://www.ofwat.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/pap_pos201307finalapproach.pdf 

Amber

66 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


Red


Green

http://www.ofwat.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/pap_pos201307finalapproach.pdf




Regulations 2010 include provisions to impose fines on water companies for polluting water 
courses. 

The Environment Agency has responsibility for monitoring and reporting on the status of water 
bodies and the reasons why good ecological status has not been achieved ('reasons for failure'). 
At present, diffuse and point source pollution make up the majority of recorded reasons for 
failure (64%), with over-abstraction and flow-related issues accounting for about 5% of failures.34 

Plans to reform the abstraction licencing system (see Section 3.2) aim to reduce pressures on the 
freshwater environment, through directing water more efficiently to where it is most needed, 
and reducing the amount of abstraction that can take place in vulnerable ('enhanced') 
catchments. 

Are actions taking place? 

Four NAP actions relate directly to this theme, all of which are on track or complete: 

• The second round of river basin management plans were published in 2016.

• The Environment Agency and Natural England are continuing to review and implement
Diffuse Water Pollution Plans for Natura 2000 Protected Areas under WFD requirements.

• Work continues on embedding approaches to integrated catchment management. For
example, one of the Defra Natural Capital Pioneer projects is focussed on integrated
catchment management in Cumbria.

• Defra's ongoing abstraction reform process is seeking to improve environmental flows.

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

Indicators showing recent declines in the condition of freshwater habitats point to a lack 
of progress in managing vulnerability.  

As for terrestrial habitats, ensuring that freshwater habitats are in good condition would help to 
improve resilience to climate change. While 42% of the total unit area of freshwater SSSIs are 
currently in favourable condition (Figure 3.2), it is not known what percentage of total habitat 
area these sites make up, as 'freshwater bodies' include rivers, lakes, canals and ponds of a 
variety of sizes and importance. In 2015, only 20% of all surface water bodies assessed under 
WFD were classed as having good or high status, compared to 23% in 2013.35 

Species indices also show negative trends. In 2014, populations of breeding wetland birds in 
England dropped to their lowest level since the index began in 1975. There was a 10% decline in 
the index between 2008 and 2013. Wintering wetland birds declined by 5% between 2007/8 and 
2012/13, though the index is still above its starting level recorded in 1970.36 

The lack of significant or sustained improvements in habitat condition and species abundance 
suggests that persistent and underlying pressures on the freshwater environment are not yet 

34 Suggitt, A., et al. (2015) Aggregate assessment of climate change impacts on the goods and benefits provided by the 
UK’s natural assets.  
35 England biodiversity indicators 2015 update, https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/england-biodiversity-
indicators 
36 Ibid. 

Chapter 3: Natural environment 67 

https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/england-biodiversity-indicators
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/england-biodiversity-indicators




being adequately addressed. This is particularly the case for diffuse pollution from agriculture, 
which accounts for around one-third of WFD failures but can be technically difficult to manage.37 

Marine and coastal habitats 

Is there a plan? Biodiversity 2020 includes goals for coastal and marine habitat 
protection and creation. There is also a target to achieve good 
environmental status for marine habitats by 2020 under the EU 
Marine Strategy Framework Directive.  

The 2009 Marine and Coastal Access Act provides for setting up 
and reporting on Marine Conservation Zones (MCZs), and the 
production of marine plans that must include consideration of 
adaptation to climate change. Marine Plans take a longer-term 
focus, looking 20 years ahead, and include sections on climate 
change adaptation. Those published to date do not include 
specific proposals to adapt the marine environment to the key 
risks from rising sea temperatures and changing ocean 
chemistry. 

Are actions taking 
place? 

All relevant NAP actions are complete or on track. Importantly, 
the number of MCZs across the UK increased from 27 in 2013 to 
50 in 2016, with over 1 million hectares (21%) of England’s 
inshore waters now protected, against a Biodiversity 2020 target 
of 25% by 2020.  

Is progress being 
made in 
managing 
vulnerability? 

Available indicators suggest that progress is being made in 
improving the condition and extent of marine and coastal 
habitats. However, exposure to climate risks within the 
marine food chain is increasing due to changes in ocean 
biogeochemistry such as rising sea temperatures, 
deoxygenation and ocean acidification. Our understanding 
of this process is incomplete and its implications not yet 
known. 

Is there a plan? 

Plans are in place to conserve and improve marine and coastal habitats and to consider 
how marine planning can take climate change into account.  

Improving the condition of the marine environment through the reduction of existing pressures 
is necessary to give species - including those important for fisheries and aquaculture - the best 
chance of adapting to changes in water temperature and chemistry. 

The current legal framework for the environmental management of UK seas derives from the EU 
Marine Strategy Framework Directive, which requires Member States to achieve good 
environmental status by 2020. Biodiversity 2020 contains outcome measures related to 
improving the condition and extent of coastal priority habitats (Outcomes 1 and 2). These 

37 Brown, I., et al. (2016) UK Climate Change Risk Assessment Evidence Report: Chapter 3, Natural Environment and 
Natural Assets.  

Amber

Amber

68 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 

Green


  

include a 2016 target for 25% of England's waters to be conserved and managed; and targets on 
improving the condition of priority habitats. 

The 2009 Marine and Coastal Access Act initiated the production of Marine Plans, which should 
include how activities in the marine environment can be made more resilient to climate change. 
Marine plans for all areas around England should be in place by 2021 and are required to look 20 
years ahead. The Act also sets a framework for setting up a network of protected areas called 
Marine Conservation Zones. Marine Plans do not (yet) include consideration of how to adapt the 
marine environment to key risks from rising sea temperatures and changing ocean chemistry. 
Activities could include undertaking further research on how these risks might affect the marine 
food chain, and consideration of how to build maximum resilience into marine ecosystems 
through reducing other pressures. 

Are actions taking place? 

There has been a significant amount of progress against NAP actions related to marine 
and coastal habitats and species.  

The number of MCZs across the UK increased from 27 in 2013 to 50 in 2016, with over 1 million 
hectares (21%) of England’s inshore waters now protected, against a Biodiversity 2020 target of 
25% by 2016. Consultation on a third tranche of MCZs is due to take place in 2017. 

Defra has published its Marine Strategy (Part 2) required under the Marine Strategy Framework 
Directive, setting out the monitoring programmes which the UK will use to assess progress 
towards good environmental status (GES) for the marine environment. The UK is currently 
carrying out the MSFD Article 8 assessment of UK seas, to update the initial assessment carried 
out in 2012. The results of this exercise are due to be reported in 2018. Some 50 indicators 
address the extent to which the UK targets for GES have been achieved, with several indicators 
(such as sea surface temperature) being directly related to the effects of climate change. 
However, Defra has indicated that any further cuts to Departmental budgets are likely to result 
in reduced monitoring programmes in the coming years. 

There has been progress through the Marine Management Organisation (MMO) to develop 
marine plans that include climate change. A plan for the East of England has been published and 
plans for the south of England are due to be published in 2017. The MMO also produced a report 
under the second round of reporting under the Adaptation Reporting Power in 2015/16. 

The Marine Climate Change Impacts Partnership (MCCIP) is in the process of producing a report 
card looking in detail at topics highlighted in CCRA2.  

The National Coastal Erosion Risk Mapping project has been completed and erosion projections 
have been published online. In relation to the ASC's 2015 report recommendation no.30,38 the 
Environment Agency is working with partners, including Natural England, through the Habitat 
Creation Programme to identify the potential for new coastal habitats. This includes those 
created through managed realignment, in line with the strategic direction set out in Shoreline 
Management Plans.  

38 'The Environment Agency should continue to take action to ensure there is no net loss of internationally 
protected coastal habitats by 2025 as a result of coastal squeeze and publish within a year of this report a 
programme of habitat creation projects they have identified to deliver this goal. The Agency should also report on 
the progress being made with the implementation of the habitat creation programme in time to inform the ASC’s 
next statutory report in June 2017'. 


  


Chapter 3: Natural environment 69 


 

                                                           




The Marine Biological Association of the UK completed a marine non-native invasive species 
(NIS) baseline project for Defra in June 2016. This report maps the locations of species that are 
on the UK marine NIS monitoring list. The report will provide a baseline against which the spread 
of NIS over time can be monitored. 

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

Progress is being made in improving the condition of marine and coastal habitats, but 
there is a potential risk of irreversible changes to the marine environment from rising sea 
temperatures and changing ocean chemistry.  

Compared to terrestrial and freshwater habitats, a larger proportion of coastal SSSI habitats are 
in favourable condition (63% compared to 25% and 42% respectively - see Figure 3.2). As 
reported above, substantial progress has been made in designating protected marine areas. In 
2014, the breeding seabird index in England was 16% higher than its baseline level in 1986, 
though with little change since 2008, and against a broader picture of sharp declines in breeding 
seabird populations around the UK as a whole. The difference between the England and wider 
UK trend is probably explained by the different mix of species in the two indices.39  

The input of hazardous substances to the marine environment has also declined significantly 
since 1990, due to tighter controls on industrial and other sources of pollution and a reduction in 
industrial production. Inputs of three substances (cadmium, lindane and mercury) declined by 
more than 75% over this time period, while zinc pollution has declined by 65%, copper by 62% 
and lead by 53%.40 

The evidence of potentially irreversible impacts of climate change on marine ecosystems is 
growing. Studies are beginning to emerge that consider the effects of changes in ocean 
chemistry (such as deoxygenation and acidification) and temperature on phytoplankton 
abundance, which underpins the marine food chain. Sea-surface temperatures in UK coastal 
waters and in the North-east Atlantic have risen by 0.1 - 0.5˚C per decade since the 1980s. During 
the last 50 years there has been a northward shift in less nutritious warmer water plankton 
species (by about 10º latitude into the north-east Atlantic), and a similar shift northwards of cold-
water plankton species. This equates to a movement by plankton species of 200 - 250km per 
decade.41 Full scale of changes in plankton composition and abundance are unlikely to be 
detected until 2050, by which point it may be too late to put in place effective mitigation 
measures.42  

Ocean acidification also carries significant risks to the marine food chain. In general, 
echinoderms, molluscs, calcareous algae and corals appear to be more sensitive to acidification 
than crustaceans, fishes and non-calcareous algae. By 2060, over 85% of known deep-sea cold 
water coral reefs in UK waters could be exposed to waters that are corrosive to them. Many other 
shell-forming organisms would be similarly vulnerable. Analysis of combined measurements 

39 Species included in the England indicator are gannets (the rising population at Bempton Cliffs has had a 
significant positive impact), Great Cormorant, European Shag, Common Guillemot (all subsurface feeders), Arctic 
Tern, Black-legged Kittiwake, Common Tern, Little Tern, Sandwich Tern (all surface feeders), and Northern Fulmars 
and Herring Gulls (both classed as ‘other feeding type’). Across the UK more widely, substantial declines have been 
observed in populations of puffins, fulmars, and kittiwakes among others. 
40 England biodiversity indicators 2015 update, https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/england-biodiversity-
indicators 
41 Baxter and Laffoley (2016) Explaining ocean warming  
42 Deppeler and Davidson (2017) Southern Ocean Phytoplankton in a changing climate. Frontiers in marine science, 
volume 4, article 40. 

70 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 

https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/england-biodiversity-indicators
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/england-biodiversity-indicators


  

from different locations shows that the pH in the North Sea has declined by about 0.1 units over 
the past 30 years. This represents about half of the change expected with global warming of 2ºC 
above pre-industrial levels. 

Long-term monitoring programmes should therefore be put in place as a matter of urgency, and 
early consideration given to the implications for policy and the management of marine 
ecosystems. 

RECOMMENDATION 7: Research on the risks to the marine food chain and ecosystem from rising 
sea temperatures, deoxygenation and ocean acidification should be undertaken over the course of 
the next National Adaptation Programme period, to inform future marine and fisheries policies. The 
research should assess the extent to which adaptive actions could increase the resilience of marine 
habitats and species to climate change. (Owner: Defra. Timing: by 2022). 

Farmed countryside 

Is there a plan?  Agri-environment schemes under the Common Agricultural 
Policy aim to incentivise activities that protect farmland habitats 
and wildlife, but they lack explicit goals and targets. Agri-
environment schemes are expected to cease to operate in their 
present form from 2022. Government intentions with regard to 
a plan for the long-term management of the farmed 
countryside are unclear. 

Are actions taking 
place? 


  

Only two actions in the NAP relate directly to this adaptation 
priority, both of which are on track. A number of options under 
the higher tier Countryside Stewardship scheme include a 
reference to adaptation. Natural England has also published 
guidance on how climate change can be considered within 
Countryside Stewardship.  

Is progress being 
made in 
managing 
vulnerability? 


  

Most of the available indicators for the farmed countryside 
continue to show long-term declines in species abundance. 
Only farmland bats show a positive trend. 

Is there a plan? 

Agri-environment schemes under Pillar II of the Common Agricultural Policy provide 
components of a plan to improve the resilience of the farmed countryside to climate 
change, but have no overarching targets or goals and are likely to cease to operate from 
2022. 

The Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) has heavily influenced land use and land management by 
farmers, through Pillar I (direct payments), Pillar II (agri-environment schemes) and other 
mechanisms. Agri-environment schemes provide payments to land managers for adopting 
specific environmental measures. Since 2015, the older Environmental Stewardship schemes 
(Higher Level Stewardship and Entry Level Stewardship) have been subsumed into a new 
Countryside Stewardship scheme. The new scheme has three levels: higher tier, mid-tier and 

Amber


  


Chapter 3: Natural environment 71 


 

Green


Red  

capital grants. The application process for Countryside Stewardship is competitive in most cases 
and scored against specific criteria.  

As we reported in 2015, agri-environment schemes incentivise a set of activities that could 
increase resilience of the farmed countryside, but do not represent a coherent strategy to reduce 
vulnerability to climate change. In light of the UK's decision to leave the EU, the Government has 
provided assurances that agri-environment payments to land managers agreed before August 
2016 will be honoured up to 'the end of the current Parliament' (which, assuming a five-year 
term will end in 2022), but what will happen after this time is unclear. Defra are currently 
working with other Government departments on proposals to replace CAP measures after this 
time, as part of wider work to develop a new long-term agricultural strategy.  

Plans for the long-term management of the farmed countryside have been delayed. 

Alongside the 25-year environment plan, the previous Government committed to a 25-year 
food, farming and fishing plan. The status of this plan under the current Government is unclear 
at the time of writing.  

Are actions taking place? 

There are only two actions in the NAP related to improving the condition of the farmed 
countryside, both of which are on track. 

Defra has a NAP action to ensure that climate change is integral to agri-environment schemes. In 
2015 its proposals for updating the way agri-environment schemes are delivered through 
Countryside Stewardship in England were approved. The higher tier options manual sets out 
which measures can help to deliver climate change adaptation; management and creation of 
coastal sand dunes, shingle and saltmarsh, creation of intertidal habitat, woodland creation and 
improvement, management and restoration of wood pasture, and tree planting. The mid-tier 
options do not include consideration of adaptation.  

In 2014, 1.35 million hectares of farmland were covered by Higher Level Stewardship (15% of 
available farmland) and 6.4 million hectares (72%) by Entry Level Stewardship.43 Since 2016 both 
schemes have been closed to new entrants due to the switch to Countryside Stewardship. Data 
on uptake and coverage under Countryside Stewardship is not yet available. 

Natural England has produced climate change guidance for the Countryside Stewardship 
scheme. Analysis by Natural England shows that the majority of the uptake of restoration and 
maintenance action under the scheme is on habitats with a medium sensitivity to climate 
change (~73%). There is significantly less uptake on habitats with high (~9%) and low 
sensitivities (~5%). 

In response to the ASC's recommendation no.29 in 2015,44 Natural England has conducted a 
review of how past agri-environment scheme delivery has contributed to climate change 
adaptation. The study established a monitoring framework and provided a baseline against 
which future data can be compared. It found that the greatest contribution of agri-environment 
schemes to adaptation occurs where there is overlap with other objectives, for example the 
maintenance of existing protected sites. Despite an increase in the amount of priority habitat 

43 England biodiversity indicators 2015 update, https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/england-biodiversity-
indicators 
44 'Natural England should establish within a year of this report a monitoring scheme to assess the extent to which 
the new Countryside Stewardship scheme will help to deliver coherent ecological networks, and more broadly 
reduce the vulnerability of farmland wildlife to environmental pressures, including climate change'. 


     

72 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


 

                                                           

https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/england-biodiversity-indicators
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/england-biodiversity-indicators


  

being created under the schemes, there has been limited success in addressing habitat 
fragmentation. The study also found that the majority of blanket peat soils (~73%) are covered 
by options whilst only 9% of other peat soils are covered by options.  

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

Key species indicators for the farmed environment continue to show long-term declines.  

Farmland birds, butterflies and bats are used by the Government as indicator species to monitor 
the condition of farmland habitats, as all are sensitive to changes in habitat condition. Breeding 
birds on farmland have been monitored since 1970 with data on the average population size 
available for 19 species. The latest data for 2014 show that the population index has fallen by 
56% against its 1970 starting value. As we reported in 2015, changes in farming practices such as 
the loss of mixed farming practices, the move from spring to autumn sowing, and the 
widespread use of pesticides, have been demonstrated to have had adverse consequences for 
many species. Impacted species include the skylark and grey partridge, though some 'generalist' 
species such as the wood pigeon have grown in numbers. 

Since 1990, the abundance index for 21 different farmland butterfly species has fallen by 27%, 
though with some upward movement in 2013 and 2014. An occupancy index for farmland 
pollinator species fell by 32% between 1980 and 2010. During this time, 27% of pollinator 
species became more widespread, and 51% became less widespread.  

One positive trend associated with the farmed countryside is the index for farmland bat species. 
Between 1999 and 2013, there was a 20% increase in eight species of bats, though between 
2013 and 2014 the index declined slightly. 45 

RECOMMENDATION 9: New agricultural land management policies should take account of the 
need to improve water quality and the condition of habitats and soils, in order to build resilience to 
climate change. Targets should be set that focus on outcomes, and monitoring undertaken to 
understand if these targets are being met. (Owner: Defra. Timing: by 2020). 

3.3 Soil health and carbon sequestration 
CCRA2 identified that improving the condition of soils and degraded peatlands was 
urgently required in the next five years in order to address the risks to soils from climate 
change. While actions are underway, there is no overarching plan to improve soil health 
and the changing condition of soils across England is not routinely monitored. 

The way that climate and soils interact is highly complex and the precise impacts of climate 
change on soil condition and carbon storage are uncertain. Most projections suggest that there 
is a risk of reductions in soil moisture, and uncertain changes in soil microflora, erosion rates, and 
carbon content. CCRA2 highlighted the need for more action in the next five years to reduce 
existing pressures on soils, including through increasing restoration of degraded soils and 
uptake of soil conservation measures. It also called for more action to restore degraded soil 
carbon stores, in particular peatlands. Defra's aspiration, included in the Natural Environment 
White Paper (2011), for all soils to be managed sustainably by 2030 has not yet been translated 
into a plan, and there has been no national assessment of soil condition since 2007. 


 

45 England biodiversity indicators 2015 update, https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/england-biodiversity-
indicators 


  


Chapter 3: Natural environment 73 


 

                                                           

https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/england-biodiversity-indicators
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/england-biodiversity-indicators




Is there a plan? Defra set an aspiration in the 2011 Natural Environment White 
Paper for all soils to be managed sustainably by 2030. This 
aspiration is reflected in the National Adaptation Programme 
but there remains no plan in place to achieve it. 

Are actions taking 
place? 

All NAP actions related to this theme are on track, including 
completion of a £3.2 million research programme funded by 
Defra. Around £14 million was allocated in the 2015 spending 
review to peatland restoration projects. 

Is progress being 
made in 
managing 
vulnerability? 

The percentage of blanket bog SSSIs in good condition 
declined from 19% to 10% between 2003 and 2016, though 
the percentage moving from unfavourable to unfavourable 
recovering condition (i.e. with a restoration plan in place) 
rose from 16% in 2003 to 87% in 2016. 

The Countryside Survey and National Soil Inventory last 
reported on soil condition across England in 2007 and 2003 
respectively. No further assessment has taken place, so 
neither the current state nor recent trends in the condition 
of English soils are known. 

Is there a plan? 

Our recommendation in 2015 for an action plan on soil health has not yet been fulfilled. 

Our progress report in 2015 stressed the importance of soils in storing carbon and providing a 
range of other ecosystem services. We recommended that the Government publish an action 
plan outlining how it would meet its policy aspiration for all soils to be managed sustainably by 
2030. We said the plan should include a scheme to monitor soil condition, and proposals to 
ensure that the ongoing loss of lowland and upland peat soils is reversed. This recommendation 
was reiterated in the Environmental Audit Committee's 2016 report on soil health.46 

In response to our recommendations, the previous Government stated that soil protection 
would be considered as part of the 25-year environment plan, a framework for which has yet to 
be published. Defra has begun to develop a peatland strategy for England, but work is at an 
early stage. 

Are actions taking place? 

All of the NAP actions on soil health and carbon sequestration are ongoing. Most relate to 
research and guidance.  

Under Pillar I of the CAP, new soil protection rules were introduced in 2015 as part of cross 
compliance. These rules were designed to promote actions to achieve minimum soil cover, limit 
the risk of erosion, and maintain soil organic matter levels. Defra is responsible for monitoring 
and evaluating the impact of the new rules, and has stated that it intends to take an outcome-
based approach. Details of this monitoring scheme are not yet available. 

46 See: https://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/environmental-audit-
committee/inquiries/parliament-2015/soil-health/  

74 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


Red


Green


Red


https://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/environmental-audit-committee/inquiries/parliament-2015/soil-health/
https://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/environmental-audit-committee/inquiries/parliament-2015/soil-health/


  

Defra has a commitment under the Natural Environment White Paper to undertake a research 
programme to explore how degradation can affect a soil's ability to support vital ecosystem 
services such as flood mitigation, carbon storage and nutrient cycling; and how best to manage 
lowland peatlands in a way that supports efforts to tackle climate change. Projects underway 
include an analysis of what additional measures will be required as a result of climate change to 
manage risks of soil erosion, changes in soil organic carbon, and the impact of wetter soil 
conditions. These projects are due to complete in 2017. One of the projects will provide the first 
full carbon and greenhouse gas budgets for peatland across England and Wales under different 
management and land uses (e.g. pristine bogs and lands that have been impacted by extraction, 
grazing and arable production). The results will be used to develop emission factors for each 
peatland type under a range of baseline management activities. The data derived should help 
inform how sustainable management practices can reduce degradation of cultivated peatland 
soils in the lowlands.  

NERC and the BBSRC have also begun a Soil Security Research Programme, which is expected to 
finish in 2019.47 Projects underway include investigating soil function under land use and climate 
change, how soil management can mitigate flood risk, and peatland sensitivity to global change. 

Upland peat soils are a critical natural asset for climate change adaptation because of the range 
and scale of ecosystem services they provide, including carbon storage, water storage, and 
habitat provision. As set out in our 2015 report, Natural England estimates that around half of 
the 281,000 hectares of blanket bog in England have lost their mossy, peat-forming vegetation 
and are in a degraded state. The ASC recommended further action in its 2015 report to restore 
degraded peatlands (recommendation 27).48 Although the Government declined to produce an 
action plan as proposed by the ASC, further efforts have been made since our last report to 
support relevant work. The Spending Review in 2015 announced that £100 million would be 
invested in a range of projects to support the natural environment. Around £14 million is being 
allocated to peatland restoration projects, of which £4 million has been spent on projects to 
date. The remaining £10 million is expected to fund practices such as rewetting and seeding 
with Sphagnum mosses. The resulting reduction in greenhouse gases is one of the criteria by 
which bids will be judged.  

The Peatland Code has also been developed and deployed via the IUCN website.49 It is a 
voluntary standard for restoration projects across England, and signals to potential investors 
specific projects that include robust restoration actions.  

A 2015 review of the policy for reducing the amount of peat used in horticulture has been 
delayed, in order for it to be aligned with the 25-year environment plan. 

Burning of vegetation (heather and grass) on blanket bogs is carried out to create new growth 
for livestock grazing, and to increase the diversity of the age and structure of heather for game 
management. A Natural England study from 2013 shows that rotational burning reduces species 
composition, peat accumulation, and the carbon storage capacity of the soil and increases the 
amount of dissolved organic carbon in nearby water courses. Burning of vegetation on 
designated blanket bog sites requires consent from Natural England. It is argued that consenting 

47 See: https://www.soilsecurity.org/research-partners/  
48 'Natural England, in partnership with the Upland Stakeholder Forum, should take further action to deliver the 
widespread restoration of degraded upland peat habitats. An action plan should be published within a year of this 
report that includes: (a) a programme for reviewing consents for burning on protected sites; and (b) an assessment 
of the extent to which agri-environment schemes are being used to fund damaging practices on peatland habitats'. 
49 See: http://www.iucn-uk-peatlandprogramme.org/peatland-code  


  


Chapter 3: Natural environment 75 


 

                                                           

https://www.soilsecurity.org/research-partners/
http://www.iucn-uk-peatlandprogramme.org/peatland-code




to some burning allows for controls to be put in place and for Natural England to work with 
landowners on measures to lower the frequency and intensity of burning over time. From an 
adaptation perspective, the test is how rapidly the extent of burning decreases and stops. The 
most recent data provided by Natural England indicates that 110,700 hectares (57%) of blanket 
bog SSSIs (including SAC and SPA) have burning consents in place,50 against a figure of 160,000 
hectares (82%) of such SSSIs with consents in place in 2015. It is not clear what has influenced 
this decline in area with burning consents in place. 

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

Only 10% of SSSI blanket bog habitats are in favourable condition. 

The condition of upland blanket bog sites is an important indication of the ability of upland peat 
soils to deliver the ecosystem services described above. Since 2003 there has been a large shift in 
sites from 'unfavourable' to 'unfavourable recovering' condition (i.e. there is now a restoration 
plan in place for 87% of sites), but there has been a decline in the area in favourable condition, 
from 19% in 2003 to 10% in 2016 (Figure 3.4). The area of upland bog in favourable condition 
also only represents about 6% of the total area of upland peat, as not all areas are protected. 
Similar data are not available for lowland peat soils. 

Figure 3.4. Condition of upland blanket bog SSSIs in England: 2003, 2013 and 2016 

Source: For 2016 data - Natural England, 
https://designatedsites.naturalengland.org.uk/NEInterimReports/ConditionByHabitat.aspx 
For 2003 and 2013 data, see ECI (2013) for the ASC, Assessing preparedness of England's natural resources for a 
changing climate.  

50 ADAS (2017) for the ASC. Research to provide updated indicators of climate change risk and adaptation action in 
England. Latest NE data indicates that the total area of SSSI upland blanket bog is 194,000 hectares. 


0102030405060708090100Favourable Unfavourablerecovering Unfavourable(no change)Unfavourabledeclining Destroyed orpart destroyed Percentage2003




2013




2016


76 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 

https://designatedsites.naturalengland.org.uk/NEInterimReports/ConditionByHabitat.aspx


  

Vulnerability is hard to assess in the absence of routine national monitoring of soil 
condition in England.  

The last national assessment of soil condition in England was published in 2007, as part of the 
Countryside Survey. The National Soil Inventory also reports on the condition of soils across 
England, but this has not been conducted since 2003. It is therefore not possible to assess 
current trends in soil health across England. 

RECOMMENDATION 10: To support adaptation efforts, a plan should be put in place to deliver the 
aspiration for all soils, to be managed sustainably by 2030. The plan should include a scheme to 
monitor uptake of soil conservation measures, and specific proposals to reverse the ongoing loss of 
lowland peat soils, in order to provide mitigation and adaptation benefits. (Owner: Defra. Timing: by 
2019).  

RECOMMENDATON 11: A target for restoring all designated upland blanket bog habitats to 
favourable condition by 2030 should be adopted in order to contribute to both adaptation and 
mitigation efforts. (Owner: Defra. Timing: by 2018). 

3.4 Water management  
Plans are in place and action is underway to improve water management in the natural 
environment. It is too early to tell what effect these measures will have on the long-term 
risks of water scarcity.  

CCRA2 identifies urgent risks to agriculture and wildlife from water scarcity. It notes that further 
steps need to be taken to reduce over-abstraction, and ensure that decisions on water use take 
into account its availability with climate change. If action is not taken, the majority of 
catchments in England are projected to have insufficient water to meet demand by the 2050s. 
Abstraction reform is needed to create a water use system that responds to the changing 
availability of water over time, directing resources to where they are most needed. 
Environmental flow indicators will be a useful measure of progress in managing vulnerability as 
a result of these reforms. Such indicators are currently reported under the Water Framework 
Directive, and an equivalent process will be needed when the UK leaves the EU. 

Flood risk to agricultural land is also highlighted as an urgent risk in CCRA2. Land that is 
frequently flooded is only capable of supporting lower-value crops, pasture or woodland. 
Further action is also needed to incentivise land management practices that assist in storing 
water and reducing runoff rates. Natural flood management is discussed in more detail in 
Chapter 4: People and the built environment. 


 

Is there a plan?  Proposals for abstraction reform legislation should provide a 
statutory framework for managing water availability in the 
context of climate change across all sectors. The reforms will 
need to secure parliamentary time in order to meet the goal for 
abstraction reform to be introduced by the early 2020s. This will 
be a challenge given EU-exit and other legislative priorities. 

Flood risk to agricultural land is covered under the Flood and 
Coastal Risk Management Strategy for England. 


  


Chapter 3: Natural environment 77 


 

Green


  

Are actions taking 
place? 

 Most of the14 NAP actions on water management in the natural 
environment are complete or on track. One action, to review 
guidance and support to farmers in managing their water use, 
has been delayed until 2018 to coincide with abstraction 
reform. 

Is progress being 
made in 
managing 
vulnerability? 

 Trends in water availability and use are highly variable. 
Since 1960 there has been no clear trend in summer or 
winter low flows. There is also no obvious increase or 
decrease between 2000 and 2014 in water abstraction for 
agricultural use, spray irrigation, or in crop losses due to 
drought or flooding. 

Environmental flow indicators will provide a measure of the 
success of abstraction reform in managing vulnerability in 
the future, as they will show the amount of stress placed on 
the natural environment from water scarcity. 

Is there a plan? 

Parliamentary time will need to be secured in the coming Parliament for reforms to the 
water abstraction system to happen as planned from 2021. This may be challenging given 
pressures on the legislative timetable. 

Abstraction reform aims to improve the efficiency of water use, directing it to those who need it 
most during times of drought and making the system more resilient to climate change. 
Following a consultation in 2013/14, an impact assessment was published in 2016 and final 
reform proposals were originally expected in a draft Bill later in 2017, though there is some 
uncertainty as to whether time can be found in the parliamentary schedule to take this forward. 
Under the proposals, all abstraction licenses will be re-issued as permits, with reductions in 
unused abstraction volumes where they pose a risk to the environment if used in the future. The 
most water-scarce catchments (~30% of the total) will be designated as ‘enhanced catchments’, 
with specific rules for environmental controls and trading of permits. Most permits will continue 
to specify absolute annual and daily constraints on abstractions, but in enhanced catchments, a 
water share ‘accounting’ framework will be introduced. 

Between now and 2020, the Environment Agency is working to remove unused licences and 
reduce those that are underused, as well as to bring previously exempt abstractors under 
regulation. Licences will be moved across into the new system from the early 2020s. If the 
proposed approach is effective, water should be abstracted and traded in a way that directs it to 
where it is most needed. An associated aim is to reduce the risks to the natural environment 
during times of low flows. 

Managing flood risk in relation to agriculture, forestry and the natural environment is 
integrated into the Flood and Coastal Risk Management Strategy for England.  

New defences and improvements to existing defences are undertaken to protect agricultural 
land as part of the wider programme of flood risk management (see Chapter 4). Water level 
management plans are also prepared by the Environment Agency, Internal Drainage Boards, and 
some local authorities, depending on who exercises drainage powers in each part of the country. 

Amber



     

78 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


 

Green




As well as risks from flooding to agricultural land, opportunities exist for using agricultural land, 
forestry and natural features to manage flood risk. Natural flood management (NFM) approaches 
are discussed in Chapter 4.  

Are actions taking place? 

There are fourteen NAP actions related to water management for the natural 
environment, agriculture and forestry. Notable actions that have been progressed since 
our last report include: 

• Defra is planning to review and re-issue guidance to farmers in 2018 on managing their
water assets, to ensure that guidance is in line with abstraction reform. This responds to the
ASC's 2015 report recommendation no.21.51

• Measures are continuing to be taken through the Catchment Sensitive Farming programme
to incentivise farmers to reduce levels of diffuse pollution into water courses. New measures
are being included under the Countryside Stewardship scheme, but no data is available on
uptake at present. Defra is also undertaking research to better understand how climate
change may impact on the measures included in Catchment Sensitive Farming.

• The Forestry Commission is working with Natural England and the Environment Agency to
improve the freshwater environment through woodland creation, and woodland
management in flood risk areas through Countryside Stewardship grants.

• Various projects are underway to assess the benefits and feasibility of natural flood risk
management. These are reported in Chapter 4.

• The 'Keeping Rivers Cool' project was taken over by the Woodland Trust from the
Environment Agency in 2015. Guidance on riparian shading of rivers has been re-issued
along with a series of academic papers on cooling, but due to resource constraints the
Woodland Trust is now looking for a new partner to lead the programme.

• In relation to the ASC's 2015 report recommendation no.2852, progress continues to be made
under the Environment Agency's Restoring Sustainable Abstraction Programme. To date,
changes have been made to 271 licences to reduce pressures on the natural environment,
with a further 166 licences remaining to be reviewed. The Environment Agency is also
working with local catchment partners, through the Catchment Based Approach, to improve
the sharing of evidence on pressures and impacts on the water environment.

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

Trends in river flows, water abstraction, and impacts from droughts and flooding on 
agricultural activities, show large inter-annual variability with no significant increase or 
decrease in vulnerability observed to date. Continued monitoring of environmental 
flows should help to determine whether abstraction reform is reducing vulnerability in 
the future. 

51 'Defra should bring forward its planned review of water efficiency measures on farms to the summer of 2016, in 
line with the initial plans presented in the National Adaptation Programme'. 
52 'The Environment Agency, Defra and water companies should continue to take action to ensure that water bodies 
are managed in ways that will increase resilience to the changes in water availability, quality and temperature 
expected with climate change. To deliver this (a) the Environment Agency should publish within a year of this report 
the steps it will take to ensure full delivery of the Restoring Sustainable Abstraction programme by 2020, and (b) 
Defra should press ahead with reforms to the abstraction regime early in this Parliament'. 

Chapter 3: Natural environment 79 




Long-term trends in river flows are difficult to distinguish from inter-annual variability, and show 
a high degree of spatial variability. Records since 1960 show no clear pattern in summer or 
winter low flows.53 The volume of water abstracted for agriculture and spray irrigation is highly 
variable and sensitive to annual rainfall fluctuations. There has been a slight downward trend 
between 2000 and 2014, but the variability between years is high (Figure 3.5). Over the same 
period, there have been no intense summer droughts, and cereal yields have been affected 
more by heavy rainfall episodes over this period than by soil moisture deficits.54  

Figure 3.5. Trends in water abstraction in England for spray irrigation and other agricultural uses 

Source: Defra water abstraction statistics, https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-data-sets/env15-water-
abstraction-tables  

Environmental flow indicators will help show whether abstraction reform is successful at 
managing vulnerability in the future, as they will provide a measure of how much pressure is 
being put on the natural environment from over-abstraction. As discussed in Section 3.2, only 
20% of water bodies in England are currently meeting 'good' or 'high' ecological status, with 
little change since 2009. Over-abstraction currently accounts for 5% of WFD failures in England, 
though it may contribute to other cases. 

53 Brown, I., et al. (2016) UK Climate Change Risk Assessment Evidence Report: Chapter 3, Natural Environment and 
Natural Assets.  
54 ADAS (2017) for the ASC. Research to provide updated indicators of climate change risk and adaptation action in 
England.  


020406080100120140Million cubic metres

Spray irrigation

Agriculture

80 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 

https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-data-sets/env15-water-abstraction-tables
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-data-sets/env15-water-abstraction-tables


  

3.5 Provisioning services 
The capacity for commercial agriculture, forestry, fisheries and aquaculture to adapt to 
climate change will be greatly reduced if the natural assets and ecosystem services on 
which they depend remain vulnerable to the climate change risks discussed above. Only if 
all these risks are managed, can the opportunities from longer growing seasons and 
higher growth rates of crops and trees in a warmer climate be realised. 

The commercial management of land, freshwater and marine resources is dependent on the 
resilience of underlying natural assets and the ecosystem services they provide. The risks 
outlined in the sections above are also risks for the production of crops and livestock, and for 
forestry and fisheries. There are additional climate related risks from pests and diseases and the 
changing climate suitability of commercial species. 

If habitat condition and extent, water quality and availability, and soil health are maintained and 
enhanced, and resilience thus increased, climate change presents potential opportunities for 
agriculture and forestry in England from extended growing seasons and faster growth rates. 
However, risks from pests and diseases and changing climatic suitability for trees, crops and 
livestock species will remain. There is currently no overarching plan for how the agricultural 
system in England should respond to climate change. The current Agri-tech strategy55 provides 
some components of a plan, but its impact on the long-term productivity and environmental 
footprint of the sector has not yet been evaluated. There are also wider issues relating to the 
impacts of climate change on trade, supply chains and food security.  

Fisheries and aquaculture were not covered in the first National Adaptation Programme, and 
there is little information available to monitor vulnerability or assess action to build resilience. 
New policies will be needed to replace the EU Common Fisheries Policy after 2019, and these 
should take account of climate change and promote adaptation. 

Crops and livestock 

Is there a plan?  The Agri-tech strategy provides a partial plan for increasing the 
resilience of crops and livestock to climate change as it aims to 
improve the technological capability of the sector.  

Overarching plans that identify objectives for crop and livestock 
production under a changing climate - including consideration 
of food security issues - do not yet exist.  

Are actions taking 
place? 

 All 14 NAP actions relate to providing guidance and research, 
and most are on track or complete. No updates on progress 
have been provided for two actions related to the monitoring of 
pests and diseases.  

Is progress being 
made in 
managing 
vulnerability? 

 The index of total factor productivity (a measure of the 
efficiency of the industry) increased by 5.5 points between 
2013 and 2015, following a levelling off between 2003 and 
2013.  

55 See: https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/agricultural-technologies-agri-tech-strategy  

Amber

Amber


  


Chapter 3: Natural environment 81 


 

Green

                                                           

https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/agricultural-technologies-agri-tech-strategy


  

Is there a plan? 

There is no overarching plan that considers the range of risks and opportunities for the 
agricultural sector in England from climate change. 

Habitat condition, soil and water management are central to ensuring that the future production 
of crops and livestock is resilient to climate change. Relevant plans for managing these aspects 
of natural capital are discussed above. 

The Agri-tech Strategy aims to support the development and deployment of agricultural 
technologies in the UK, which among other things should help to improve the resilience of the 
farming sector to climate change through, for example, diversifying the genetic composition of 
crops grown, and improving control measures for pests and diseases. 

However, an overarching plan does not exist that considers how to build resilience of the 
agricultural sector more widely, taking account of possible broader risks to the food system from 
climate impacts on supply chains and trade. The previous Government's proposed 25-year food, 
farming and fishing plan could achieve this, but plans for its publication remain unclear. The 
Government could also consider the issue in its review of the UK Food Security Assessment (see 
Chapter 6: Business). 

Are actions taking place? 

All of the actions for this priority in the NAP focus on research and providing support and 
tools for farmers. 

In 2016, 24 new projects worth £16 million were funded under the Agri-tech Catalyst 
programme, concentrating on food security, weed control and livestock diseases. 56 Five projects 
will target challenges in developing countries, including improving methods to detect the 
incidence of carcinogenic mould toxins in food crops, which was identified as a food safety risk 
in CCRA2. Defra is also continuing to fund research through the Sustainable Intensification 
Research Platform on improving agricultural practices, supporting decisions at a landscape scale 
and balancing economic, environmental and social requirements. 

Under the ERA-NET Plus action 'Climate Smart Agriculture: Adaptation of agricultural systems in 
Europe', BBSRC is funding a series of projects to develop resilience in crop and livestock systems. 

The Environment Agency and NFU have been collaborating on the development of a Farm 
Business Resilience Health Check Tool, for farmers to assess their vulnerability to a range of 
impacts from climate change. Phase 1 of the tool is now complete and work is in progress to roll 
it out more widely. 

A NAP action to promote resilient livestock systems with a focus on dairying has been revised to 
shift attention to pigs, which are considered more at risk from high temperatures. The 2016 
Countryside Productivity Scheme under the English Rural Development Programme is providing 
grants for farmers to purchase sensors, hardware and associated software to monitor and 
control temperature, humidity, ventilation and electricity consumption in buildings for housing 
pigs. 

Two actions have not been updated by Defra. One relates to work with the European 
Commission to monitor new and emerging livestock diseases. The other relates to work by Defra 

56 See: https://www.gov.uk/government/news/16-million-for-new-technologies-to-improve-global-food-
production-and-security  


     

82 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


 

                                                           

https://www.gov.uk/government/news/16-million-for-new-technologies-to-improve-global-food-production-and-security
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/16-million-for-new-technologies-to-improve-global-food-production-and-security




to consider which plant pests and diseases relate to poorly managed adaptation of invasive non-
native species. 

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

Positive recent trends in total factor productivity suggest that the overall efficiency of the 
UK agricultural system is continuing to increase.  

Total factor productivity (TFP) is an important overarching indicator of the level of efficiency of 
the agricultural sector. A past slowdown in the rate of increase in TFP for the UK agriculture 
sector has been linked to a levelling-off of expenditure on applied R&D.57 TFP is used in this 
report as a proxy indicator for the uptake of research by, and the technological capability of the 
sector, and thus of vulnerability. Between 1993 and 2003, TFP increased at an annual rate of 1.33 
points per annum, before slowing to a rate of 0.18 points per annum between 2003 and 2013. 
However, it has accelerated again since 2013 (Figure 3.6), and has been increasing at an annual 
rate of 2.75 points (a total rise of 5.5 points between 2013 and 2015). This may in part be due to 
the Agri-tech Strategy, although an evaluation of its impact, recommended by the ASC in 2015,58 
has not yet been conducted. 

Figure 3.6. UK total factor productivity, 1973 - 2015 

Source: Defra agricultural statistics: https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/total-factor-productivity-of-the-
agricultural-industry  

The amount of investment in agricultural R&D can be used as another indicator of vulnerability. 
R&D investment, combined with adequate knowledge transfer can lead to increases in TFP and 

57 Thirtle and Holding (2003). Productivity of UK agriculture: causes and constraints. 
58 Recommendation 25: 'Defra should publish an initial evaluation of the impact of the Agri-Tech Strategy in time to 
inform the next NAP in 2018'. 


4050607080901001101973197519771979198119831985198719891991199319951997199920012003200520072009201120132015UK total factor productivity

Chapter 3: Natural environment 83 

https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/total-factor-productivity-of-the-agricultural-industry
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/total-factor-productivity-of-the-agricultural-industry


  

an improved ability to manage pests and diseases, including through changes in species 
composition of crops and livestock. Data on UK public R&D investment has previously been 
available through the OECD, but has not been updated since 2015. Some data on private sector 
R&D for agriculture, hunting, forestry and fish together is available from the Office of National 
Statistics, and shows high levels of inter-annual variability, though with an increase in spend of 
about £20 million since 2013 (to £140 million per year).59 Separately, statistics collected by Defra 
show for example that, in 2012/13, £320million was estimated to have been invested by the 
public sector and £496 million by the private sector in agri-tech R&D. The ONS and Defra 
estimates vary significantly, due to differences in data collection methods, the sectors covered 
and the time periods considered.  

Forestry 

Is there a plan? 


 

The Forestry and Woodlands Policy Statement in 2013 
committed the Government to work with the forestry sector to 
improve its resilience to climate change.  

The Forestry Commission’s Climate Change Action Plan for 
Public Forests has been revised, and should be published 
shortly. 

Are actions taking 
place? 

 Most NAP actions are complete or on track, with some revisions 
to original objectives.  

The proportion of forests under active management in England 
has increased to 58%, although the Forestry Commission's 2018 
target of 66% is unlikely to be met. The British Woodland Survey 
in 2015 showed low take up of adaptation actions by forest 
managers (<25% were found to be actively taking measures to 
adapt). Active management of forests is required to reduce their 
vulnerability to climate change. 

Is progress being 
made in 
managing 
vulnerability? 

 While the variety of conifer species being planted on the 
public forest estate has increased to improve resilience to 
pests and diseases and changing climatic suitability, this 
has not been the case for broadleaf species. 

Is there a plan? 

Plans are in place to increase the extent of woodland, improve the level of active 
management, and to enhance the management of pest and disease risks. 

The Government's Forestry and Woodlands Policy statement in 2013 included commitments to 
work with the forestry sector to improve resilience to pests and diseases, and to increase the 
area of woodland under active management to 66% by 2018. There was also a proposal to 
increase the total area of woodland in England by 5,000 hectares per year (see Section 3.2). 

59 See: 
https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/governmentpublicsectorandtaxes/researchanddevelopmentexpenditure/timese
ries/ldin/berd  

Amber

Amber



     

84 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


 

Green

                                                           

https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/governmentpublicsectorandtaxes/researchanddevelopmentexpenditure/timeseries/ldin/berd
https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/governmentpublicsectorandtaxes/researchanddevelopmentexpenditure/timeseries/ldin/berd


  

The Forestry Commission’s Climate Change Action Plan for Public Forests ended in 2016. It has 
subsequently been revised and is due to be published shortly. 

Are actions taking place? 

All eighteen NAP actions related to forestry, comprising a mix of practical action, research 
and capacity building, are on track. Targets to increase the active management of 
woodland are likely to be missed. 

Since 2011, the percentage of woodland under active management has increased from 52% to 
58%, but has remained static over the past 18 months. It is therefore likely that the goal to reach 
66% by 2018 will be missed. The Forestry Commission is planning to review progress in 2018.  

The England Woodland and Timber Partnership (EWTP) originally had a NAP action to prepare a 
climate change action plan for privately managed forests. The EWTP was disbanded in 2014, but 
the Forestry Commission has subsequently worked with over 30 organisations to produce a 
Climate Change Accord, published in 2015.60 The British Woodland Survey in 2015 showed that 
fewer than 25% of land managers were taking measures to adapt to climate change, though the 
partners involved in the Accord are hoping to increase this number. The Forestry Commission is 
also reviewing the UK Forestry Standard to improve its usability. 

To support efforts to increase tree planting, the Forestry Commission has developed an 
approach to identifying and mapping areas that are most suitable for large scale woodland 
creation. The analysis was initially conducted for Northumberland and Cumbria, but is now 
being rolled out nationally. The analysis reveals that there are ~2 million hectares of land across 
the country that could be suitable. 

The Tree Health and Plant Biosecurity Research Initiative has entered a third phase (2016 - 2020), 
and is funding projects to investigate the changing risk and possible management of Sudden 
Oak Death (caused by Phytophora ramorum).  

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

While the diversity of conifer species being planted on the Public Forest Estate has 
increased, the number of different broadleaf species being planted has remained static. 

Increasing the diversity of tree species in new plantings is an important adaptation strategy 
designed to reduce threats from pests and diseases, and to help manage uncertainties around 
the suitability of particular species to future climate conditions.  

According to the latest data from the Forestry Commission, the number of species of conifer 
being planted on the Public Forest Estate in England has increased, from eight in 2012/13 to 18 
in 2015/16, including ‘alternative’ species such as Atlas Cedar, Weymouth and Maritime Pine. The 
same trend has not been observed for broadleaf species. According to the Forestry Commission, 
this is because of the minimal range of alternative broadleaf species available and a focus on 
native species to maintain and restore priority habitats. Around 18 broadleaf species have 
accounted for the great majority of plantings over between 2012/13 and 2015/16, with the 
percentage of oak and birch increasing from 49% to 61% of total new plantings over this 
period.61 

60 See: https://sylva.org.uk/forestryhorizons/environmental-change  
61 Data provided directly by the Forestry Commission. 


  


Chapter 3: Natural environment 85 


 

                                                           

https://sylva.org.uk/forestryhorizons/environmental-change


  

Notable changes in planting regimes have been made, however, in response to threats from 
pests and diseases. Planting of ash has stopped altogether in response to the Chalara outbreak, 
and Corsican pine has not been planted over this period due to the risk from Dothistroma 
needle blight. Import notification is also required for some species such as oak, pine, elm, sweet 
chestnut and Prunus species (cherry, peach, plum) as a result of concerns over pest and disease 
threats from abroad. 

The Forestry Commission in its second report under the Adaptation Reporting Power raised the 
issue of a lack of clarity on how genetic variation should be factored into decisions on planting 
broadleaf species. The evidence is to be reviewed, followed by the drafting of a 'policy position 
statement', to give Forestry Commission England (and Natural England) field staff updated 
guidance.  

Fisheries and aquaculture 

Is there a plan? 


 

There is no plan set out in the NAP or elsewhere for improving 
the resilience of marine fisheries and aquaculture to climate 
change.  

Are actions taking 
place? 

 There are no NAP actions that directly relate to this priority. 

Seafish (the industry body for the seafood sector) has produced 
a report under the Adaptation Reporting Power that sets out 
actions currently being taken by the fishing industry in response 
to climate change.  

Is progress being 
made in 
managing 
vulnerability? 

 The proportion of UK fish stocks that are sustainably 
managed varies over the long-term but remains low, at 
about 30%. Other vulnerability indicators would be useful 
to develop. 

Is there a plan? 

There are currently no plans in place that consider how the fishing and aquaculture 
industries can best adapt to climate change. Replacement policies for the Common 
Fisheries Policy should include consideration of how to improve the resilience of the 
fishing sector to climate change. 

While plans exist to improve the resilience of marine and coastal habitats and species, there is no 
specific plan in the NAP or elsewhere that focuses on improving the resilience of commercial 
fisheries and aquaculture, including fish farming and shellfish production. The previous 
Government committed to a 25-year food, farming and fishing plan, but its status under this 
Government is unclear. 

The EU Common Fisheries Policy (CFP) is the current overarching policy for the fishing industry 
in the UK. It aims to achieve sustainable maximum yields across a number of fish species, which 
if achieved would provide some degree of resilience to climate change. The CFP sets total 
allowable catches and the allocation of those catches between Member States as well as 
regulating certain non-quota stocks. Under the CFP, fishing vessels from other EU countries can 
access UK waters and vice versa. The CFP as such cannot therefore be directly transposed into 
UK law. Fish species move freely between different countries' waters, and distributions will 

Amber

Amber



     

86 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


 Red  

change in response to climate change, warming seas and other factors. What happens to fish 
populations in the seas around Europe will impact UK fisheries. There are a multitude of issues to 
be considered in working through how UK fisheries policy will operate after the UK leaves the 
EU.62 From an adaptation point of view, any new policies will need to achieve at least two key 
things: sustainable yields for individual species; and flexibility through time in what species are 
caught, to mirror the changing species diversity and abundance in UK waters as the climate 
changes. 

Are actions taking place? 

There are no NAP actions related to improving the resilience of commercial fisheries and 
aquaculture.  

Outside of the NAP, the Seafish Industry Authority (Seafish) has produced a report under the 
Adaptation Reporting Power. The report outlines a number of actions being taken by the wild-
caught fishing industry in response to the risks from climate change, including: 

• Setting up fisheries science partnerships to improve dialogue between scientists and 
industry representatives. 

• The inclusion of training modules on environmental awareness within Seafish's 'Introduction 
to Commercial Fishing' training course. 

• Establishing port emergency operating guidelines to deal with severe weather. 

• Improving vessel safety for fishermen during severe weather through ensuring appropriate 
equipment is on board, and training. 

Seafish has also developed an action plan for future reporting cycles that aims to improve the 
state of knowledge on climate change within the industry, further improve port and vessel risk 
management strategies, and review quota allocations and fishing seasons in response to climate 
change over the longer-term. 

There is no information currently on the adaptation measures being taken by the aquaculture 
and fish farming industries. Work on this could be conducted as part of the next NAP. 

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

It is difficult to measure progress in this area as indicators of vulnerability and action 
within marine fisheries and aquaculture are limited.  

Wider indicators of the sustainability of the fishing industry provide a useful insight into 
resilience to climate change. If fisheries are not resilient to current pressures, they are likely to be 
vulnerable to the increased pressures expected as a result of climate change. The proportion of 
UK marine fish stocks that are managed at full reproductive capacity and being harvested 
sustainably varies over the long-term but is currently at around 30%.63  

For aquaculture, the amount of freshwater abstracted for fish farming provides a useful 
indicator, as this represents a significant proportion of non-tidal water abstractions in England. 
The absolute volume of water abstracted has declined from around 1,700 million cubic metres in 
2000 to around 900 million cubic metres in 2014. Abstraction for fish farming has fallen from 

62 For example, see: https://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/EU exit-explained/common-fisheries-policy  
63 England biodiversity indicators 2015 update, https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/england-biodiversity-
indicators  


  


Chapter 3: Natural environment 87 


 

                                                           

https://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/brexit-explained/common-fisheries-policy
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/england-biodiversity-indicators
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/england-biodiversity-indicators




14% to 10% of overall freshwater abstraction.64 It is not clear how much of this water 
is consumed and how much is returned to the environment. 

Further indicators that would be useful to develop include the diversity of fish species caught 
and sold on the market, and the level of bycatch. It would also be helpful to monitor pest and 
disease incidence within farmed fish and commercial shell fisheries over time. 

RECOMMENDATION 8: Goals and actions to achieve sustainable yields by 2030 should be included 
in new policies that will replace the Common Fisheries Policy. Indicators of sustainable management 
should also be reviewed to ensure they take account of changing distributions of fish species due to 
climate change. (Owner: Defra. Timing: by 2019). 

3.6 Progress against NAP objectives 
Table 3.2 below summarises progress against the objectives listed within the NAP for the 
Natural Environment, and Agriculture & Forestry themes. In general, the objectives 
describe a number of processes and list actions that aim to improve the direction of travel 
in current indicators of vulnerability. 

Of the 136 actions in the two relevant themes of the NAP: 

• 59 (44%) are complete;

• 49 (36%) are on track;

• 10 (7%) have been revised or delayed, and

• 4 (3%) have been dropped.

Updates were not received on the remaining 14 actions (10%). 

93 (68%) of actions in the NAP for these themes are time-bound, with the remaining 43 (32%) 
classed as ‘on-going’. 

As set out in our last progress report in 2015, the objectives for the natural environment, 
agriculture and forestry themes of the NAP focus on reversing historic declines in the direction of 
travel, i.e. increasing resilience compared to a present-day baseline. Similarly, the ASC's 
assessment of vulnerability looks at trends for a series of indicators, but unless there are relevant 
government targets, we do not currently specify recommended outcomes that should be 
achieved for the natural environment. Further work should be undertaken to consider what 
outcomes, success measures and indicators would improve the assessment of resilience, to 
include in future ASC reports and the second National Adaptation Programme. 

64 Defra abstraction statistics, https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-data-sets/env15-water-abstraction-tables 

88 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 

https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-data-sets/env15-water-abstraction-tables




Table 3.2. NAP objectives for the natural environment, and agriculture and forestry, themes 

NAP objective Commentary on progress 

Objective 15. To increase the 
resilience of agriculture by 
effectively managing the impact 
of volatility in the occurrence and 
severity of rainfall events on 
water availability, flooding, soil 
erosion and pollution due to 
runoff. 

16 NAP actions (12% of the total number included in this chapter) 
fall under this objective, all of which are on track or complete. 
Defra and the Environment Agency have focussed on promoting 
efficient water use through abstraction reform, are undertaking 
further research to assess the costs and benefits of different water 
management measures, and are supporting farmers to use water 
most effectively. 

In order to measure how resilience is changing, it is necessary to 
consider overall water use and availability. Since 1960 there has 
been no clear trend in summer or winter low flows. There is also no 
obvious increase or decrease between 2000 and 2014 in water 
abstraction for agricultural use, spray irrigation, or in crop losses 
due to drought or flooding. 

Environmental flow indicators will provide a measure of the 
success of abstraction reform and other activities in managing 
vulnerability in the future, as they will show the amount of stress 
placed on the natural environment by water scarcity. 

Objective 16. To increase the 
resilience of the forestry sector 
by increasing the level of 
management in England’s 
woodlands and the uptake of 
adaptation good practice in 
woodland creation and 
restocking. 

All 12 NAP actions for this objective are complete or on track. The 
Forestry Commission has worked with a variety of partners to 
implement actions from the Government's Forestry and 
Woodlands policy statement, and has placed particular emphasis 
on increasing the area of woodland being actively managed, in 
order to support adaptation efforts. 

The proportion of forests under active management, which now 
stands at 58%, continues to increase, although the Forestry 
Commission's 2018 target of 66% is unlikely to be met. The British 
Woodland Survey in 2015 showed low take up of adaptation 
actions by forestry managers (<25% are actively taking measures 
to adapt). The Forestry Commission and other partners are hoping 
to increase take up through the Climate Change Accord. 

Chapter 3: Natural environment 89 




Table 3.2. NAP objectives for the natural environment, and agriculture and forestry, themes 

NAP objective Commentary on progress 

Objective 17. To increase 
resilience to pests and disease to 
help protect biodiversity, 
maintain agricultural and forestry 
productivity and protect the UK’s 
ability to export products. 

11 of the 13 NAP actions for this objective are complete or on 
track. The majority of actions relate to improving the knowledge 
base of how climate change will affect pest and disease incidence, 
and embedding environmental change in risk assessments for 
pests and diseases. No updates have been provided for two NAP 
actions owned by Defra related to the monitoring of agricultural 
pests and diseases.  

Measuring how vulnerability to pests and diseases is changing for 
biodiversity and agriculture is challenging, due to a lack of suitable 
vulnerability indicators. Indicators of species diversity in the 
forestry sector show that the variety of conifer species being 
planted on the public forest estate has increased (from eight to 18 
over the past four years), but this has not been the case for 
broadleaf species. 

Objective 18. To embed climate 
change adaptation into 
agriculture, horticulture and 
forestry research programmes, in 
order to improve knowledge of 
likely climate impacts and 
contribute to the development 
and uptake of climate resilient 
crops, tree and livestock species 
as well as relevant technologies. 

All nine NAP actions for this objective are complete or on track, 
with most of the research highlighted in the NAP action updates 
due for completion between 2017 and 2019. Research topics under 
this theme include improving understanding of soil function, 
valuation of impacts of extreme weather on crop and livestock 
systems, and how genetic traits in plants and animals can affect 
resilience to climate change. 

Evidence is not available on the outcomes of these research 
programmes in terms of contributing to the development and 
uptake of climate resilient crops, tree and livestock species. An 
evaluation of the Agri-tech strategy, which is still outstanding, 
could seek to derive evidence on the impact of R&D on crop and 
livestock resilience and use of new technologies. Individual project 
reviews that look at their impact on decision makers would also be 
valuable, once the research under this objective is complete. 

Objective 19. To build the 
resilience of wildlife, habitats and 
ecosystems (terrestrial, 
freshwater, marine and coastal) 
to climate change, so as to put 
our natural environment in the 
strongest possible position to 
meet the challenges and 
changes ahead. 

A large amount of action is underway for this objective, which 
contains 48 actions covering terrestrial, freshwater, marine and 
coastal ecosystems. Of these, 44 are complete or on track. Many of 
the actions relate to producing tools and guidance for land 
managers, improving site-level assessments of vulnerability, and 
implementing the actions set out in the Biodiversity 2020 strategy. 
Four actions have been revised or dropped due to organisational 
changes, similar work being carried out elsewhere, or a lack of 
resources.  

Despite the considerable level of activity, the condition and extent 
of most habitats is not improving at the rate needed to meet 
current targets, and species numbers continue to decline in many 
cases, as set out in detail in this chapter. 

90 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 




Table 3.2. NAP objectives for the natural environment, and agriculture and forestry, themes 

NAP objective Commentary on progress 

Objective 20. To take action to 
help wildlife, habitats and 
ecosystems accommodate and 
smoothly transition through 
inevitable change. 

This objective has 11 associated actions, all but one of which are 
complete or on track. Natural England has focussed on improving 
its assessment of vulnerable habitats, and undertaken work to 
consider how to include greater flexibility in site designations to 
account for climate change. One action for National Parks to 
update their adaptation reports under the second round of the 
Adaptation Reporting Power has been revised - not all parks were 
able to take part in Round 2 due to resource shortages.  

It is not currently possible to assess how these and other actions 
have contributed to helping wildlife, habitats and ecosystems to 
accommodate change. Further work is needed in the future to 
assess how this can best be measured. 

Objective 21. To promote and 
gain widespread uptake in other 
sectors of the use of adaptation 
measures that benefit and/or do 
not adversely affect the natural 
environment. 

This objective contains 12 actions, nine of which are on track or 
complete. Actions include work to pilot payments for ecosystem 
services, efforts to increase the uptake of blue and green 
infrastructure in urban areas, and to incentivise peatland 
restoration through the Peatland Code. 

No updates have been received for three actions related to the 
work of the Green Infrastructure Partnership, how public bodies 
are taking into account the need to conserve biodiversity in 
exercising their functions, and work by the Crown Estate to build 
resilience to wildfire.  

It is unclear how far the actions have succeeded in driving a wider 
uptake of the use of adaptation measures in other sectors, as this 
has not been reported. 

Objective 22. To improve the 
evidence base, to enhance the 
knowledge and understanding of 
decision makers, land managers 
and others of the impacts of 
climate change on the natural 
environment and how best we 
can influence adaptation or 
accommodate change. 

All sixteen NAP actions related to this objective are on track or 
complete. The vast majority of relevant research projects under 
this theme have been published, including the Living with 
Environmental Change (LWEC) climate impact report cards on 
biodiversity and water, and a 5-year, £14.5 million programme on 
ocean acidification.  

As with the other objectives, there is a lack of evidence to assess 
how these actions have contributed towards achieving the stated 
objective. Further work to evaluate the outcomes of the various 
research projects would be valuable. 

Chapter 3: Natural environment 91 




Chapter 4: People and the 
built environment 




Key messages 

Context 

The built environment in which people live and work determines, to a large extent, their vulnerability 
to weather and climate events, such as flooding and increased temperatures. The vast majority of 
people in England live in built-up areas, with about 91% of the population in cities and towns. 
Adaptation in the built environment is therefore essential to manage the climate risks to health and 
wellbeing. The second UK Climate Change Risk Assessment (CCRA2) concluded that urgent action is 
required to manage risks to people from flooding and higher temperatures. CCRA2 also pointed out 
that a long-term approach to planning and designing the built environment creates opportunities to 
manage these risks in a cost-effective way, whilst improving wellbeing. For example, green spaces 
contribute to reducing surface water flooding and overheating risks, as well as potentially reducing 
obesity, and improving mental health and air quality. Informed local planning can deliver more 
resilient communities, whilst also reducing greenhouse gas emissions. 

Summary of progress 

Since 2015, progress has been made in adapting the built environment to climate change, in 
particular in managing river and coastal flooding and reducing water use in homes. However, 
the vulnerability of communities to climate change is still increasing. While there are some 
examples of good practice, actions to manage surface water flooding are still not commensurate 
with current, and future, risk. Local planning policies and building regulations are not delivering 
the resilience to higher temperatures and extreme rainfall that will be needed.  

Overview of progress 

Adaptation priority Is there a plan? Are actions taking 
place? 

Is progress being 
made in managing 

vulnerability? 

1. River and coastal
flood alleviation

2. Development in
areas at risk of river and 
coastal flooding 

3. Surface water flood
alleviation

4. Development and
surface water flood risk

5. Property-level flood
resilience


Red


Green


Red


Amber

RedAmber

Amber

Amber

Amber

Chapter 4: People and the built environment 93 


Red


Green

GreenGreen

Green

Green




Key messages 

6. Capacity of people
and communities to 
recover from flooding

7. Coastal change risk
management 

8. Water demand in the
built environment 

9. Health impacts from
heat and cold 

10. Pathogens, air
quality and UV 
radiation

11. Effectiveness of the
emergency planning 
system 

Note: See Annex 2.1 for a description of the criteria used to assign Red-Amber-Green (RAG) scores. 

Most of the relevant actions listed in the National Adaptation Programme (NAP) have been completed 
or are on track. Significant progress is being made in managing river and coastal flooding, and 
improving water efficiency in homes: 

• Investment in flood alleviation schemes has increased since 2015, and between now and 2021
is consistent with the most recent assessment of long-term funding needs. Between April 2015 and
April 2017, 97,000 homes in England benefited from new or replacement flood defences. Whilst
flood defences have required additional maintenance due to damage from recent flood events, the
condition of flood defences is, on the whole, improving, with the Environment Agency achieving
its target for 97% of ‘high consequence’ flood defences to be in the required condition by the end
of March 2017.

• A new Property Flood Resilience Action Plan has been developed as part of a review
commissioned by Defra (the ‘Bonfield Review’). Within the action plan, Defra has adopted a vision
of achieving, in five years’ time, an ‘environment where it is standard practice for properties at high
flood risk to be made resilient’. This is a challenging ambition, yet necessary given that at least
153,000 households currently at high risk are not cost-beneficial to protect with flood
alleviation schemes, but could potentially benefit from steps to improve their resilience during
floods. This number is expected to increase to more than 217,000 households by the time Flood Re
is withdrawn in 2039.

Amber

Green

Amber

Amber

Amber

Amber

Amber

94 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 

Green

Green

Green

Green

Green

Green

Green

Green

Green

Green


Red  

Key messages 

• Household water consumption per person has continued to decline from 155 litres per person 
per day (l/p/d) in 2003/04 to 139 l/p/d in 2015/16, in line with the target for 2020 of 137 l/p/d. 
Water companies have implemented a range of actions to reduce household water demand, 
including encouraging the uptake of water metering. More than 45% of households in England 
now have water meters installed, compared to 43% in 2013. A recent Water UK assessment 
highlighted that more ambitious targets to reduce household consumption are needed to manage 
future risks of water shortages. 

However, some of the priority risks identified by CCRA2 are still not being managed at the necessary 
scale, including those from high temperatures and more intense rainfall. 

• While there is extensive guidance, there remain no legal requirements in place to adapt the 
built environment (including homes, hospitals, care homes, schools and prisons) to mitigate the 
impact of increasing temperatures. The absence of building or other regulations that require 
overheating risk to be addressed by developers is cited by building professionals as one of the 
main reasons why overheating is not consistently taken into account in new building design. 

• Efforts to address surface water flooding need to increase. There is evidence that rainfall 
patterns in the UK are intensifying, with the existing drainage and public sewerage network 
already under severe pressure in some areas. Responsibility for dealing with this issue is 
fragmented between water companies and different local authority functions. There are no plans 
currently in place to prepare for the long-term investment that will be needed.  

• New development is increasing the risk of surface water flooding. A recent CIWEM survey of 
500 industry experts highlighted a lack of confidence in the current policy, and the accompanying 
non-statutory national standards, that aim to promote sustainable drainage systems (SuDS) in new 
development. Developers appear to prefer building ‘grey’ underground systems that are less 
resilient to future changes in rainfall and do not provide environmental co-benefits. Use of SuDS is 
also inhibited by the continuing lack of clarity regarding who should be responsible for their 
adoption and maintenance.  

• Shoreline Management Plans identify areas where existing defences will become unsustainable 
or not cost-effective to maintain by the 2030s, 2060s and 2100s. This will have significant 
implications for some stretches of coastline, but the affected communities have not yet been 
seriously engaged in adaptation planning and need to long before coastal defences become 
unsustainable. 

• Evidence gathered from members of Local Resilience Forums (LRFs) suggests that their capacity 
to respond to emergencies has been severely tested by recent flood events, including Storm 
Desmond in December 2015. Whilst LRFs say they have made the best use of the resources 
available to respond to past events, they are not confident that they could cope with events 
more severe than those experienced to date, especially given diminishing resources.  

Recommendations for further progress 

More ambitious and rigorous policies, plans and implementation activity are needed to manage the 
increasing risks from surface water flooding and overheating. Stronger action is also needed to help 
people prepare for coastal change and for the staged withdrawal of the Flood Re subsidised insurance 
scheme from 2021.  

RECOMMENDATION 12: More and better co-ordinated action is needed to manage the lack of capacity 
within drainage systems to cope with possible increase in the frequency and severity of heavy rainfall. Defra 
and the National Infrastructure Commission should initiate a comprehensive assessment to quantify the 
need for investment and other policy actions to manage surface water flood risk, including, but not limited 


  


Chapter 4: People and the built environment 95 


   

Key messages 

to, retrofitting SuDS. Urgent investments need to be considered by water companies and Ofwat as part of 
the 2019 price review, and the comprehensive assessment should be in place to inform local planning policy 
and major investment decisions in the 2024 price review. (Owner: Defra. Timeline: as above). 

RECOMMENDATION 13: Policy is needed urgently to address the outstanding barriers to deliver high 
quality, effective SuDS in new development that achieve the full range of potential environmental co-
benefits. In particular, there is a need for: 

• More comprehensive and ambitious national standards for SuDS.  

• The automatic right to connect new development to the existing sewerage network to be made 
conditional on the national SuDS standards being met. 

• A clear policy on who should maintain and adopt SuDS by default. 

(Owner: DCLG. Timing: by 2019). 

RECOMMENDATION 14: Defra should develop a long-term strategy to manage flood risk down to 
tolerable levels in each part of the country (as we first recommended in 2015), so that as Flood Re is 
withdrawn properties can remain insurable at reasonable cost. This should include: 

• Monitoring the impact of the actions adopted following the Bonfield Review to achieve, in five years’ 
time, an ‘environment where it is standard practice for properties at high risk to be made resilient’. 

• Actively communicating the risk and possible adaptation actions to households and communities that 
are expected to remain or become at high flood risk by the 2030s.  

• Ensuring that Flood Re incentivises households to take up property-level resilience measures, which 
insurers should allow to be implemented during post-flood repairs. 

(Owner: Defra. Timing: by 2020). 

RECOMMENDATION 15: The Environment Agency, with Coastal Groups, should review the ambition 
within, and progress being made in implementing, Shoreline Management Plans (SMPs), and prepare 
communities for the coastal adaptation that will need to take place between now and the middle of the 
century. (Owner: Environment Agency. Timing: by 2020). 

RECOMMENDATION 16: As recommended in our 2015 report, a standard or regulation should be put in 
place to reduce the risk of overheating in new homes. (Owner: DCLG. Timing: by 2020).  

RECOMMENDATION 17: Further action should be taken to assess and reduce the risks of overheating in 
existing buildings, with the priorities being hospitals, schools, care homes and prisons. This could be 
undertaken for example through the relevant standards agencies such as the Care Quality Commission and 
Ofsted. (Owner: Department of Health, Department for Communities and Local Government, Department 
for Education, Department for Justice. Timing: by 2020). 

RECOMMENDATION 18: The Cabinet Office should, in consultation with Local Resilience Forums: 

• Commission an independent review of the planning scenarios underpinning local Risk Registers to 
ensure they i) they are consistent with plausible worst case scenarios, and ii) use the results to help LRFs 
assess the resources needed to manage these events. 

• Strengthen the Emergency Planning Guidance to clarify and test responsibilities for coordination 
amongst Category 1 and Category 2 responders, as well as between neighbouring LRFs.  

(Owner: Cabinet Office. Timing: by 2020). 



     

96 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


   


4.1 Climate change and the built environment  
The second UK Climate Change Risk Assessment in 2017 (CCRA2) concluded that people’s 
vulnerability to weather and climate events is to a large extent determined by the built 
environment.  

The vast majority of people in England live in built-up areas, with about 91% of the population 
living in cities and towns.65 The built environment has a strong influence on how climate change 
will impact upon people and communities. For example, the level of flood risk to communities 
depends on whether houses are built in areas vulnerable to flooding, the level of protection 
provided by flood alleviation schemes, and whether resilience measures are put in place at the 
individual household level. Housing quality determines whether people live in damp, excessively 
hot or cold homes, with the health cost to the NHS of poor housing estimated to be £1.4 - 2 
billion per year.66 The extent of permeable surfacing and urban green space impacts on the 
quantity and quality of water entering drainage networks and being discharged into 
watercourses. Green spaces also help to mitigate overheating of built up areas. 

CCRA2 also presented evidence that adapting the built environment to these risks reduces 
physical and economic impacts and achieves health and wellbeing co-benefits.  

For example, increasing the amount of green space contributes to reducing surface water 
flooding and overheating risks, and also helps to reduce obesity in children, improve mental 
health, and improve air quality.67 Local spatial planning can deliver greater community resilience 
to severe weather, whilst also reducing greenhouse gas emissions. For example, local planning 
policies can ensure that energy efficiency measures help to reduce emissions from buildings, 
which make up 19% of the national total, as well as encourage measures in new homes to 
protect people from heat and cold. There are many national and international examples of 
communities that are managing climate change risks, reducing their emissions and increasing 
the liveability of the built environment (see Box 4.1).These examples show that national and 
local government are instrumental in making them happen through supportive policies and in 
some cases funding. 


 

Box 4.1. Examples of climate resilient design contributing to community wellbeing 

Amsterdam 

In 2015, Amsterdam adopted a comprehensive sustainability agenda to tackle climate change risks, 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions, improve air quality, and enhance the city’s natural resources. The 
approach defined objectives, with quantitative targets, and the required investments to achieve 
them.68 Based on the economic return of these investments, for example through the savings that 
energy efficiency projects generate or in reducing flood damages, low-interest loan schemes were set 
up. These loans provided initial capital to projects that would not qualify for traditional financing either 
by being considered too innovative or because they are too small. This has resulted in more projects 

65 According to Defra’s Official Statistics on Rural population 2014/15 (2016), excluding people living in sparsely 
populated areas, 83% of the English population lives in cities and urban towns and 9% in rural towns, villages and 
hamlets. 
66 Select Committee on National Policy for the Built Environment (2016) Building Better Places.  
67 Kovats, R.S., Osborn, D., et al. (2016) UK Climate Change Risk Assessment Evidence Report: Chapter 5, People and the 
Built Environment. 
68 City of Amsterdam (2015) Sustainable Amsterdam. 


  


Chapter 4: People and the built environment 97 


 

                                                           




Box 4.1. Examples of climate resilient design contributing to community wellbeing 

incorporating adaptation and mitigation being delivered. To qualify for such loans, projects need to 
demonstrate that they can deliver against specific sustainability outcomes.69 

North West Bicester ‘Eco-town’ 

The town of Elmsbrook is the first phase of a Masterplan to create up to 6,000 new eco-homes in North 
West Bicester.70 These homes are being equipped with measures to reduce surface water runoff and 
improve water quality, such as green roofs and walls, to achieve water neutrality by collecting and 
recycling water, and to produce zero net carbon emissions. This development was initially aimed to 
fulfil the Eco-town Planning Policy Statement, which was withdrawn in 2009. The development was 
subsequently supported by Government funding of about £13 million.71 

Stuttgart ‘cool city’ 

Stuttgart is located in a low-lying area between two river valleys, in one of the most important car 
manufacturing regions in Germany. Overheating and air quality problems were highlighted in the 
1930s, and worsened in the 1970s due to industry intensification and the city’s growth. To address this 
issue, a ‘climate atlas’ was produced in 1992, identifying areas more prone to overheating as well as 
those that contribute to air circulation - the so-called ventilation corridors. Since then, spatial planning 
has taken into account the impact that new development has on overheating. For example, local 
policies do not allow new construction to take place in ventilation corridors, require buildings to be 
surrounded by green spaces, and provide for interconnected green areas to be created and protected. 
Passive cooling has also been introduced in public buildings such as the city library and main station. 
Green roofs are required for all new buildings, and a financial support program for green roofs has 
been in place since 1989.72 

Sources: see footnotes. 

4.2 Flood risk management and climate change 
In 2015, the ASC said a long-term strategy was needed to address the increasing number 
of homes and other properties expected to be at high flood risk in the coming decades. 
CCRA2 identified flooding and coastal change as one of the six priority risks for which 
more action is urgently needed. 

Since our last ASC Progress report in 2015, severe flood events have affected the UK. In 
December 2015 and January 2016, 17,000 properties were flooded as storms Desmond, Eva and 
Frank passed through the UK. Cumbria was particularly affected. The newly-built flood defences 
in Carlisle were overtopped, flooding 2,000 homes. In September 2016, widespread 
thunderstorms and intense bursts of rain caused surface water flooding in Manchester, Cornwall, 
the Thames Valley, Surrey and Hampshire.73 In January 2017, severe flood warnings were issued 
across the East Coast and thousands of residents in Lincolnshire, Norfolk, Suffolk and Essex were 
asked to evacuate their homes until a life-threatening tidal surge had passed.  

69 C40 Cities (2016) C40 Cities Good Practice Guide – City Climate Funds. 
70 See: http://nwbicester.co.uk/ 
71 See: http://www.cherwell.gov.uk/index.cfm?articleid=7975 
72 Kazmierczak, A. and Carter, J. (2010) Adaptation to climate change using blue and green infrastructure – A database 
of case studies.  
73 See: http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/climate/uk/summaries/2016/september 

98 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 

http://nwbicester.co.uk/
http://www.cherwell.gov.uk/index.cfm?articleid=7975
http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/climate/uk/summaries/2016/september


  

The Environment Agency estimates that one in six properties in England is at risk of being 
flooded from river, coastal and/or surface water. This corresponds to 2.6 million properties at risk 
of flooding from rivers and the sea, and 3.2 million properties at risk from surface water 
flooding.74 About 660,000 properties are at risk from surface water flooding and river or coastal 
flooding. The annual average damages from flooding are estimated to be about £860 million 
from rivers and the sea, and £290 million from surface water.75 CCRA2 estimated that average 
annual damages would rise by between 22 and 78% by the 2050s, and between 47 and 160% by 
the 2080s, depending on the climate scenario adopted. These projections assume no population 
growth and a continuation of current effort in managing flood risk.76 

Meeting the challenge of increasing river, coastal and surface water flood risk requires a 
strategic approach that combines catchment management, flood alleviation schemes, 
development control, and property-level flood resilience. 

In 2015, the ASC called for a more integrated, catchment-based approach to managing 
increasing flood risk. The Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and Environmental Audit 
Committees have made similar recommendations in response to recent floods. CCRA2 reiterated 
that more joined-up action is needed to manage flood risks, especially with climate change.  

The need for a comprehensive approach to flood risk management was previously identified in 
the Government’s Foresight Flooding report, published in 2004. Following this advice, Defra’s 
Making Space for Water strategy in 2005 sought to integrate a wide range of environmental, 
social and economic factors to cost-effectively manage flood risk, taking a systems approach. 
However, the National Flood Resilience Review launched in response to the 2015/16 winter 
floods focused on what could be done to prepare the country for the following winter, and on 
improving the understanding of river and coastal flood risk in the current climate.77 The NFRR 
did not consider longer-term risks nor cover surface water flooding. 

Looking forward, Flood Risk Management Plans for the period 2016-2021, required by the EU 
Floods Directive,78 assess the risk of flooding from all sources at the catchment scale and set out 
how relevant authorities should work together, and with communities, to manage flood and 
coastal risk. In the context of exiting the European Union, Defra is now considering the approach 
to the second cycle. Preliminary discussions have identified the potential to develop a more 
integrated approach in high risk catchments, especially where there are likely to be co-benefits 
such as carbon storage, water quality and biodiversity benefits.79 The National Flood and Coastal 
Erosion Risk Management Strategy is also due to be updated by 2019.  

Meeting the challenge of managing flood risk in the context of climate change is 
particularly important given that Flood Re, the subsidised flood insurance scheme, will 
begin to be withdrawn from 2021 before ceasing altogether by 2039.  

The Government and the insurance industry have an explicit focus on the number of homes in 
areas with more than a 1% annual chance of flooding. This is because some of these properties 

74 Environment Agency (2016) Managing flood and coastal erosion risks in England: 1 April 2015 to 31 March 2016. 
75 Environment Agency (2014) Flood and coastal erosion risk management - Long-term investment scenarios (LTIS) 
2014. 
76 Sayers, P. B. et al. (2015) for the ASC. Climate Change Risk Assessment 2017: Projections of future flood risk in the UK. 
https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/sayers-for-the-asc-projections-of-future-flood-risk-in-the-uk/ 
77 HM Government (2016) National Flood Resilience Review.  
78 EU Floods Directive 2007/60/EC 
79 National Adaptation Programme (NAP) action update (2017). 


  


Chapter 4: People and the built environment 99 


 

                                                           

https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/sayers-for-the-asc-projections-of-future-flood-risk-in-the-uk/


  

might struggle to access affordable insurance in a free market when Flood Re is withdrawn.80 
Currently there are more than 500,000 homes in this risk band (~2% of homes in England, 
considering river and coastal flood risk only). This number could increase due to the combined 
impact of climate change, ongoing building in floodplains, and the deterioration of flood 
defences. The Environment Agency’s Long Term Investment Scenarios show that it will not be 
cost-effective to build community flood alleviation schemes to protect all of these properties. 
Thus a wider strategy is needed to reduce the impacts of flooding as Flood Re is withdrawn.  

The aim of this section is to assess whether progress has been made in reducing the number of 
properties in areas at more than a 1% annual chance of flooding through: 

• Delivering river, coastal and surface flood alleviation schemes, where it is cost-effective to do 


so. 


• Ensuring that new development is well below this risk threshold now and in the future. 

• Implementing property-level resilience in areas where flood alleviation schemes are not cost-
effective. 

• Assessing whether there are barriers for a prompt and full recovery by those who are 
affected by flooding. 

River and coastal flood alleviation  

Is there a plan? 


 

The Environment Agency’s latest Long Term Investment 
Scenarios (LTIS) explored the investment trajectory needed to 
deliver all cost-effective flood alleviation schemes across 
England over the next 50 to 100 years. Defra’s six-year 
investment plan sets out what it will achieve by 2021, and 
forecasts a 5% net reduction in expected annual flood 
damages by then. 

Are actions taking 
place? 


 

Spending over the 2015-2021 period has increased by £700 
million following the 2015/16 floods, although a quarter of this 
sum has yet to be allocated. There is now a new emphasis on 
catchment-wide approaches, including initiatives such as the 
Cumbria Flood Action Plan. £15 million was announced for 
natural flood management projects in November 2016.  

Is progress being 
made in managing 
vulnerability? 


 

Flood risk management authorities delivered new or 
replacement flood defences for 97,000 homes between 
2015 and 2017 and are on course to achieve the 300,000 
household target by 2021. The Environment Agency is also 
on track to achieve its target to maintain 97% of ‘high 
consequence’ flood defences in the required condition.  

80 ABI and the NFF (2012) Guidance on Insurance and Planning in Flood Risk Areas for Local Planning Authorities in 
England. 


     

100 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


 

Green

Green

Green

                                                           


  

Is there a plan? 

A six-year plan for investment in flood alleviation schemes in England has been in place 
since 2015. Plans for the period up to 2021 are consistent with the most recent assessment 
of long-term investment needs.  

The six-year programme of investment in flood alleviation schemes started in 2015. By 2021, the 
programme should deliver 1,500 schemes that benefit 300,000 households, reducing expected 
annual flood damages by 5%.81 

According to the Environment Agency’s Long-Term Investment Scenarios, spending £750 to 
£800 million per year (a total of £4.5 - £4.8 billion) represents the most cost-effective expenditure 
profile between now and 2021. Defra has allocated £2.5 billion in capital funding and £1.4 billion 
in revenue funding towards the six-year programme. The rest of the funding is due to be raised 
from other sources through the ‘partnership funding’ approach.82 

Guidelines require that catchment-wide options are considered when designing flood 
alleviation schemes, with an emphasis on working where possible with natural processes.  

The Environment Agency guidance for appraising flood risk management schemes, published in 
2010, requires schemes to consider a range of options, including those that work with natural 
processes.83 The appraisal of such options should take into account the whole range of co-
benefits that each option can provide, as well as whether each option is sustainable in the long 
term. 

Are actions taking place? 

Spending in the six-year programme is now in line with the Government’s most cost-
effective, long-term investment trajectory (Figure 4.1).  

In our previous report84 we noted that there was underinvestment in flood and coastal defence 
between 2010 and 2015. In response to flood events in 2013 spending levels were increased. 
Following the 2015/16 winter flooding, a further £700 million was announced in the 2016 
Budget, of which £520 million has been allocated to date.85 


  

81 Environment Agency (2017) Flood and coastal erosion risk management in England investment programme 2015 to 
2021 infographic - updated March 2017. 
82 See: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/flood-and-coastal-resilience-partnership-funding-an-
introductory-guide  
83 Measures that work with natural process help to manage flood risk whilst improve the environmental condition of 
rivers, wetlands and coastal areas, both urban and rural. Whilst these measures are not meant to replace traditional 
schemes, the Environment Agency recommends using them where appropriate as they help achieve wider social 
and environmental benefits. See: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/338434/SC130004_R1.pdf  
84 ASC (2015) Progress on preparing for climate change, https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/reducing-emissions-
and-preparing-for-climate-change-2015-progress-report-to-parliament/ 
85 Communication with the Environment Agency.  


  


Chapter 4: People and the built environment 101 


 

                                                           

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/flood-and-coastal-resilience-partnership-funding-an-introductory-guide
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/flood-and-coastal-resilience-partnership-funding-an-introductory-guide
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/338434/SC130004_R1.pdf
https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/reducing-emissions-and-preparing-for-climate-change-2015-progress-report-to-parliament/
https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/reducing-emissions-and-preparing-for-climate-change-2015-progress-report-to-parliament/




Figure 4.1. Spending on flood and coastal erosion risk in England against the long term need 

Source: ASC based on Defra (Sept 2016) Central Government Funding for Flood and Coastal Erosion Risk 
Management in England, and Environment Agency (2014) Long-Term Investment Scenarios. 
Notes: Money retained by Defra, and spending by local authorities on local flood risk management, are excluded 
from the figures. All figures are presented in cash/nominal terms, with inflation included at 1.5% per year. The 
‘most favourable’ long-term investment scenario identified in the Environment Agency’s 2009 Long-Term 
Investment Strategy (LTIS1) required an average of £20 million more plus inflation to be spent each and every 
year to 2035 in order to avoid an increase in the number of properties in areas of significant flood risk (1-in-75 
annual chance of flooding or greater). The optimal investment path identified in the Environment Agency’s 2014 
Long-Term Investment Scenarios (LTIS2) suggested a lower optimal rate of investment, starting at between £750 
million and £800 million in 2014/15. 

New or replacement flood alleviation schemes have delivered benefits to 97,000 
households since 2015.86 A large proportion of the investment programme is necessarily 
focused on replacing existing schemes to maintain current standards of protection, 
alongside some new schemes in previously undefended areas.  

The 97,000 households benefitting from investment since 2015 fall into three main categories: 

• Those in previously unprotected areas, now with defences in place for the first time.

• Those already benefiting from defences for which investment was needed or justified to
improve the standard of protection.

• Where existing defences were at the end of their service life and needed to be replaced.

86 Communication with the Environment Agency. 

102 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


  

Many of the schemes being delivered, and counted towards the Government’s 300,000 ‘homes 
better protected’ target, will replace or renew ageing defence structures. This is because flood 
alleviation schemes need periodic upgrades in order to provide a continuing level of protection. 
During the previous spending period (2011-2015), investment in flood alleviation projects 
benefitted over 162,000 households.87 The Environment Agency does not publish a breakdown 
of this total by the three categories of flood defence project mentioned above. 

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

The Environment Agency is on course to achieve its target to deliver schemes that benefit 
300,000 households by 2021, and to improve the condition of existing flood defence 
structures so that at least 97% of ‘high consequence’ assets are in the required condition. 

In 2015/16, 111 river and coastal flood alleviation schemes were delivered that benefitted 49,000 
households. Two-thirds of these properties were provided with a 1:100 standard of protection or 
better (39 out of the 111 schemes).88 A lower standard of protection was provided by 25 
schemes (ranging between 1:5 and 1:75). These data show that the residual risk of flooding can 
be high even for households claimed by the Government as ‘better protected’. 

The protection provided by the remaining 47 schemes could not be established, as data on the 
risk of flooding before and after the schemes were built are not available. Without these data it is 
unclear whether the delivery of flood alleviation schemes by 2021 will achieve the claimed 5% 
net reduction in expected annual damage.  

Climate change was generally factored into the design of recent flood alleviation schemes.  

In 2016, the Environment Agency updated the guidelines for designing flood alleviation 
schemes, reiterating the support for ‘managed adaptive approaches’89 stated in previous 
guidelines.90 Almost half (13) of 27 schemes built between 2010 and 2015 reviewed for the ASC 
incorporated a managed adaptive approach, for example by building larger foundations so 
defences can be raised in future. Twelve of the schemes adopted precautionary approaches to 
take into account future climate change. Two of the 27 schemes made no provision for climate 
change.  

The set of options under consideration for large schemes can be narrowed prematurely 
during the appraisal process, leaving little room for innovative solutions, options that 
deliver wider co-benefits, or scope to change the risk management approach entirely.  

A review by Defra in 2012 found that the final option for two-thirds of flood alleviation schemes 
was already determined at the start of the appraisal process. In seven of the 27 schemes built 
between 2010 and 2015 analysed for the ASC, including some large coastal schemes, the choice 
of the intervention was found to be constrained because the ‘new’ scheme was an upgrade of a 
pre-existing scheme. About two thirds of the 27 schemes analysed consisted of a hard 
engineering structure, four schemes included some element of working with natural processes, 

87 See: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/426724/Agenda_and_papers_for
_14_May_2015_board_meeting.pdf  
88 The standard of protection is the annual chance of a flood exceeding the design standard of the flood alleviation 
scheme, for example by overtopping or breaching a flood defence. An area immediately behind a defence with a 
1% standard of protection will have (approximately) a 1% annual chance of being flooded. 
89 Environment Agency (2016) Adapting to Climate Change: Advice to Flood & Coastal Risk Management Authorities. 
90 Defra (2009) Appraisal of flood and coastal erosion risk management: A Defra policy statement. 


  


Chapter 4: People and the built environment 103 


 

                                                           

https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/426724/Agenda_and_papers_for_14_May_2015_board_meeting.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/426724/Agenda_and_papers_for_14_May_2015_board_meeting.pdf


  

and only the remaining six actively worked with natural processes by setting back flood 
defences, creating salt marshes or lowland fens, and re-connecting floodplains.91 

Development in areas at risk of river and coastal flooding  

Is there a plan?  National planning policy steers development away from flood 
risk areas. It allows development in flood risk areas only once 
other alternatives have been considered and then, only by 
exception.  

Are actions taking 
place? 

 The number of planning applications approved against the 
Environment Agency’s advice remains low. 

Is progress being 
made in managing 
vulnerability?  

Development in areas with more than a 1% annual chance 
of being flooded has increased and there is the potential 
for 90,000 new homes to be built in the next five years in 
these areas. Although most of these developments will be 
in line with the Environment Agency’s advice, this level of 
development will add to future flood risk. 

Is there a plan? 

National planning policy steers development away from flood risk areas. It allows 
development in these areas only once other alternatives have been considered and then, 
only by exception.  

Local Planning Authorities (LPAs, consisting of unitary and district councils) need to identify 
sufficient development sites to meet local housing requirements. A Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment is carried out to assess the flood risk to all the sites that the authority has identified 
for development, including those brought forward by private landowners.92 Sites with more 
than a 1% annual chance of flooding from a river, and more than a 0.5% annual chance of 
coastal flooding, can be allocated for development only if there are insufficient sites at lower 
flood risk to meet housing targets (the ‘sequential test’). To gain planning permission developers 
need to demonstrate that occupants of houses built in these areas will be safe during the 
development’s lifetime and that the development does not increase flood risk elsewhere (the 
‘exception test’). In practice, this means that these houses should be structurally sound, flooding 
in the area would not pose a risk to inhabitants, and there is a safe means of escape in the event 
of a flood.93 The Environment Agency has also developed guidelines to assist developers and 
Local Planning Authorities to prepare and assess planning applications. These guidelines include 
specific measures to reduce the risk below the 1% threshold for river flooding, and 0.5% for 
coastal flooding.94 

91 JBA (2017) for the ASC. Assessment of the impact of recently-built flood alleviation schemes in managing long-term 
residual flood risk in England. 
92 DCLG (2014) Guidance: Housing and economic land availability assessment. 
93 Based on a 1-in-100 year river flood event (1-in-200 for coastal flooding). 
94 See: https://www.gov.uk/guidance/flood-risk-assessment-local-planning-authorities  


     

104 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


 

Green

Green

Amber

                                                           

https://www.gov.uk/guidance/flood-risk-assessment-local-planning-authorities


  

In February 2017, the Government published a housing white paper to introduce policies and 
proposals to address the lack of supply of new homes. The white paper included proposals that 
could help to clarify some aspects of the NPPF.95  

It should be noted that new homes built after 1st January 2009 are excluded from Flood Re. This 
is a useful incentive to ensure new development is located away from flood risk areas or is made 
sufficiently resilient to be insurable at reasonable cost. 

Are actions taking place? 

The number of planning applications reported as being approved despite EA objections 
remains low. However, it is not known if the Environment Agency is consulted on all 
relevant planning applications. The outcome of about one-third of planning decisions the 
Environment Agency advises on is also unknown.96 

Local authorities should consult with the Environment Agency on all planning applications for 
minor and major developments in areas with at least a 1% annual chance of flooding (0.5% in 
coastal areas). In 2015/16, the Environment Agency received over 15,700 requests to comment 
on planning applications, corresponding to about 3% of the planning applications received by 
Local Authorities over the same year.97 It is not known whether the Environment Agency is sent 
all planning applications it should comment on.  

Of those received, the EA objected to about 2,600 planning applications on flood risk grounds. It 
is recommended in planning guidelines that local authorities inform EA of the outcome of 
applications that it has commented on. Between 2003 and 2015, the Environment Agency was 
notified of the outcome for two-thirds of the applications it commented on.98 Of the 2,000 
applications for which the outcome is known, 65 (3%) were approved against the Agency’s 
advice. These correspond to less than 200 buildings. The annual percentage of applications 
going against the Environment Agency’s advice has remained around 3% since 2010.  

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

Development in areas at more than a 1% annual chance of flooding has steadily increased 
over the last few years. Although it is likely that most of these developments are in line 
with Environment Agency advice, development at this level of risk should only occur by 
exception. 

The ASC recommended in 2015 that The Department of Communities and Local Government 
should by the time of the ASC’s next report in 2017 publish an assessment quantifying the impact of 
new development on long-term flood risk. The evidence from this assessment should be used to 
inform subsequent Environment Agency long-term investment scenarios (Recommendation 6). The 
Government did not agree that such an assessment was needed, quoting the available data at 
the time that showed 7% of new dwellings in 2013/14 were located in areas with at least a 1% 

95 Proposals include clarifying the NPPF to ensure that: both the Exception Test and Sequential Test need to be 
passed for an area to be allocated for development; minor developments require both a flood risk assessment and 
ensure that they do not increase flood risk elsewhere; and that planning policies should consider the cumulative 
flood risks resulting from separate developments in the same area. See: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/fixing-our-broken-housing-market 
96 Data from the Environment Agency (2017), see the Technical Annex for this chapter. 
97 DCLG (2016) Planning Applications in England: January to March 2016. 
98 Data from the Environment Agency (2017), see the Technical Annex for this chapter. 


  


Chapter 4: People and the built environment 105 


 

                                                           

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/fixing-our-broken-housing-market


  

annual chance of flooding, lower than the level in 2011.99 However, in 2015/16 DCLG reported 
that the percentage had increased to 9%. The Environment Agency has since taken up the ASC’s 
recommendation, and is currently assessing the impact of new development on long-term flood 
risk as part of work to update their LTIS analysis. 

Given the recent rate of development in flood risk areas and the last Government’s housing 
target of building one million new homes, there is the potential for 90,000 new homes to be 
built in the highest risk parts of the floodplain between 2015 and 2020. The actual level of risk to 
individual developments will depend on whether defences are in place, the standard of 
protection they provide, and whether additional resilience measures have been adopted.100 
Flood defences that protect new development will need to be continuously maintained and 
improved over time if current standards of protection are to be sustained. Even where defences 
are in place, design standards can be exceeded by extreme weather events.101 Intensively 
building behind flood defences means more people and property will be affected by future 
floods, and increases the exposure of the insurance industry to claims should defences be 
overwhelmed.102 

Surface water flood alleviation 

Is there a plan? 


 

Responsibilities and ownership for managing surface water 
risk remain fragmented, and plans piecemeal: 

• Lead Local Flood Authorities (LLFAs) are making progress 
in producing strategies for managing surface water 
flooding, but 38 out of 152 LLFAs were yet to complete 
their strategy five years after the requirement was 
introduced. Defra has published an action plan on surface 
water management, which focuses on helping LLFAs 
implement local strategies, but the action plan lacks 
timescales and resources. 

• Whilst some water companies have started assessing 
actions to tackle the lack of capacity of their sewerage 
networks, it is unclear whether and how this assessment 
will feed into LLFA strategies.  

99 The percentage of building in the floodplain observed in 2011 is not reported here, as it cannot be directly 
compared with those observed in 2013, because the two figures were derived using different methods and dataset.  
100 Once flood defences are taken in to account, an estimated 4,600 new homes have been built per year in areas 
exposed to a 1% or greater annual chance of flooding from river and tidal sources (around 3% of new development 
in recent years). See our 2015 Progress Report, page 60-66. 
101 For example, recently built flood defences in were overtopped in December 2015, including in Cockermouth and 
Carlisle. 
102 See: https://www.abi.org.uk/globalassets/sitecore/files/documents/consultation-
papers/2004/11/ppg25review.pdf  

Amber



     

106 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


 

                                                           

https://www.abi.org.uk/globalassets/sitecore/files/documents/consultation-papers/2004/11/ppg25review.pdf
https://www.abi.org.uk/globalassets/sitecore/files/documents/consultation-papers/2004/11/ppg25review.pdf


  

Are actions taking 
place? 


 

Water companies have allocated £6 billion to reduce surface 
water flood risk over the next five years, and there are many 
examples of water companies, local councils and transport 
authorities retrofitting SuDS within the existing built 
environment to reduce pressure on public sewers. However, 
the requirements on LLFAs within the Flood and Water 
Management Act have not yet been fulfilled. 

Is progress being 
made in managing 
vulnerability?  


 

Evidence suggests a significant and increasingly severe 
lack of capacity in the sewer network to deal with heavy 
rainfall. The scale of the investment to tackle this issue has 
yet to be assessed. 

Is there a plan? 

A recent review carried out by Water UK concluded that responsibilities for managing 
surface water flood risk need clarifying and that different standards and guidelines need 
to be aligned.103 

Responsibilities for managing surface water risk remain fragmented: 

• The 2010 Flood and Water Management Act established county and unitary authorities as 
Lead Local Flood Authorities to take the local leadership role in managing flood risk from 
surface and ground water, and local watercourses. 

• The 1991 Water Industry Act legislated that water companies are responsible for providing, 
maintaining and operating systems of public sewers and works for the purpose of effectually 
draining an area. Industry guidance details what ‘effectual’ drainage means, by defining the 
minimum capacity of the network.104  

• The industry regulator (Ofwat) requires water companies to reduce the number of properties 
with a 10% annual chance of flooding from drains, foul or combined sewer networks.105 
Ofwat also encourages all water companies to charge for surface water drainage services 
according to impermeable site area.  

• Highway authorities are responsible for public drains that collect surface water from local 
roads.106  

Lead Local Flood Authorities are responsible for producing strategies for managing 
surface water and other local flooding, but 38 out of 152 LLFAs had not completed their 
strategy five years after the requirement was introduced. Defra has published an action 
plan to help LLFAs implement local strategies, but its expected impact, timeline and 
resources are not clear.  

The Flood and Water Management Act was introduced to implement a number of the key 
recommendations from the independent Pitt Report on the 2007 floods.107 One of the 

103 21st Century Drainage Programme (2016) Communication document. 
104 According to this guidance, drainage and combined systems should have the capacity to drain an event with a 
3% annual chance of occurring. See: http://sfa.wrcplc.co.uk/ 
105 See, for example: Mott MacDonald (2008) External Review of Sewer Flooding Risk Registers. 
106 Highways Act 1980. 

Amber


  


Chapter 4: People and the built environment 107 


 Red

                                                           

http://sfa.wrcplc.co.uk/




requirements from the Act was for all LLFAs to produce a local flood risk management strategy. 
Whilst most of the LLFAs have made progress in implementing the Act, 38 of the 152 LLFAs had 
not published a strategy by March 2016. Whilst the Act did not specify timescales for 
compliance, the Government expected local strategies to be produced ‘within a reasonable 
period of time from the commencement of the legislation’.108 Defra has now said it will consider 
instructing other risk management authorities to complete the remaining strategies.109 

The content of the published strategies varies, and in some cases it is not in line with the Act’s 
requirements. For example, 55 of the 90 strategies assessed independently for Defra did not 
include a cost-benefit assessment of the actions needed to meet the plans’ objectives, and 30 
included only a partial assessment. 35 out of 90 strategies did not fully specify how and when 
such actions would be implemented, as is required by the Act.110  

The ASC’s 2015 report recommended that Defra work[s] with local government representatives to 
improve local flood risk management arrangements (…) [as] part of an action plan to tackle surface 
water flood risk by the summer of 2016 (Recommendation 3b). Defra accepted this 
recommendation and in January 2017 published a three-page action plan as an annex to its 
post-legislative scrutiny report on the Flood and Water Management Act. The action plan 
focuses on stronger partnership working at the local level, the Environment Agency providing 
more support to improve the quality of LLFA strategies, and on measures to help identify 
funding for the projects identified within strategies. The plan does not include a timescale for 
completion, or the expected impact of improving approaches to manage surface water flood 
risk. 

Whilst some water companies have started assessing actions to tackle the lack of capacity 
of their sewerage networks, it is unclear whether and how this assessment will feed into 
LLFA strategies.  

Water UK’s 21st Century Drainage programme has developed a method to assess actions to 
tackle the lack of capacity in water company networks. It is not clear whether and how this 
methodology will be rolled out by water companies or how the outcomes will be fed into local 
flood risk management strategies.  

Are actions taking place? 

As well as there being slow progress in producing local flood risk management strategies, 
other Lead Local Flood Authority duties are also yet to be fulfilled.111  

When reviewed in 2015, almost half of LLFAs had not yet developed the statutory registers of 
local flood risk management assets. Knowledge of third-party assets, which could include local 
SuDS features and water company drainage assets, is particularly important for managing 
surface water flooding. Some of the registers that had been developed up to 2015 did not 
include relevant assets owned by third parties.112  

107 Pitt, M. (2008) The Pitt review: learning lessons from the 2007 floods. 
108 Defra (2015) Letter from Dan Rogerson to Council Leaders on Local Flood Risk Management Strategies of the 4th 
March 2015. 
109 Defra (2017) Flood and Water Management Act 2010: post-legislative scrutiny. 
110 Maiden, T., Anderson, M. et al. for Defra (2017) Evaluation of the arrangements for managing local flood risk. 
111 Ibid. 
112 Ibid. 

108 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


  

The water industry is due to invest £6 billion in improving drainage and combined 
networks over the current five year asset management period. There are many examples 
of water companies, local councils and transport authorities retrofitting SuDS within the 
existing built environment to reduce the amount of water entering the sewer network. 

For example, Transport for London has installed green roofs and green walls in some of its 
stations and depots including Edgware Road, Ruislip and Rotherhithe; is reviewing the drainage 
in all its road schemes; and trialling permeable asphalt on roads.113 Thames Water is carrying out 
a £20 million project to remove around 20 hectares of impermeable paving between 2015 and 
2020, and installing rain gardens, swales and other permeable surfaces instead.114 Sheffield City 
Council is implementing an EU-funded project to turn 1.3 kilometres of redundant roads into 
public spaces, including retrofitting rain gardens and a series of interlinked SuDS.115  

Water companies are also developing Drainage Strategies, in line with guidelines that Ofwat and 
the Environment Agency issued in 2013.116 Whilst these strategies focus on company-owned 
networks, the guidelines require that each water company works with other organisations and 
contributes to the resolution of wider drainage and surface water flooding issues. However, it is 
not known how many companies have developed such strategies to date, and what the impact 
of these strategies will be in managing surface water flooding. 

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

The available evidence suggests an increasingly severe lack of capacity in the public sewer 
network. The scale of the investment needed to tackle this issue has yet to be assessed and 
there is no ownership of the problem.  

The Environment Agency reports that 2.5 million households in England are currently in areas at 
risk of flooding from surface water.117 On average, surface water flooding accounts for more than 
£300 million per year in damages to property.118 Climate change is expected to increase this risk 
by at least 40% by the 2050s, assuming current approaches to local flood management 
continue.119 Much of the public sewer network is 50 or more years old120 and parts of it are 
already working at full or beyond capacity.121 

Even where they exist, it is not clear what the impact of local flood risk management strategies 
will be in reducing surface water flood risk. Many of these strategies do not report the cost and 
benefits of proposed actions, and it is unclear whether funding for implementing these 
strategies is in place. The Environment Agency is due to report on the development and quality 
of local flood risk management strategies from April 2017.122 For this reporting mechanism to be 

113 Transport for London (2015) Providing Transport Services Resilient to Extreme Weather and Climate Change –2015 
Update Report following last report to government in 2011. 
114 Thames Water (2016) Thames Water’s progress in planning for climate change - Climate Change Adaptation 
Reporting Power. 
115 See: http://www.greytogreen.org.uk/index.html 
116 Halcrow (2013) for the Environment Agency and Ofwat. Drainage Strategy Framework For water and sewerage 
companies to prepare Drainage Strategies - Good practice guidance. 
117 Environment Agency (2016) Managing flood and coastal erosion risks in England: 1 April 2015 to 31 March 2016. 
118 Sayers, P. B. et al. (2015) for the ASC. Climate Change Risk Assessment 2017: Projections of future flood risk in the UK.  
119 Ibid. 
120 21st Century Drainage Programme (2016) Protecting health, supporting communities, securing the environment 
now and for the future.  
121 ASC (2015) Progress in preparing for climate change. 
122 Defra (2017) Flood and Water Management Act 2010: post-legislative scrutiny. 


  


Chapter 4: People and the built environment 109 


 

                                                           

http://www.greytogreen.org.uk/index.html


  

effective, it should include the expected impact of the strategies in reducing surface water flood 
risk, an assessment of whether sufficient funding has been identified to support actions, and the 
progress made toward their implementation.  

RECOMMENDATION 12: More and better co-ordinated action is needed to manage the lack of 
capacity within drainage systems to cope with possible increase in the frequency and severity of 
heavy rainfall. Defra and the National Infrastructure Commission should initiate a comprehensive 
assessment to quantify the need for investment and other policy actions to manage surface water 
flood risk, including, but not limited to, retrofitting SuDS. Urgent investments need to be considered 
by water companies and Ofwat as part of the 2019 price review, and the comprehensive assessment 
should be in place to inform local planning policy and major investment decisions in the 2024 price 
review. (Owner: Defra. Timeline: as above). 

Development and surface water flood risk 

Is there a plan?  


 

Local Planning authorities can only allow development in 
areas subject to surface water flooding if the development is 
safe and does not increase the risk elsewhere. However, the 
standards defining how to discharge this duty in practice are 
non-statutory, only apply to developments of 10 or more 
houses, do not promote the benefits of green sustainable 
drainage systems, and fail to provide clear guidance on 
responsibilities for adoption and maintenance of SuDS. 

Are actions taking 
place? 


 

There are many examples of new development that include 
SuDS. Water companies and Lead Local Flood Authorities also 
set guidelines detailing the specifications that SuDS should 
meet in order to be adopted. However, DCLG did not complete 
its planned review of current SuDS policy in time to inform this 
report.  

Is progress being 
made in managing 
vulnerability? 

 A comprehensive survey by CIWEM found little confidence 
that high quality SuDS are being built in the majority of 
major new developments. In many cases the SuDS being 
built are below-ground retention systems, rather than 
'green' SuDS that deliver a range of benefits and can be 
more readily adapted to cope with future change. New 
development is thus highly likely to be adding pressure to 
existing drainage networks.  

Is there a plan? 

Local planning authorities should only allow development in areas subject to surface 
water flooding if the development is safe and does not increase the risk elsewhere. 
However, the non-statutory standards defining how to discharge this duty in practice only 
apply to developments of 10 or more houses, do not promote the benefits of green 
sustainable drainage systems, and fail to provide clear guidance on responsibilities for 
adoption and maintenance of SuDS.  

Amber



     

110 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


 Red Red  

New development can be affected by surface water flooding as well as heighten risks in other 
areas by increasing the flow of water that drains into the sewerage system. The National 
Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) requires that flood risk is assessed for any development site 
that might be subject to surface water flooding.123 These areas should be identified in the 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment, for example by using the Environment Agency’s surface water 
flood maps.124 For developments of ten dwellings or more, the Lead Local Flood Authority 
should be consulted regarding planning permission in these areas.  

The Flood and Water Management Act included provisions to make SuDS the default option for 
managing surface water in all new development, as recommended in the Pitt Report. However, 
the relevant clauses in the Act (Schedule 3) were not commenced. Instead, DCLG introduced 
changes to the planning system to make the use of SuDS an “expectation…wherever this is 
appropriate” from April 2015 for developments of 10 or more dwellings.125 Non-statutory 
technical standards for SuDS were published.126 

This approach is significantly weaker than that proposed by Sir Michael Pitt.127 The national 
standards, even where they are applied, do not mention climate change allowances, and do not 
recommend ensure that surface water is managed effectively and sustainably, such as by 
capturing water as close as possible to the source, enabling some of the water to infiltrate into 
the ground, and using a combination of SuDS to progressively reduce the volume of water 
running from the source into the final receptor. In contrast, the Welsh non-statutory standards 
for SuDS, published in 2017, require SuDS being installed in new developments of more than 
one property. They specify that SuDS as far as possible should capture first 5mm of rainfall, allow 
it to soak into the ground or evaporate (‘interception’), and be located as close to the rainfall 
source as is feasible. The standards also give specific preference to using SuDS that contribute to 
improving water quality, biodiversity and amenity value.128  

Other instruments to ensure that high quality SuDS are delivered in new development have 
been weakened, namely the pre-commencement conditions that allowed Local Planning 
Authorities to make approval for planning applications subject to the introduction of SuDS.129 

To ensure that non-statutory guidelines are implemented at the local level they need to be 
transposed into Local Plan policies. An analysis of 39 Local Plans showed that 17 (44%) of the 
plans did not include a specific policy on SuDS and 12 (30%) included policies that were heavily 
caveated by terms such as ‘where viable’ or ‘feasible’.130  


  


123 See: https://www.gov.uk/guidance/flood-risk-assessment-in-flood-zone-1-and-critical-drainage-areas 
124 See: https://www.gov.uk/guidance/flood-risk-and-coastal-change#Strategic-Flood-Risk-Assessment-be-prepared 
125 See: http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-
statement/Commons/2014-12-18/HCWS161/  
126 See: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/sustainable-drainage-systems-non-statutory-technical-
standards  
127 See letter from Lord Krebs to the then Environment Secretary shortly after the proposals were announced: 
https://www.theccc.org.uk/2014/10/28/significant-weakening-of-plans-to-manage-flood-risk-from-new-
development/  
128 Welsh Government (2017) Recommended non-statutory standards for sustainable drainage (SuDS) in Wales. 
129 The 2017 Neighbourhood Planning Act introduced a clause stating that pre-commencement conditions cannot 
be applied without a written agreement of the applicant. If a developer disagrees with the proposed conditions, the 
authority would need to either withdraw the conditions, in which case SuDS would not be implemented, or refuse 
the application, thus lengthening the planning process. 
130 TCPA (2016) for JRF. Planning for the climate challenge? Understanding the performance of English local plans. 


  


Chapter 4: People and the built environment 111 


 

                                                           

https://www.gov.uk/guidance/flood-risk-assessment-in-flood-zone-1-and-critical-drainage-areas
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/flood-risk-and-coastal-change%23Strategic-Flood-Risk-Assessment-be-prepared
http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-statement/Commons/2014-12-18/HCWS161/
http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-statement/Commons/2014-12-18/HCWS161/
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/sustainable-drainage-systems-non-statutory-technical-standards
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/sustainable-drainage-systems-non-statutory-technical-standards
https://www.theccc.org.uk/2014/10/28/significant-weakening-of-plans-to-manage-flood-risk-from-new-development/
https://www.theccc.org.uk/2014/10/28/significant-weakening-of-plans-to-manage-flood-risk-from-new-development/


  

Are actions taking place? 

There are many examples of new developments implementing SuDS. 

Examples include the Sarum Academy in Salisbury, in which surface water runoff is managed 
through swales and permeable paving, to maximise infiltration;131 Lamb Drove, Cambridge, a 
residential development of 35 affordable homes that includes permeable paving, a green roof, 
swales, detention and wetland basins;132 the Springhill Co-Housing, Stroud, 34 homes and 
communal facilities where water collected within the site flows onto a densely planted swale, 
rills planted by individual house occupants, a wildlife pond and a play area.133 

Water companies and Lead Local Flood Authorities also set guidelines detailing the 
specifications that SuDS should meet in order to be adopted.  
These guidelines are often more comprehensive than the non-statutory technical standards. For 
example, Anglian Water has developed a design guide for developers and local authorities and 
will adopt only those SuDS that meet the standards.134 These include the requirement for SuDS 
to intercept the first 5mm of rainfall. Similarly, Cambridge City Council’s guidelines state that 
they will adopt SUDS only if they meet some of the minimum requirements from the SuDS 
Manual (see below), including the interception of the first 5mm of rainfall.135 Cambridge City 
Council is a unitary council, meaning that it is both the LLFA and Local Planning Authority. The 
Council states that these guidelines might be turned into a Supplementary Planning Document, 
thus becoming linked to the Local Plan. Staffordshire County Council has also published a SuDS 
handbook to help the LPAs in Staffordshire ensure that high quality SuDS are included in new 
developments.136 The Council is not a unitary authority, therefore for this handbook to be linked 
to the Local Plan it would need to be translated into a Supplementary Planning Document by 
each of the nine Staffordshire district councils. 

In 2016, CIRIA released an update of the SuDS Manual.137 The manual aims to assist planning, 
design, construction, management and maintenance of good SuDS. It provides the evidence 
and technical guidance needed to deliver surface water attenuation as well as benefits to 
biodiversity, water quality and amenity. 

The Department for Communities and Local Government did not complete its promised 
review of current SuDS policy in time to inform this report. The findings of the review were 
originally due in April 2017.  

In 2015, the ASC recommended that DCLG (…) (a) make water companies statutory consultees on 
all planning applications that have implications for the public sewer network; (b) put in place a 
process for monitoring and evaluating the effectiveness of planning policy in (i) achieving a high 
uptake of SuDS in new development and (ii) limiting the paving over of front gardens with 
impermeable surfaces (Recommendation 4). The Government initially declined to review the 
effectiveness of planning policy in delivering SuDS other than to look at the 10 dwelling 
threshold. However, in response to pressure in the House of Lords during the passage of the 

131See: www.illman-young.com/images/case-studies/new%20build%20sustainable%20drainage.pdf 
132 See: http://www.susdrain.org/case-
studies/case_studies/lamb_drove_residential_suds_scheme_cambourne.html 
133 See: http://www.paving.org.uk/commercial/downloads-registration.php?file=bob_bray_case_study&type= 
134 Anglian Water (date unknown) Towards sustainable water stewardship - Sustainable drainage systems (SUDS) 
adoption manual. 
135 Cambridge City Council (date unknown) Cambridge sustainable drainage design and adoption guide. 
136 Staffordshire County Council (2017) Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) Handbook. 
137 CIRIA (2016) The SuDS Manual (C753) . 


     

112 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


 

                                                           

http://www.illman-young.com/images/case-studies/new%20build%20sustainable%20drainage.pdf
http://www.susdrain.org/case-studies/case_studies/lamb_drove_residential_suds_scheme_cambourne.html
http://www.susdrain.org/case-studies/case_studies/lamb_drove_residential_suds_scheme_cambourne.html
http://www.paving.org.uk/commercial/downloads-registration.php?file=bob_bray_case_study&type


  

2016 Housing and Planning Act, the Government conceded an amendment that required them 
to review the impact of the new policy. Whilst the Act does not specify a deadline, in October 
2016 the then Minister for Communities and Local Government stated that the findings of the 
review would be available in time to inform this report.138 

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

Survey data suggests there is little confidence that current policies are effective in 
delivering high quality SuDS. New development is thus likely to be adding further 
pressure to existing drainage networks  

In line with the findings of the Pitt Report, the ASC recommended in 2015 that Defra amend (…) 
the 1991 Water Industries Act in order to remove or make conditional the current automatic right to 
connect new development to public sewers (Recommendation 3a). Whilst recognising the need to 
reduce pressures on public sewers, the Government rejected this recommendation stating that 
they were ‘confident that the changes to planning policy put in place by the previous coalition 
Government to promote sustainable drainage systems as the first option for surface water drainage 
for new major developments will achieve this’. 

However, practitioners are not confident that SuDS are being implemented. Around 30% of the 
500 respondents to a CIWEM survey said that SuDS (of any type) are not used in all major 
developments, as current guidance requires, and a further 28% do not know whether this is the 
case.139 60% of the responders identified responsibilities for maintenance and adoption not 
being clearly defined as a significant barrier to the delivery of SuDS in new development. Only 
8% of the responders consider current non-statutory guidance effective at driving installation of 
high quality and effective SuDS.140 

Green SuDS bring additional benefits over ‘proprietary’ systems (e.g. underground tanks), 
including helping to recharge groundwater, improving water quality, and providing and 
sustaining green spaces. Underground tanks are also less adaptable to changes in extreme 
rainfall, due to their physically constrained capacity. The capacity of green SuDS can be 
exceeded during an event without the system failing, and be more easily upgraded.141 However, 
70% of 365 practitioners that took part in a survey in 2016 stated that they did not give priority 
to green features in SuDS.142 

There is also evidence of a lack of consideration of the co-benefits of SuDS. While almost 60% 
those responding to the CIWEM survey consider the cost of SuDS to be more than traditional 
drainage, 75% said they do not assess the full cost and benefits of SuDS. Underground tanks are 
also reportedly easier to maintain and more likely to be adopted. These factors are likely to result 
in green SuDS not being proposed due to the perceived impact on the viability of a 
development.143 However, recent research found that SuDS were more cost-effective to fit and 
maintain than traditional drainage in a range of recent developments.144 

138 See: https://www.theyworkforyou.com/pbc/2016-17/Neighbourhood_Planning_Bill/08-0_2016-10-27c.295.4 
139 CIWEM (2016) A place for SuDS?  
140 Peter Melville-Shreeve, Ana Arahuetes, Sarah Cotterill, Raziyeh Farmani, Virginia Stovin, Laura Grant and David 
Butler (in press) State of SuDS Delivery in the UK. Water and Environment Journal. 
141 21st Century Drainage Programme (2017) Workstream 2: Capacity Management – Executive Summary. 
142 Engineering Nature’s Way (2016) SuDS: the state of the nation survey. 
143 CIWEM (2016) A place for SuDS? 
144Environmental Policy Consulting (2017) for the Welsh Government. Final report: Analysis of evidence including costs 
and benefits of SuDS construction and adoption. 


  


Chapter 4: People and the built environment 113 


 

                                                           

https://www.theyworkforyou.com/pbc/2016-17/Neighbourhood_Planning_Bill/08-0_2016-10-27c.295.4


  

RECOMMENDATION 13: Policy is needed urgently to address the outstanding barriers to deliver 
high quality, effective SuDS in new development that achieve the full range of potential 
environmental co-benefits. In particular, there is a need for: 

• More comprehensive and ambitious national standards for SuDS.  

• The automatic right to connect new development to the existing sewerage network to be made 
conditional on the national SuDS standards being met. 

• A clear policy on who should maintain and adopt SuDS by default. 

(Owner: DCLG. Timing: by 2019). 

Property-level flood resilience 

Is there a plan? 


 

The Property Flood Resilience Action Plan published by Defra 
(following the Bonfield Review in 2016) includes the vision to 
achieve, within five years, an ‘environment where it is standard 
practice for properties at high flood risk to be made resilient’.  

However, the Flood Re subsidised insurance scheme largely 
removes the financial incentive for high risk households to 
take action to prevent flooding. There is no apparent progress 
by Flood Re in meeting the commitments made in its 
transition plan to promote property-level flood resilience (PLR) 
measures or to share the data it holds on polices and claims in 
order to help improve risk management approaches in high 
risk areas.  

Are actions taking 
place? 


  

The Bonfield Review has been published and actions have 
started to be implemented, including initiating the process to 
create standards to certify PLR measures. The Government also 
encouraged the uptake of PLR for households damaged by the 
winter 2015/16 floods, by making grants of £5,000 available for 
flood protection measures and resilient repairs.  

Is progress being 
made in managing 
vulnerability?  

The Government’s six-year investment plan includes 
proposals to protect around 500 households per year 
using PLR measures.  

At least 153,000 households in England would be cost-
effective to protect using PLR measures, and this is 
expected to increase to more than 217,000 by the time 
Flood Re is withdrawn. This means that the number of 
vulnerable properties is increasing five times faster than 
the rate at which PLR measures are currently being fitted.  

Is there a plan? 

Even if all cost-effective community flood alleviation schemes are implemented, there are 
expected to be more than 217,000 households in areas at a high risk of flooding when 
Flood Re is withdrawn in 2039. To address the risk to these properties, Defra has adopted 

Amber



     

114 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


 

Green


Red  

the vision of achieving, within five years, ‘an environment in which it is standard practice 
for properties at high flood risk to be made resilient’. 

The Environment Agency’s Long Term Investment Scenarios show that there are currently 
153,000 households in areas with a 3.3% or greater annual chance of flooding. By the late 2030s, 
there are projected to be at least 217,000 households in this risk band145, due to deteriorating 
defences, climate change, and because it will not be cost-effective to protect them with flood 
alleviation schemes. The ASC previously found property-level resilience measures can be used to 
reduce flood risk cost-effectively for properties at this level of risk.146  

In 2015, the ASC recommended that Defra takes steps to address the increasing number of homes 
and other properties expected to be at high flood risk in the coming decades, publishing a strategy 
within a year of this report and make full use […] of the opportunities presented by the Flood Re 
subsidised insurance scheme to encourage households in high flood risk areas to take steps to reduce 
the potential for flood damage (Recommendation 2). Defra agreed in principle with this 
recommendation, and later in 2016, commissioned the Building Research Establishment’s Chief 
Executive, Dr Peter Bonfield, to prepare a Property Flood Resilience Action Plan.147 The plan 
includes the vision of achieving, in five years’ time, an ‘environment where it is standard practice 
for properties at high flood risk to be made resilient’.  

The ASC also recommended that Flood Re’s transition plan (…) include[s] clear proposals for how 
the scheme will promote flood risk alleviation amongst high risk households (Recommendation 7). 
The Government agreed that Flood Re should provide the right incentives to households and 
insurers to put in place resilience measures. In February 2016, Flood Re committed to assessing 
how the scheme might play a more direct role in incentivising households and insurers to 
implement property-level resilience measures.148 However, this assessment is yet to be 
published. 

Flood Re’s transition plan also stated ‘We will use our database of high flood risk properties and 
work with others to identify where we believe that spending would be the most effective in 
cutting the cost of flooding to households and insurers.’ The plan committed to work with the 
Government, the devolved administrations, the Environment Agency, local authorities, and the 
ASC. Flood Re now holds data on more than 100,000 households in the UK considered by 
insurance companies to be at the greatest flood risk. The process of releasing data to inform and 
help target new policies in high risk areas has not yet begun. 

Are actions taking place? 

Government has encouraged the uptake of PLR amongst households damaged by recent 
flood events, by making £5,000 ‘repair and renew’ grants available for flood protection 
measures. However, many insurers do not allow improvements to be made when flooded 
properties are reinstated, even if paid for by policy holders. 

In 2016, Defra published a handbook to help practitioners both select and give better advice to 
households on low cost flood resilient measures.149 However, one-third of the insurance brokers 
interviewed for the Bonfield Review said they would not pay insurance claims if spent on flood 

145 Data from the Environment Agency’s LTIS (2014). See the Technical Annex for this chapter. 
146 Royal Haskoning (2012) for the ASC. Assessing the Economic Case for Property Level Measures in England. 
147 Defra (2016) Improving property level flood resilience: Bonfield 2016 action plan. 
148 Flood Re (2016) Transitioning to an affordable market for household flood insurance. 
149 Defra (2016) Practitioners’ Handbook for low cost repairable or resilient reinstatement for surveyors and local 
authorities.  


  


Chapter 4: People and the built environment 115 


 

                                                           


  

resilient or resistant repairs, even if they were cost-neutral. Over half of the brokers said that they 
would not allow for improvements to be made to a flooded property if they required additional 
cost, even if this cost were met by the policy holder. The same survey also suggested that fitting 
resilience and resistance measures do not generally lead to lower insurance premiums. 

Actions listed in the Property Flood Resilience Action Plan have started to be 
implemented.150  

A Code of Practice for installing PLR measures is being developed as one of the actions listed in 
the Bonfield Review. The Code will support training and certification in PLR and suggest a single 
surveyor has overall responsibility for the delivery of PLR measures within a property. BRE is also 
considering a Certification Scheme for surveyors, supported by training courses that BRE is 
developing. A new open standard for installers is under development, and the British Standard 
PAS1188 is being updated. 

The six-year investment programme will provide property-level measures to 2,900 of the 
153,000 households currently in areas at high risk.151  

Within the programme of schemes being delivered between 2017 and 2021, the Environment 
Agency has allocated £5.7 million as grant-in-aid toward property-level flood resilience schemes. 
This will be matched by £5.3 million in external contributions. Whilst promising, this level of 
commitment to PLR measures represents around 2% of the properties for which such measures 
would be cost-beneficial.  

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

Uptake of property-level resilience measures is far less than is required to manage residual 
risk for the hundreds of thousands of properties that will not be cost-beneficial to protect 
by other means.  

Between 2008 and 2011, the uptake of PLR was less than 400 properties per year.152  

In 2015/16, the Environment Agency delivered 24 property flood resilience schemes, installing 
PLR to 662 properties. These figures only include the schemes that primarily consist on 
delivering PLR. Further households might have had PLR installed as part other flood alleviation 
schemes, but these figures are not available. A recent survey among 531 people living in areas at 
flood risk found that most were not aware of Government schemes to protect their properties, 
and few had taken up any scheme.153  

The commitment in the six-year investment plan would result in around 500 properties being 
fitted with PLR measures per year between 2015 and 2021. At this rate, PLR would be fitted to 
around 12,000 properties by 2039. By the time Flood Re is withdrawn, it is estimated that 64,000 
more properties would be cost-effective to protect using PLR measures in addition to the 
153,000 already in this risk band, due to projected increases in flood risk. This means that the 
number of vulnerable properties is increasing over five times more quickly than the rate at which 
PLR measures are currently being fitted. 

150 Communication with BRE. 
151 Environment Agency (2017) Flood and coastal erosion risk management in England investment programme 2015 to 
2021 infographic - updated March 2017. 
152 ASC (2015) Progress on preparing for climate change. 
153 Ipsos Mori  (2015) for Defra. Affordability and Availability of Flood Insurance. 


     

116 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


 

                                                           


  

RECOMMENDATION 14: Defra should develop a long-term strategy to manage flood risk down to 
tolerable levels in each part of the country (as we first recommended in 2015), so that as Flood Re is 
withdrawn properties can remain insurable at reasonable cost. This should include: 

• Monitoring the impact of the actions adopted following the Bonfield Review to achieve, in five 
years’ time, an ‘environment where it is standard practice for properties at high risk to be made 
resilient’. 

• Actively communicating the risk and possible adaptation actions to households and communities 
that are expected to remain or become at high flood risk by the 2030s.  

• Ensuring that Flood Re incentivises households to take up property-level resilience measures, 
which insurers should allow to be implemented during post-flood repairs. 

(Owner: Defra. Timing: by 2020). 

Capacity of people and communities to recover from flooding 

Is there a plan? 


 

Post-flood recovery is managed through Local Resilience 
Forum (LRF) recovery plans. Current guidelines state that plans 
should be developed to manage peoples’ physical and 
psychological recovery from flood events, in the long-term as 
well as the immediate aftermath. 

Are actions taking 
place? 


 

Repair and renew grants were made available after the 
2015/16 winter flooding. National and local flood forums 
provide assistance to households in processing insurance 
claims and repairs. Flood Re has begun operation and means 
almost all households are able to access affordable insurance 
for the time being.  

Public Health England has begun to release results from their 
long-term cohort survey of mental health impacts from 
flooding. 

Is progress being 
made in managing 
vulnerability? 


 

Insurance uptake remains high and Flood Re was due to 
support around 130,000 households with subsidised 
insurance by April 2017, rising to 350,000 by 2020. Even 
where properties are insured, it normally takes 6 to 12 
months for a property to be reinstated, depending on the 
level of damage. Problems in dealing with loss adjustors 
are still reported. The PHE study shows that the impacts of 
flooding on wellbeing are significant, prolonged, and 
extend beyond those whose homes are directly flooded. 

Is there a plan? 

According to the guidance accompanying the 2004 Civil Contingencies Act, Local 
Resilience Forums have to include recovery in their emergency plans.  

Current guidelines state that plans should be developed to manage people’s physical and 
psychological recovery from flood events, in the immediate aftermath as well as in the long 

Amber


  


Chapter 4: People and the built environment 117 


 

Green

Green


  

term.154,155 Recovery plans or recovery sub-groups are in place in all the Local Resilience Forum 
areas that publish their plans online.156 Most plans available online acknowledge the long-term 
psychological impacts of emergencies, and the need for the LRF to support those affected until 
they recover.  

Flood Re has begun operation which means that almost all homes built before 2009 have 
access to affordable insurance for the time being.  

However, by 2021, when the scheme is due to begin being phased out, more action will be 
needed to ensure that the risks are managed to allow insurance to remain affordable without 
the need for subsidies (see previous section). 

Are actions taking place? 

Following the 2015/16 winter floods, the Government provided a series of grants to 
households and business to aid recovery.  

These grants included £500 for emergency assistance to meet immediate costs such as 
temporary accommodation. Households were also able to apply for £5,000 grants to repair their 
properties in a flood resilient way (see previous section). Voluntary organisations also provided 
assistance during the recovery phase. For example, during recent flooding, the flood groups that 
the National Flood Forum (NFF) has helped set up provided assistance to those affected. The NFF 
also activated a helpline to assist households in processing their insurance claims. The 
Association of British Insurers (ABI) has published guidance to help households repair their 
homes after a flood, and to install property-level protection measures.157 

Public Health England has published the first results from a cohort study on the mental health 
impacts of flooding. The study surveyed 2,126 people in neighbourhoods affected by flooding 
between December 2013 and March 2014, and reported an elevated prevalence of mental 
health impacts among those affected or disrupted by the floods (see below). In 2014, PHE 
updated its guidance to help people stay safe and deal with the aftermath of a flood. These 
guidelines are designed to help prevent the physical health impacts from flooding, but do not 
cover mental health impacts. 

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

Even when properties are insured, it normally takes 6 to 12 months for a home to be 
reinstated, depending on the level of damage. The most effective measure to reduce this is 
to make properties more resilient before flooding occurs. 

Flood Re was on course to support around 130,000 households with subsidised insurance by 
April 2017, at it is expected to cover 350,000 households by 2020.158  

Reinstating a property can take a long time, depending on factors such as the property’s fabric 
and the severity of the flooding. ABI reports that, after the 2013/14 flooding, 60% of claims were 
fully settled within six months, almost three quarters within nine months, but some remained 
outstanding after one year. After the 2015/16 winter floods, 90% of claims from storms 

154 Cabinet Office (2013) Emergency Response and Recovery- Non statutory guidance accompanying the Civil 
Contingencies Act 2004. 
155 Defra, Environment Agency, Public Health England (2014) The national flood emergency framework for England. 
156 ASC analysis of 37 LRF websites. 
157 ABI (2016) Responding to major floods. 
158 Communication with ABI. 


     

118 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


 

                                                           


  

Desmond, Eva and Frank were fully or partially settled after six months. ABI reports that this 
length of time is consistent with the repair work that is often needed.159 However, interviews 
carried out by the NFF suggest that this time frame is not acceptable for those involved, and 
difficulties with dealing with loss adjustors and finding independent surveyors have been 
adding to the time it takes to reinstate a property.160 In general, it is recognised that the most 
effective measure to speed up reinstatement is to reduce the likelihood of water entering a 
property and to use property-level resilience measures, such as water-resilient fittings and 
materials wherever feasible.161,162,163 

Successful flood recovery includes dealing with impacts on mental health and wellbeing. 
These impacts are significant, prolonged, and extend beyond those whose homes are 
flooded. 

The PHE study of households affected by flooding between December 2013 and March 2014 
found probable Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), anxiety, and depression, at levels six 
times higher than amongst those unaffected.164 36% of those directly affected by flooding 
showed probable PTSD, 28% suffered from anxiety, and 20% from depression. Mental health 
impacts were also recorded amongst those not directly flooded but disrupted by the flood 
event, for example from power outages, or not being able to get to work.165 The same study 
found that mental health impacts might be reduced by limiting flood damage to homes, for 
example by avoiding water entering living spaces, as well as enabling the affected people to go 
back to work and school as quickly as possible.  

4.3 Coastal change 
CCRA2 identified risks to the viability of some exposed communities due to coastal 
change, as a result of both increased tidal flooding and faster rates of coastal erosion. The 
assessment concluded that more action is needed to adapt to the anticipated changes.  

About one-third of the English coastline is subject to erosion.166 Over half of the length of the 
Yorkshire and Humber coastline is receding, together with one-third of the coastline in East of 
England and 20% of the coastline in North West England.167 Human intervention can affect the 
susceptibility of a particular stretch of coast to erosion. For example, coastal structures can 
reduce the supply of sediment to the shore or exacerbate erosion. About half of the coastline in 
England is protected by coastal defences or artificial beaches.168 

159 For example, the drying stage can take months, and starting repairs before a property is completely dry would 
create future problems. Full decontamination is also needed to ensure that the property is safe to occupy. 
160 NFF (2016) December 2016 Bulletin. 
161 See: http://www.aviva.co.uk/home/home-advice/extreme-weather-advice/article/getting-back-normal-after-
flood/ 
162 ABI (date unknown) A guide to resistant and resilient repair after a flood. 
163 NFF (2014) Ready for flooding –Before, during and after. 
164 Public Health England (2017) The English National Study for Flooding and Health: First year report. 
165 Waite, T. D., Chaintarli, K. et al. (2017) The English national cohort study of flooding and health: cross-sectional 
analysis of mental health outcomes at year one. BMC Public Health, 17 (129). 
166 Coastal erosion occurs due to the impact of waves and wind on the coastline. The phenomenon is highly 
dependent on local factors: the topography and climate of the coastline influence the persistence, height and 
strength of waves; whilst the geological composition of the coastline determines its erodability. 
167 Masselink, G. and Russell, P. (2013) Impacts of climate change on coastal erosion, MCCIP Science Review 2013, 7,1-


86. 

168 Ibid. 


  


Chapter 4: People and the built environment 119 


 

                                                           

http://www.aviva.co.uk/home/home-advice/extreme-weather-advice/article/getting-back-normal-after-flood/
http://www.aviva.co.uk/home/home-advice/extreme-weather-advice/article/getting-back-normal-after-flood/


  

Climate change could increase the risk of coastal erosion due to sea level rise, potentially more 
frequent coastal storms, and potential changes in wave direction. For levels of sea level rise 
beyond one metre, which could occur this century, 200km of coastal defences in England are 
projected to become vulnerable to failure in storm conditions.169  

This section assesses whether coastal erosion risk is being managed in a cost-effective and 
sustainable manner by: 

• Enhancing the resilience of the coastline by restoring natural processes when possible. 

• Protecting economically important infrastructure assets and urban areas. 

• Planning ahead for managed realignment or ceasing intervention where maintaining or 
replacing coastal defences cannot be reasonably justified. 

Coastal change risk management 

Is there a plan? 


  

Shoreline management plans (SMPs) are currently in place for 
the whole English coastline.  

National planning policy states that Local Planning Authorities 
should not allow new development in areas that they have 
identified as being subject to coastal change, and must make 
provisions for development and infrastructure that need to be 
relocated away from these areas. Whilst there is no 
compensation available to householders for homes damaged 
or lost to erosion, grants of up to £6,000 per property are 
available to pay for demolition and removal.  

Are actions taking 
place? 

 The Environment Agency provides grants for erosion schemes, 
helping to protect houses and prevent habitat losses from 
coastal squeeze. Coastal erosion assistance grants have been 
paid to a small number of qualifying homes in recent years. 

Is progress being 
made in managing 
vulnerability? 


 

11,000 houses benefitted from coastal erosion schemes 
between 2010 and 2015, and about 400 hectares of 
intertidal habitat have been created to offset losses from 
coastal squeeze. However, the amount of managed 
realignment of the coastline is still not in line with 
delivering SMP aspirations for the 2030s. It is not known 
whether actions in the SMPs constitute a viable approach 
to coastal adaptation in the long term. Communities likely 
to be impacted are not yet being engaged in earnest. 

Is there a plan? 

Shoreline Management Plans define long term policies for the coastline, developed in 
consultation with the relevant communities, to adapt to coastal change through to 2100. 
These policies identify the stretches of coastline that can be defended and those for which 
managed retreat or no active intervention are likely to be the more sustainable options.  

169 Sayers, P. B. et al. (2015) for the ASC. Climate Change Risk Assessment 2017: Projections of future flood risk in the UK. 

Amber



     

120 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


 

Green

Green

                                                           


  

Shoreline Management Plans are high-level, non-statutory policy documents that help coastal 
authorities assess and manage the long-term risks of coastal erosion to people and the 
environment. Coastal authorities have formed voluntary Coastal Groups to bring together 
interested parties in developing such plans.170 There are currently 22 different Shoreline 
Management Plans covering the entire coast of England and Wales.171  

Each plan includes an assessment of flood and coastal erosion risk for a particular stretch of 
coastline, and identifies the preferred coastal management policy. These policies determine 
whether natural processes should be restored, either by not maintaining existing defences once 
they deteriorate or proactively realigning the coastline; or whether the current coastal defence 
system should be maintained in the short- (up to 2030), medium- (2060) and long-term (2100). 
The overall aim of the SMPs is to reduce the number of properties at risk and to realign the coast 
when protecting it is considered unsustainable. 

Currently, 54% of the English coastline is defended. The preferred policy option between now 
and 2030 is to maintain and increase the protection for 47% of the coastline, whilst actively 
realigning 5%, and gradually withdrawing from coastal defence for the remaining 2%.172 These 
interventions are projected to reduce the number of homes being lost to coastal erosion to 
about 250, from the 3,400 that might be lost otherwise. To achieve this, about 550 km of 
coastline needs to be realigned by the 2030s. 

Preferred policies in SMPs have helped inform Flood Risk Management Plans, and funding to 
implement the interventions to protect and realign coastlines are allocated as part of the 
standard ‘partnership funding’ formula(see section 4.2). Defra is currently re-evaluating the 
formula,173 given that a previous review reported concerns regarding the ability of coastal 
authorities to secure sufficient external contributions to support coastal erosion schemes.174 

Coastal Groups work with the Environment Agency to annually monitor progress in 
implementing individual SMPs. However, as plans describe actions differently, the data collated 
by different Coastal Groups are not readily comparable in order to draw a national picture of 
progress.  

The National Planning Policy Framework includes provisions to avoid new development in 
areas at risk of coastal erosion.  

The NPPF states that Local Planning Authorities should define areas that are susceptible to 
coastal change within Local Plans (Coastal Change Management Areas), taking SMPs into 
account. Local Planning Authorities should also define what type of development is appropriate 
in these areas whilst making provision for existing development and infrastructure to be 
relocated away from these areas. Planning applications in these areas can only be granted if 
development is safe over its lifetime and does not have an ‘unacceptable’ impact on coastal 
change.175 According to the NPPF, it is not appropriate to allocate permanent new residential 
development within an area susceptible to coastal change. However, a National Trust study 
found that in 2015 only 29 of England’s 94 coastal planning authorities had defined Coastal 

170 Defra (2006) Shoreline management plan guidance - Volume 1: Aims and requirements. 
171 Environment Agency (2016) Managing flood and coastal erosion risks in England: 1 April 2015 to 31 March 2016. 
172 HR Wallingford (2013) for the ASC. ASC natural resource indicators - Coastal Research Project 
https://www.theccc.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/TCCC-ADAPT01-12_Final_Report_Appendices-A-
F_29July13.pdf 
173 Communication with the Environment Agency. 
174 Defra (2014) Flood and Coastal Erosion Resilience Partnership Funding Evaluation, Final report. 
175 DCLG (2012) National Planning Policy Framework. 


  


Chapter 4: People and the built environment 121 


 

                                                           

https://www.theccc.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/TCCC-ADAPT01-12_Final_Report_Appendices-A-F_29July13.pdf
https://www.theccc.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/TCCC-ADAPT01-12_Final_Report_Appendices-A-F_29July13.pdf


  

Change Management Areas, with a further 35 having some form of policy on coastal change. 
One-third of the coastal planning authorities in England do not have such policies.176 

Are actions taking place? 

Coastal protection and realignment schemes have been delivered, helping to protect 
houses and compensate for habitat losses from coastal squeeze. Grants have been paid to 
assist local authorities with removing a small number of homes at immediate erosion risk.  

Capital grants for coastal erosion schemes between 2007/08 to 2010/11 averaged £110 million 
per year,177 increasing to £125 million per year on average for the period 2013-2016.178 In 
2015/16, 16 coastal erosion projects were delivered.179 

There is no compensation available to householders for homes damaged or lost to erosion but 
local authorities can apply for grants toward the cost of demolition and removal, of up to £6,000 
per property. Defra allocates £60,000 every year to cover these grants, which are administered 
by the Environment Agency. Between 2010 and 2017, the Environment Agency provided 
£273,000 to local authorities to assist with the demolition of 43 properties at immediate risk in 
Yorkshire, Norfolk and East Sussex. Local authorities are reportedly struggling to meet the 
criteria to apply for these grants. In particular, properties are eligible only when at imminent risk 
of loss, which does not allow local authorities to take action proactively. The Environment 
Agency is currently discussing this issue with Defra to overcome these barriers.180 

The other two actions related with coastal erosion listed in the NAP have been completed or are 
on track. A ‘light touch’ review of the deliverability of SMP policies has taken place and is due to 
be published by the Environment Agency in summer 2017.181 In 2009, Defra announced £11 
million would be made available to help 15 coastal authorities to engage communities about 
coastal change and, in some cases, test different approaches to relocating communities. Lessons 
learnt from this process are being used to develop guidelines that clarify roles and 
responsibilities, legal and spatial planning frameworks, and the potential funding available to 
coastal authorities.182  

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

There is no national monitoring of the implementation of the Shoreline Management 
Plans. The amount of managed realignment of the coastline is still not in line with 
delivering SMP commitments for the 2030s. It is unclear whether communities are ready 
for the coastal adaptation that needs to take place between now and mid-century.  

Between 2010 and 2015, 11,000 houses benefitted from coast protection schemes, and projects 
delivered between 2015 and 2016 have reduced coastal erosion risk for a further 5,500 homes. 
Coastal schemes have created 179 hectares of inter-tidal habitat between 2015 and 2016, and 
about 400 hectares between 2010 and 2015.183 Whilst most of the coastal defence projects 

176 National Trust (2015) Shifting Shores. 
177 Halcrow (unpublished) for the Environment Agency. 
178 ASC (2015) Progress on preparing for climate change. 
179 Environment Agency (2016) Managing flood and coastal erosion risks in England: 1 April 2015 to 31 March 2016. 
180 NAP action update (2017). 
181 Communication with the Environment Agency. 
182 Ibid. 
183 Environment Agency (2016) Managing flood and coastal erosion risks in England: 1 April 2015 to 31 March 2016. 


     

122 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


 

                                                           


  

planned for 2015-2021 are in line with the SMP preferred policy options,184 the rate of 
implementation is not in line with aspirations within SMPs for 550 km of coastline to be 
realigned by the 2030s. In 2013, the ASC reported that coastal erosion management projects are 
realigning the coastline at a rate of 6 km every year. Achieving the goals set out in the SMPs 
imply realigning around 30 km of coastline every year. This means that the rate of realignment 
would have to increase five-fold from the current level to deliver the aspiration within SMPs.185  

No active intervention is planned by 2030 for 2,000 km of the coastline that is not cost-effective 
to protect, and a further 450 km of coastline will cease to be actively managed or is due to be 
realigned by 2060. This is likely to have economic and social impacts for the affected 
communities. Despite existing engagement efforts, CCRA2 concluded that communities are not 
yet being prepared for the coastal change likely to take place between now and mid-century. 

RECOMMENDATION 15: The Environment Agency, with Coastal Groups, should review the 
ambition within, and progress being made in implementing, Shoreline Management Plans (SMPs), 
and prepare communities for the coastal adaptation that will need to take place between now and 
the middle of the century. (Owner: Environment Agency. Timing: by 2020). 

4.4 Household water use 
CCRA2 concluded that whilst significant effort is already underway, additional action is 
needed to manage the risk of future water supply-demand deficits.  

The majority of climate change projections for the UK show a reduction in the amount of water 
available to people, industry, agriculture and the environment, compounded by increasing 
demand during the driest months from a growing population. As well as CCRA2, a recent study 
from Water UK concluded that there is a need to increase action to manage water supplies more 
efficiently as well as reducing demand.186 

Water was discussed under several themes of the NAP. Correspondingly: 

• Water in the natural environment is discussed in Chapter 3: Natural environment.  

• Supply-side measures and structural improvements to water company networks to reduce 
leakage, and be more resilient to severe weather, are covered in Chapter 5: Infrastructure. 

• Use of water by businesses and industry is covered in Chapter 6: Business. 

This section discusses progress made in reducing water use by households. 

184 Three coastal defence projects planned for 2015-21 appear to hold the coastline in areas where the SMP policy is 
to realign or cease active intervention.  
185 ASC (2013) Managing the land in a changing climate. 
186 Water UK (2016) Water resources long-term planning framework. 


  


Chapter 4: People and the built environment 123 


 

                                                           


  

Water demand in the built environment 

Is there a plan? 


  

Guidance documents for the industry price review in 2019 
emphasise the importance of continued efforts to reduce 
household water demand. Water UK has identified long-term 
scenarios for reducing per capita consumption that are more 
ambitious than those set in current water resource 
management plans. It is not clear whether these scenarios will 
be adopted in the next round of plans due from water 
companies in 2019. 

DCLG has added an ‘optional requirement’ for local planning 
authorities to specify a minimum standard of 110 litres per 
person per day (l/p/d) in new homes. However, the Code for 
Sustainable Homes was withdrawn in 2015, which included 
stronger standards for water efficiency in new homes. 

Are actions taking 
place? 

 Water companies have implemented a range of actions to 
reduce household water demand, including programmes to 
encourage metering, use of water-efficient taps and 
appliances, and changes in behaviour. Metering of household 
water consumption has increased from 42% of households in 
England in 2012/13 to 45.5% in 2015/16.  

Is progress being 
made in managing 
vulnerability?  

Domestic water consumption has continued to fall 
from155 l/p/d in 2003/04 to 139 l/p/d in 2015/16, in line 
with the target for 2020 of 137 l/p/d.  

Data on water consumption in new homes is not available. 

Is there a plan? 

Water companies are required by Ofwat to publish water resource management plans 
(WRMPs) detailing how the companies will manage the balance between available water 
resources and customer demand over the next 25 years. 

WRMPs are updated every five years. The latest set of plans, published in 2014, included the 
ambition to reduce average consumption per person from 141 l/day in 2014 to around to137 
l/day by 2020, and 135 l/p/d by 2040, and proposals to increase the proportion of households 
with water meters in England and Wales from 48% in 2014 to 61% in 2020.187 

Defra and the Environment Agency have published guidance for the next round of WRMPs, due 
from water companies in 2019. These guidelines include a general expectation that demand-
side measures will continue to be deployed to reduce per capita consumption, including as a 
result of more widespread water metering.188  

Water UK has identified long-term scenarios for reducing per capita consumption that are 
more ambitious than those set in current water resource management plans. It is not clear 
whether these will be adopted in the next round of plans. 

187 Ofwat (2014) Setting price controls for 2015-2020 - Overview. 
188 NAP action update (2017) and Defra (2016) Creating a great place for living - Enabling resilience in the water sector.  

Amber



     

124 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


 

Green

Green

                                                           


  

Demand-side management will need to play an important role in managing risks to water 
resources in the future. The scenarios analysed by Water UK include consumption ranging 
between about 125 l/p/d (‘business as usual’) and about 115 l/p/d (‘extended strategy’) in 2040, 
and between 120 l/p/d and just under 110 l/p/d by 2065. The report concludes that whilst there 
is only a small increase in cost associated with moving from the ‘business as usual’ to an 
‘extended’ strategy, the latter would require significant behavioural and policy changes, 
including interventions such as smart metering and associated tariffs, or increasing 
requirements for water efficiency in new homes.189 Previous analysis by the ASC suggests 
improvements in household water efficiency would be cost-effective and readily achievable, and 
could reduce consumption to 115 l/p/day.190 

The NPPF sets a minimum standard of 125 l/p/d in new homes. DCLG has since added an 
‘optional requirement’ that allows local planning authorities to set a 110 l/p/d standard. The 
Code for Sustainable Homes included various standards for water efficiency, with 105 l/p/d or 
less required to achieve levels 3-4 of the Code, and less than 80 l/p/d required to achieve levels 
5-6. The Code was withdrawn in 2015 as part of a wider simplification of housing standards.191 

Are actions taking place? 

Water companies have implemented a range of actions to reduce household water 
demand, including programmes to encourage metering, use of water-efficient taps and 
appliances, and behaviours that help to reduce water consumption.  

Water companies have implemented campaigns to encourage the uptake of metering, which 
has increased from 42% of households in 2012/13 to 45.5% in 2015/16. Current water resource 
management plans suggest metering should increase to 61% of households nationally by 2020, 
but some water companies are not on track to deliver their contribution toward this.192 About 
80% of the water companies also provide water efficiency audits or similar services to 
households.193 As a result, for example, Southern Water has brought the average water use per 
person to below 120 l/p/d in some parts of company’s catchment, including as a result of 
metering having reached 90% of customers in the region.194 Education programmes have also 
been rolled out, such as Severn Trent Water’s school education programme, that reaches more 
than 45,000 children each year, and site tours at their education centres with 347,941 visits since 
2010.195  

In 2015, Defra reported that a number of manufacturers, retailers and merchants have agreed to 
use the voluntary European Water Label on all their bathroom appliances. In 2017, the 
department reported that whilst the adoption of the European Water Label is still low, water 
companies are now also encouraging manufacturers and retailers to label their products. 

189 Water UK (2016) Water resources long-term planning framework. 
190 ASC (2015) Progress on preparing for climate change. 
191 See: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/2010-to-2015-government-policy-energy-efficiency-in-
buildings/2010-to-2015-government-policy-energy-efficiency-in-buildings  
192 ASC analysis of water companies’ Annual Performance Reports 2015/16 available on individual companies’ 
websites. 
193 ASC analysis of the PR14 final price control determination notice: company-specific appendices available at 
http://www.ofwat.gov.uk/regulated-companies/price-review/price-review-2014/final-determinations/ 
194 Blueprint for water (2017) Blueprint for PR19 – Environmental outcomes for the price review. 
195 Severn Trent Water (2015) Future proofing: Severn Trent Water's climate change adaptation report. 


  


Chapter 4: People and the built environment 125 


 

                                                           

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/2010-to-2015-government-policy-energy-efficiency-in-buildings/2010-to-2015-government-policy-energy-efficiency-in-buildings
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/2010-to-2015-government-policy-energy-efficiency-in-buildings/2010-to-2015-government-policy-energy-efficiency-in-buildings
http://www.ofwat.gov.uk/regulated-companies/price-review/price-review-2014/final-determinations/




Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

Domestic water consumption has continued to fall from 155 l/p/d in 2003/04 to 139 l/p/d 
in 2015/16, in line with the target for 2020 of 137 l/p/d.196 

This trend is consistent with achieving the target of 137 l/p/d in 2020, and on course for Water 
UK’s ‘business as usual’ scenario for the 2040s (Figure 4.2). Variation from one year to another is 
due to many factors including annual climate variability, for example; a particularly hot summer 
would correspond to higher consumption. However, there has been a general downward trend 
since 2003/04. 

Figure 4.2. Domestic water consumption 

Source: Measured consumption from the Environment Agency and Ofwat. See Technical Annex for this chapter. 
PR14 target for 2040 from Ofwat (2014) Setting price controls for 2015-2020 – Overview. 
Consumption scenarios for the 2040s from Water UK (2016) Water resources long-term planning framework. 

4.5 Public health and wellbeing 
Managing the risks to health from high temperatures is one of the six priority areas 
identified for further action in the 2017 UK Climate Change Risk Assessment.  

In addition to risks to health from flooding (see section 4.2), climate change is likely to pose risks 
to public health from excess heat, and potentially from changes in UV radiation, air pollution and 
new or emerging pathogens. CCRA2 identified a lack of policy instruments in place to manage 
vulnerability to heat in the built environment, including homes but also other buildings such as 
hospitals, care homes, schools and prisons. If additional measures are not taken, it is likely that 
heat-related mortality will increase in the coming decades from a baseline of 2,000 heat-related 

196 Data from the Environment Agency (2017). See the Technical Annex for this chapter. 


110115120125130135140145150155160


2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040


Per capita consumption (l/p/d)




Year

Measured consumption PR14 target for 2020
Trendline Water UK 'business as usual' scenario
Water UK 'extended' scenario

126 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


  

deaths per year at present. There may also be some benefits of warmer temperatures from 
increased outdoor activity, for example, but these are not well-quantified. 

Cold-related mortality could decline over time as the climate warms, but the overall impact on 
the number of cold-related deaths per year is projected to be small due to the growing, ageing 
population.197 CCRA2 identified the need for more action to reduce exposure to cold and fuel 
poverty through increased energy efficiency measures in homes. Energy efficiency 
improvements need to be undertaken in ways that do not increase the risk of overheating. 

The contribution of climate change to public health risks from pathogens, air pollution and UV 
radiation are uncertain. Despite the uncertainty, actions to reduce vulnerability now are 
important given the size of the present-day risks to health. Air pollution (from all causes) 
contributes to approximately 40,000 deaths per year in the UK, while around 2,000 deaths per 
year are attributable to skin cancer, for example. 

Health impacts from heat and cold 

Is there a plan?  


 

Guidance for managing the risks from heat and cold exists 
through the Heatwave and Cold Weather Plans for England. 
The Government’s Fuel Poverty strategy has an aspiration to 
reduce exposure to cold in people’s homes. 

There are no legal safeguards to avoid new homes 
overheating, and no policies in place to begin the process of 
adapting the existing building stock to higher temperatures. 
Policies to address overheating are not generally included in 
Local Plans, despite a requirement in the National Planning 
Policy Framework to include climate change adaptation in 
local authority spatial planning.  

Are actions taking 
place? 


 

The 14 NAP actions related to increasing awareness and 
undertaking research on risks from heat and cold are complete 
or on track. The focus for most actions is on providing 
information and guidance to practitioners, and improving the 
evidence base.  

197 Kovats, R.S., Osborn, D., et al. (2016) UK Climate Change Risk Assessment Evidence Report: Chapter 5, People and the 
Built Environment. 


  


Chapter 4: People and the built environment 127 


 Red

Green

                                                           


  

Is progress being 
made in managing 
vulnerability? 


   


Daily average and maximum temperatures are increasing 
over time, which are in turn increasing the exposure of the 
population to heat. Studies consistently show around 20% 
of homes already overheat in the current climate. Urban 
green space, which has a cooling effect, declined between 
2001 and 2016 from 63% to 56% of urban areas (though 
there has been no change between 2011 and 2016). 
Without further adaptation, the number of heat-related 
deaths per year is expected to increase from 2,000 to 7,000 
by the 2050s, including the effects of population growth.  

The number of people who are vulnerable to cold, 
measured by the number living in fuel poverty, continues 
to fluctuate with no obvious downward trend.  

Is there a plan? 

The Heatwave and Cold Weather Plans for England provide guidance to health 
practitioners and the public in order to protect vulnerable people in hot and cold weather. 
There remain no legal safeguards to protect new development from adding to the number 
of homes that already overheat in warmer weather. Neither are there policies in place to 
adapt existing buildings (including homes, hospitals, care homes, schools and prisons) to 
be safe and habitable in increasing temperatures.  

As the ASC reported in detail in its 2014 and 2015 reports, there are no legal requirements in 
place to ensure that new buildings –homes, hospitals, care homes, schools or prisons – are 
designed so as to minimise the risk to occupants from increasing temperatures. Regulations 
exist to ensure that conditions in e.g. hospitals are ‘safe’198, and guidance also exists on 
performance standards to avoid overheating in schools,199 and healthcare premises.200 However, 
internal temperatures are not routinely monitored, and standards set out in guidance are not 
enforced.  

The National Planning Policy Framework requires local planning authorities to adopt strategies 
to adapt to climate change, including through the provision and protection of urban green 
space. However, the NPPF does not mention planning measures to manage risks from heat 
specifically, and two independent reviews found that this risk is generally not covered in Local 
Plans.201  

The Heatwave Plan for England provides guidance to health practitioners and the public in order 
to protect vulnerable people in hot weather. A heat-health alert service operates across England 
during June to September. This includes guidance to adapt the built environment year-round 
and ensure that appropriate measures are put in place when a heatwave does occur. The Cold 
Weather Plan for England operates in a similar way to the Heatwave Plan, providing guidance on 
long-term planning and reactive responses to protect people during cold spells.  

198 E.g. http://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/regulations-enforcement/regulation-12-safe-care-
treatment#guidance  
199 Approved document L2 in the Building Regulations. 
200 Department of Health (2015) Health, Technical Memorandum 07 - 02: EnCO2de 2015 – making energy work in 
healthcare - Environment and sustainability Part A: Policy and management. 
201 JBA and LUC (2015) for the ASC. Local authority action on climate change adaptation, and TCPA (2016) Planning for 
the climate challenge? Understanding the performance of English local plans 

Amber



     

128 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


 

                                                           

http://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/regulations-enforcement/regulation-12-safe-care-treatment%23guidance
http://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/regulations-enforcement/regulation-12-safe-care-treatment%23guidance


  

The Zero Carbon Homes target was withdrawn in 2015, with greater emphasis now being 
put on delivering reductions in fuel poverty through the Energy Company Obligation. 

Alongside awareness raising, exposure to cold can be reduced through increasing energy 
efficiency and the level of insulation in homes. The Government’s previous target for all new 
homes built after 2016 to achieve zero carbon status was dropped in 2015 as part of steps to 
reduce the regulatory burden on house builders.202 A target remains in the Fuel Poverty Strategy 
for as many fuel poor homes ‘as reasonably practicable’ to achieve an energy efficiency standard 
of Energy Performance Certificate Band C by 2030. The Energy Company Obligation (ECO) 
scheme has entered a transition period from April 2017 to September 2018, moving towards a 
new scheme focused on fuel poverty for 2018-2022.203 Where insulation schemes are being 
implemented, there is an opportunity to consider how to retrofit measures at the same time to 
mitigate the risks from heat. The Government should consider how this could be achieved. 

Are actions taking place? 

All NAP actions related to heat and cold are completed or on track, but there is limited 
evidence of the impacts these actions have had on risk.  

The majority of NAP actions related to heat and cold aim to increase awareness, provide tools for 
decision makers, and improve the evidence base. For example: 

• Public Health England has included additional information in the Heatwave Plan for local 
authorities and planners. The Department for Health is funding a review of the effectiveness 
of the plan, which will report in 2018. This review is investigating whether the Heatwave Plan 
has contributed to the reduction in mortality observed during the 2013 heatwave compared 
to the heatwaves of 2003 and 2006.204  

• The Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy is undertaking a public 
consultation on the Standard Assessment Procedure (SAP). SAP Appendix P contains a 
methodology to assess the risk of excessive internal heat gains in new build designs, in order 
to determine if a building design is compliant with Part L of the Building Regulations. The 
assessment of overheating risk relates to the need to limit energy use for cooling rather than 
limit the risks to health. The review by BEIS intends to consider whether revisions are needed 
to the calculations for internal summer temperatures to better reflect overheating risk.  

• In response to the ASC’s 2015 recommendation to introduce a new standard or regulation on 
reducing the risk of overheating in new homes (Recommendation 15), the Government stated 
that it would conduct more research on the costs and benefits of different options to 
mitigate overheating risk, including drawing on the work of the Zero Carbon Hub. The Hub 
has now reported its findings to DCLG, but funding for the hub was discontinued following 
the withdrawal of the Zero Carbon Homes target. Its last report to the Government on how 
to assess overheating risk recommended a broad, criteria-based standard,205 in line with the 
ASC’s advice to Government in 2015.  

202 HM Treasury (2015) Fixing the foundations: Creating a more prosperous nation. 
203 CCC (2016) Progress report to Parliament, Chapter 3: Buildings. 
204 Green, H., Andrews, N., Armstrong, B., Bickler, G. and Pebody, R. (2016) Mortality during the 2013 heatwave in 
England – how did it compare to previous studies? A retrospective observational study. Environmental Research, 147, 
343-349. 
205 Zero Carbon Hub (2015) Next steps in defining overheating. 


  


Chapter 4: People and the built environment 129 


 

                                                           


  

• Further work has also been conducted to provide guidance on overheating, green 
infrastructure, and protecting vulnerable people, by a range of organisations including the 
Environment Agency, Green Infrastructure Partnership, and the London Climate Change 
Partnership.  

Some evidence is available on the uptake of different cooling measures in cities across England. 
The uptake of green roofs is most prominent in London, as their installation in new builds is 
supported by the London Plan.206 The number and area of green roofs in London have been 
increasing year on year at a rate of between 15% and 19% annually since 2010, and currently 
stands at approximately 175,000m2.207 Passive cooling measures such as green roofs and passive 
ventilation systems are a preferable adaptation to air conditioning, which is energy-intensive 
and expels waste heat into the environment. The ‘packaged’ air conditioning market – which 
includes portable units sold to householders – grew by 3% between 2014 and 2015, and is 
estimated to continue this rate of growth out to 2020.208 

In relation to risks from cold, an evaluation of the Cold Weather Plan has been completed, which 
showed that the plan was well regarded by healthcare professionals, but awareness was greater 
amongst community health practitioners than frontline staff. The review found a lack of 
evidence to ascertain how far the plan has gone to reducing the risk of cold-related mortality.  

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

Daily average and maximum temperatures are increasing over time, which are in turn 
increasing the exposure of the population to heat.  

Various indicators of temperature show that average temperatures are increasing over time, as is 
the frequency of days with high temperatures. The number of days per year in England where 
the average daily maximum temperature exceeds 25°C has increased from an average of around 
5-6 days in the 1880s to 8-9 days in the 2000s. There is no obvious trend in a more extreme 
indicator of number of days per year where maximum temperatures exceed 30°C, however. 

A different type of indicator for extreme temperatures based on the temperature profile across 
the year has found that the average annual daily maximum temperature in England rose from 
11.8ºC in 1961-1990 to 12.8ºC in 1980-2010.209 CCRA2 noted that in the absence of action, annual 
UK heat-related mortality is projected to increase from a current baseline of 2,000 heat-related 
deaths per year to 5,000 per year by 2050 (7,000 per year by 2050 taking account of population 
growth). 

Declines in the area of urban green space observed between 2001 and 2011 have 
stabilised over the past five years.  

Urban green space can help to cool the surrounding area, with studies from cities across the UK 
showing a reduction in temperatures of several degrees Celsius. One study from Glasgow 
projected that a 20% increase in green cover could offset 33-50 per cent of the expected extra 
urban heat island effect in 2050.210 Urban green space also has other benefits: for mitigating 

206 The London Plan requires all major development proposals to include roof, wall and site planting, especially 
green roofs and walls where possible, to deliver cooling benefits as an adaptation measure to climate change. 
207 Survey information by Livingroofs Ltd., reported in ADAS (2017) for the ASC(2017) Research to provide updated 
indicators of climate change risk and adaptation action in England. 
208AMA research limited (2015) Ventilation and air conditioning market report UK 2015-2019 analysis. 
209 Kendon, M., McCarthy, M., Jevrejeva, S. and Legg, T. (2016): State of the UK Climate 2015. 
210 Emmanuel, R. and Loconsole, A. (2015) Green infrastructure as an adaptation approach to tackling urban 
overheating in the Glasgow Clyde Valley Region, UK. Landscape and Urban Planning, 138(0), 71-86. 


     

130 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


 

                                                           




surface water flood risk, improving air quality, supporting biodiversity, and providing amenity 
value to people. The total area of urban green space in England in 2016 declined between 2001 
and 2016 from 63% to 56% of urban area, though there has been no change between 2011 and 
2016.211 

Studies based on samples of houses consistently show around 20% of homes overheat in 
the current climate. 

Understanding trends in exposure to heat in buildings is important as people spend on average 
90% of their time indoors.212 Although internal temperatures in buildings across England are not 
monitored routinely, studies based on samples consistently show around 20% of homes exceed 
various threshold temperatures for overheating in the current climate.213 These studies could be 
routinely updated to establish if overheating is starting to occur more often, or is becoming 
more severe. Similar studies on large samples of other types of public building are lacking, 
though there is case study evidence of overheating risk in some types of public buildings (Box 
4.2). 

Box 4.2. Research on overheating in public buildings 

Hospitals 

The EPSRC-funded DeDeRHECC project, led by Cambridge University, found that all of the selected 
buildings across four NHS Trusts monitored between 2009 and 2013 overheated using a 28ºC criteria. 
Pre-war Nightingale wards were found to be the least likely to overheat, whereas lightweight 1960s 
designs were shown to be the most vulnerable. As part of the consultation process to improve the 
scope of data collection, reporting on clinical area overheating incidents is being added to the Estates 
Returns Information Collection (ERIC) at a Trust level for 2017/18. Under these reforms to the ERIC, 
Trusts will now be asked to report on a) overheating incidents in wards; b) overheating incidents 
triggering a risk assessment; and c) percentage of clinical space monitored for temperatures. These 
changes will allow the health sector to understand the reach of overheating monitoring processes and 
to measure the risk and risk mitigation of clinical areas overheating across NHS Trusts. This should 
provide data for an indicator in the future. 

Care homes 

Gupta et al. (2016) considered four case studies in care homes (two in residential care and two in extra 
care schemes). The study found that although climate models only predicted a limited risk of 
overheating in each scheme by the 2050s, empirical monitoring showed overheating across all four 
schemes during the summer of 2015. There was a general lack of awareness of the impacts of 
overheating, and the prevalence of the overheating risk both now and in the future across all those 
involved, from designers to frontline care staff and residents. Currently there is no statutory maximum 
internal temperature for care schemes. The study found that overheating is a risk in the care sector that 
is likely to be exacerbated in future due to climate change, yet there is currently little awareness and 
implementation of suitable and long-term adaptation approaches (such as external shading, and 
provision of cross-ventilation). 

Source: ADAS (2017) for the ASC. Research to provide updated indicators of climate change risk and adaptation 
action in England. 

211 ADAS (2017) for the ASC. Research to provide updated indicators of climate change risk and adaptation action in 
England. 
212 Aecom (2012) for DCLG. Investigation into overheating in homes: literature review. 
213 ASC (2015) Progress on preparing for climate change; Kovats, R.S., Osborn, D., et al. (2016) UK Climate Change Risk 
Assessment Evidence Report: Chapter 5, People and the Built Environment. 

Chapter 4: People and the built environment 131 


  

Overheating is recognised as an issue in new buildings by 45% of a sample of buildings 
professionals, who also noted the absence of regulations and appropriate training as a key 
barrier to further action. 

The Building Research Establishment (BRE) conducted a survey for the ASC of building 
professionals including architects, developers and consultants.214 Of those surveyed, 45% (33 out 
of 75 respondents) reported that overheating had been identified as an issue after the 
completion of new build projects, with 9% reporting it being identified ‘often’. A further one 
third of respondents were unaware of whether there were problems or not in completed 
projects. Respondents reported that the costs of rectifying overheating issues in completed 
projects were significantly higher than addressing the issue at the design stage. BRE also 
assessed the perceived barriers to including overheating measures at the design stage, through 
a survey, interviews and focus groups. The major barriers reported were: 

• The absence of building or other regulations that require overheating risk to be addressed by 
developers. 

• Lack of coverage of climate change adaptation in training for architects and planners. 

• The lack of client demand, including both developers and the public.  

• The need to promote energy efficiency, resulting in greater air tightness and less natural 
ventilation in buildings.  

• Uncertainty over what future climate conditions to plan for in designs 

In 2014 the ASC set out in detail why overheating risk in new homes is unlikely to be tackled 
through voluntary measures or current planning policy. Given the scale of the current and future 
risk, we reiterate our recommendation from our last progress report in 2015215 that a new 
regulation or other standard should be put in place to manage the risk of overheating in new 
homes. Such a standard should also be part of a more holistic approach to housing design that 
takes into account, amongst other things, the need to warm homes affordably in the winter. 

In relation to cold, energy efficiency levels are increasing in homes, though levels of fuel 
poverty have not (yet) declined as a result. 

In relation to managing risks to people from cold, there have been positive trends in energy 
efficiency indicators for buildings. The average SAP (energy efficiency) rating of homes in 
England in 2014 was 61, up from 45 in 1996.216 More recent data are not available. There has also 
been a reduction in the occurrence of damp and mould (which are associated with cold homes), 
from 12% of homes in 1996 to 4% in 2014.  

Although the average energy efficiency rating of homes has increased, levels of fuel poverty in 
England since 2003 have fluctuated with no obvious upward or downward trend.217 There are 
signs that the extra income needed for these households to cross the fuel poverty threshold has 
reduced, i.e. the degree of fuel poverty in fuel poor households has decreased.218 Continued 
monitoring is needed to assess whether fuel poverty rates will decline in the future as a result of 

214 BRE (2017) for the ASC. Resilience of new developments to high temperatures and flooding. 
215 Recommendation15. 
216 The Government’s Standard Assessment Procedure (SAP) is used to monitor the energy efficiency of homes. It is 
an index based on calculating annual space and water heating costs for a standard heating regime and is expressed 
on a scale of 1 (highly inefficient) to 100 (highly efficient), with 100 representing zero energy cost. 
217 BEIS (2016) Annual fuel poverty statistics report: 2016. 
218 Ibid. 


     

132 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


 

                                                           


  

energy efficiency programmes, or other factors such as rising incomes, in order to assess if these 
programmes are having the desired effect. 

RECOMMENDATION 16: As recommended in our 2015 report, a standard or regulation should be 
put in place to reduce the risk of overheating in new homes. (Owner: DCLG. Timing: by 2020). 

RECOMMENDATION 17: Further action should be taken to assess and reduce the risks of 
overheating in existing buildings, with the priorities being hospitals, schools, care homes and prisons. 
This could be undertaken for example through the relevant standards agencies such as the Care 
Quality Commission and Ofsted. (Owner: Department of Health, Department for Communities and 
Local Government, Department for Education, Department for Justice. Timing: by 2020). 

Pathogens, air quality and UV radiation 

Is there a plan? 


  

Targets and monitoring requirements for climate-sensitive air 
pollutants (ozone and particulate matter) are set through the 
National Ceiling Limits and Ambient Air Quality Directives. 
These targets will need to be maintained after the UK leaves 
the EU. Public Health England and the Food Standards Agency 
have programmes of research and surveillance for pathogens 
that pose a risk to public health. The Government has a 
strategy to reduce levels of skin cancer, and funds public 
warning systems and awareness raising activities for UV 
radiation.  

Are actions taking 
place? 


 

All 12 NAP actions related to this adaptation priority are on 
track or have been completed. These include evidence 
collection by PHE on the extent and severity of risks from 
pathogens, air quality and UV radiation. 

Is progress being 
made in managing 
vulnerability? 


  

Although the impacts of climate change on air quality, 
pathogens and UV radiation are uncertain, it is useful to 
assess how vulnerability may be changing in the 
population now. 

The number of people living with or previously diagnosed 
with chronic pulmonary obstructive disease has risen from 
1 million in 2003 to 1.2 million in 2012. Vulnerability to UV 
radiation may be decreasing as there has been an 
apparent increase in the number of people taking action to 
reduce sun exposure. No data is available to assess how 
vulnerability to pathogens is changing over time. 

Is there a plan? 

Plans exist to raise awareness, monitor and lower the present-day risks to health from air 
pollution, pathogens and UV radiation. 

Two types of air pollutant are climate-sensitive and therefore relevant to climate change 
adaptation: ground level ozone and particulate matter (PM2.5 and PM10). New national ceiling 
limits and targets for 2030 for particulate matter were set in December 2016 under a new EU 

Amber


  


Chapter 4: People and the built environment 133 


 

Green

Green


  

Directive 2016/2284/EU.219 Targets and limits for ground level ozone and its precursors are set 
under the Ambient Air Quality Directive 2008/50/EC. The provisions in this Directive are 
transposed into English law through the Air Quality Standards Regulations 2010.220 These 
regulations and national ceiling limits for 2030 will need to be retained in UK law when the UK 
leaves the EU. 

Public Health England’s Strategic Plan to 2020 includes an action by 2018 to develop a joint 
programme of work, and the production of plans, for the public health system’s response to 
high consequence infectious disease incidents. Over the next four years PHE will continue to 
support research on improving the understanding of the impacts of climate change on health. 
The Foods Standards Agency Foodborne Diseases Strategy, published in 2011, includes horizon 
scanning activities to consider future risks from food-borne pathogens. These plans do not 
include long-term targets or goals in relation to managing the risks from pathogens. 

Established monitoring programmes are in place for UV radiation.221  

Are actions taking place? 

All 12 NAP actions related to this priority are complete or on track, many of which relate to 
increasing the knowledge base on how these risks interact with weather and the level of 
exposure for different groups of people.  

For example: 

• PHE are conducting a study to quantify the health impacts from short term exposure to 
ozone pollution for different regions of England. 

• PHE will also be publishing research before the end of the year on improving methods to link 
infectious disease data to weather patterns. 

• Cefas are developing an evidence base on the role of extreme climatic events (in particular 
heat waves, droughts, precipitation events and storms) in driving waterborne pathogen risk 
in the UK as well as internationally. 

• Bathing and shellfish waters where deterioration has been identified will be prioritised for 
work in the next water industry asset management programme from 2020.  

• PHE has expanded its network of UV monitoring sites, including two new sites on Gibraltar 
and in Cyprus. A study is also underway to determine peoples’ exposure to UV radiation as 
they go about daily activities, including sport. 

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

Vulnerability to air pollution, measured by the total number of people living with chronic 
respiratory conditions, has increased since 2004.  

The future impacts of climate change on air pollutants, human pathogens and UV radiation are 
uncertain, and therefore the future level of risk due to climate change is difficult to predict. 
However, vulnerability to these risks can be monitored through assessing changes in the 
vulnerable population over time, for example in the number of people living with chronic 
respiratory conditions: 

219 See: http://ec.europa.eu/environment/air/pollutants/ceilings.htm  
220 Defra (2016) Air Pollution in the UK 2015. 
221 See: https://uk-air.defra.gov.uk/research/ozone-uv/  


     

134 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


 

                                                           

http://ec.europa.eu/environment/air/pollutants/ceilings.htm
https://uk-air.defra.gov.uk/research/ozone-uv/


  

• Since 2004, the number of people previously diagnosed with or living with asthma has 
remained steady at 7 - 8 million, though the number of new diagnoses each year has fallen 
from about 500 per 100,000 people in 2004, to 300 per 100,000 people in 2012.222  

• The number of people living with or previously diagnosed with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease increased from 1 million to 1.2 million between 2004 and 2012, with a 
smaller decline in the number of new diagnoses compared to asthma. 

Actions taken to reduce exposure to UV radiation are increasing, which should lower 
impacts over time. 

Skin cancer awareness rates can be used as a vulnerability measure for UV radiation, as they give 
an indication of whether people are aware of the risk and are likely to be protecting themselves. 
Since 2003, there has been a slight increase in the percentage of people reporting actions to 
reduce sun exposure in surveys conducted by Cancer Research. Actions include using sunscreen, 
covering up exposed skin, and being more aware of changes to moles on the skin.223 

It is not known how the risk to people from human pathogens is changing. There are no 
indicators that measure trends in the incidence of different disease vectors over time, nor 
peoples’ exposure to different pathogens. However, surveillance systems are in place to monitor 
vector distribution and abundance, and the incursion on non-native vectors at ports of entry. 

4.6 Emergency management  
CCRA2 reiterated that emergency preparedness plays a key role in managing current 
climate risks, such as flooding and overheating, as well as preparing for future extreme 
weather events in a warmer climate. 

An effective emergency response limits damage from any event that poses a serious threat to 
peoples’ wellbeing and the environment.224 This section discusses whether the emergency 
planning system in England is effectively managing current weather events, by assessing 
whether:  

• Warning systems exist for the relevant range of climate risks, and are effective in triggering 
appropriate actions from the public and professional responders. 

• Sufficient capability is in place to deal with the range of plausible extreme weather scenarios 
that can occur under today’s climate. 

222 British Lung Foundation, reported in ADAS (2017) for the ASC, Research to provide updated indicators of climate 
change risk and adaptation action in England. 
223 Cancer Research UK (2014) reported in ADAS (2017) for the ASC, Research to provide updated indicators of climate 
change risk and adaptation action in England. 
224 Cabinet Office (2006) Emergency preparedness. 


  


Chapter 4: People and the built environment 135 


 

                                                           


  

Effectiveness of the emergency planning system 

Is there a plan?  Warning systems are in place to alert emergency planners and 
the public in advance of flooding, heavy rainfall, strong winds, 
and heatwaves.  

The 2004 Civil Contingencies Act and the associated statutory 
guidelines define roles, responsibilities and procedures to 
manage climate and non-climate related emergencies. 

Are actions taking 
place? 


 

Most of the NAP actions on emergency planning have been 
completed or are on track. The number of households 
subscribed to receive flood warnings is increasing. A National 
Capability Assessment for emergency responders is underway. 
The National Flood Resilience Review provided some 
additional capability to flood emergency responders through 
acquiring an additional 32 km of temporary flood barriers. 

Is progress being 
made in managing 
vulnerability?  

Recent events have highlighted the need for community 
flood preparedness to be improved. This is needed 
because of insufficient flood emergency planning at the 
community level, people not being signed up to receive 
warnings, or failing to act upon them when issued.  

Local Resilience Forums report they are not confident that 
they have the resources to cope with more severe weather 
events than those experienced to date. Evidence on the 
effectiveness of the heatwave warning system is being 
collected. 

Is there a plan? 

Warning systems are in place to alert emergency responders and the public in advance of 
flooding, heavy rainfall, strong winds, and heatwaves. 

The Met Office provides weather warnings for heavy rain, severe gales, heavy snow and icy 
roads. These warnings are communicated to the public using a range of means and channels. 
Emergency planners and responders can sign up to receive bespoke warnings. 

The Heatwave Plan for England sets out guidance on how health practitioners and the public 
should act during periods of hot weather with a particular focus on protecting vulnerable people 
(see also Section 4.5). Linked to this plan, the Met Office operates a Heat-Health Watch Service to 
help healthcare professionals manage periods of extreme temperature. When temperature 
forecasts exceed a certain threshold, a warning is issued and sent to health professionals and 
people working in social care.225  

The Flood Forecasting Centre (FFC) is a partnership between the Environment Agency and the 
Met Office. The FFC produces daily forecasts up to five days ahead for flooding including from 

225 See: http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/public/weather/heat-health/#?tab=heatHealth 


     

136 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


 

Green

Green

Amber

                                                           

http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/public/weather/heat-health/%23?tab=heatHealth


  

river, surface water, tidal and groundwater sources. The FFC also provides specialised 
information to emergency planners and responders.226 

The Civil Contingencies Act provides a framework for local responders to develop 
appropriate planning arrangements for their area, following the Emergency Planning and 
the Emergency Response and Recovery guidance.227, 228 

The Civil Contingencies Act states that emergency planning should involve a number of 
organisations collaborating across all levels of government. Local authorities, police, fire services, 
the NHS, the Environment Agency and other key responders are responsible for assessing risks, 
planning for emergencies, and warning the public. These ‘Category 1’ responders are organised 
into Local Resilience Forums (LRFs). According to the Act, utility companies, transport agencies, 
voluntary and other organisations (‘Category 2’ responders) are required to co-operate and 
share relevant information with LRFs. 

At the national level, DCLG provides support to LRFs whilst individual government departments 
lead on national planning for the risks within their remit. Responsibilities are set out in the 
National Risk Assessment, produced by the Cabinet Office. The Assessment includes weather-
related risks such as extreme storms, major coastal and river flooding, droughts, and heatwaves, 
alongside other non-weather related risks. The Cabinet Office is considering how the National 
Risk Assessment could take into account the climate change risks identified by CCRA2. The 
National Risk Assessment forms the basis upon which LRFs produce Local Risk Registers. LRFs 
must ensure that they have sufficient capability to respond to the risks in their register.  

Are actions taking place? 

Most of the 21 NAP actions on emergency planning have been completed or are on track, 
and further actions have been carried out to improve warning systems and increase their 
uptake. The National Flood Resilience Review provided some additional capability to flood 
emergency responders through the acquisition of 32 km of temporary flood barriers. 

The flood warning service provided by the Environment Agency covers about 83% of properties 
at a risk of flooding from rivers and the sea. EA aims to extend this to cover 86% of properties by 
2017/18 and 100% by 2019/20.229 Whilst one-third of the remaining properties are expected to 
be covered by a relatively simple upgrade of the current system, EA estimates that extending the 
coverage to the remaining two-thirds might require significant investment in infrastructure, data 
and staff. Two-thirds of the properties covered by the service have subscribed to receive direct 
flood warnings by text message.230  

Regarding risks from extreme temperatures, PHE has run a ‘Get Ready for Winter’ campaign for 
the last six years, including a dedicated website and proactive communications such as social 
media activity and press releases.231 For the last three years, the Met office has also run a similar 

226 See: http://www.ffc-environment-agency.metoffice.gov.uk/ 
227 Cabinet Office (2006) Emergency preparedness. 
228 Cabinet Office (2013) Emergency Response and Recovery - Non statutory guidance accompanying the Civil 
Contingencies Act 2004. 
229 Communication with the Environment Agency. 
230 These include properties that have been automatically subscribed and have not opted out. 
231 NAP action update (2017).  


  


Chapter 4: People and the built environment 137 


 

                                                           

http://www.ffc-environment-agency.metoffice.gov.uk/


  

web-based 'Get Ready for Summer' campaign to raise awareness about warmer weather issues. 
The Cabinet Office has reviewed and updated the Communities Prepared Hub.232  

Actions to increase the capability of emergency planners include acquiring 32 Km of temporary 
flood barriers following the National Flood Resilience Review. Extensive training was carried out 
to ensure that the military and Environment Agency staff can effectively deploy the barriers.  

The Cabinet Office is in the process of conducting a new National Capability Assessment (NCA) 
at the time of writing this report. However, this assessment focuses on understanding the 
resources available, rather than those needed, to manage the risks identified in the National Risk 
Assessment. The results of the NCA are not published. 

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

Recent events have shown that community flood preparedness needs to be improved. Key 
issues included insufficient flood emergency planning at the community level, people not 
being signed up to receive warning messages, or failing to act on warnings when issued. 
There are no data yet available on the effectiveness of the heat warning system. 

A review following storm Desmond in December 2015 concluded that whilst flood warnings 
were acted upon by most of those that received them, in some places such as Carlisle and 
Cockermouth the warning reportedly arrived too late and was not sufficiently precise. The 
review found that some of the affected communities felt unprepared for the event, suggesting 
they assumed that the physical flood defences in place would never fail to protect them. In some 
cases no formal or informal flood emergency plans were in place, people were either not 
registered for Environment Agency flood warnings, or did not give enough credence to them.233 

The ASC commissioned a survey of experts in Local Resilience Forums to inform this report, with 
17 interviews conducted with people working in 14 of the 38 LRFs in England.234 The majority of 
the interviewees stated that they are satisfied with the warning services provided by the Met 
Office and the Environment Agency, although some highlighted that further improvements can 
be made to the accuracy of the flood forecasting data provided.  

Data regarding the effectiveness of warning systems for other weather-related hazards are not 
available.  

Whilst LRFs report that they have made the best use of the available resources in 
responding to past events, they are not confident that they can cope with future events 
more severe than those experienced to date. This includes the range of climate-related 
risks in the National Risk Register. 

On Saturday 5 December 2015, Cumbria was hit by storm Desmond (see Section 4.2). Senior 
responders that provided evidence to the ASC reported that the event was generally perceived 
as unprecedented and overwhelming, even by people who were experienced and prepared to 
deal with flooding events. The responders involved in managing the emergency were widely 
praised for the efforts, resulting in no lives lost. However, the response system was reportedly 
extremely stretched and this was compounded by severe disruption to infrastructure, in 
particular electricity, telecommunications and transport services (see Chapter 5 for more details). 

232 See: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/preparing-for-emergencies/preparing-for-emergencies 
233 JBA Trust, Zurich Insurance (2016) Flooding after Storm Desmond. 
234 Jacobs (2017) for the ASC. Local Resilience Forum 2017 Interviews. 


     

138 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 


 

                                                           

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/preparing-for-emergencies/preparing-for-emergencies




Almost all the participants in our LRF survey rated their response to past weather emergencies as 
either ‘excellent’ or ‘good’. However, most interviewees also highlighted limiting factors, stating 
that plans are constrained by the resources they have available, and would struggle with larger 
or more prolonged events. Reductions in staff numbers and other resources were reported. 
Interviewees felt more prepared for events experienced recently, such as flooding, and less 
prepared for events that are more rarely experienced, such as heatwaves.  

The Civil Contingencies Act has improved the capability of the emergency planning 
system, but further clarity is needed regarding co-ordination and co-operation amongst 
different agencies as well as between neighbouring LRFs. 

In the majority (76%) of the LRF interviews, participants considered the Civil Contingencies Act 
to be an effective framework for managing emergencies. However, in almost two-thirds of the 
interviews, responders suggested that there is still room for greater clarity on the definition of 
responsibilities amongst the various agencies, including the requirements for co-operation and 
information sharing. Several interviewees also highlighted the need for more regional co-
ordination between LRFs, and better co-ordination of the national-level response and 
resources.235 

RECOMMENDATION 18: The Cabinet Office should, in consultation with Local Resilience Forums: 

• Commission an independent review of the planning scenarios underpinning local Risk Registers
to ensure they i) they are consistent with plausible worst case scenarios, and ii) use the results to
help LRFs assess the resources needed to manage these events.

• Strengthen the Emergency Planning Guidance to clarify and test responsibilities for coordination
amongst Category 1 and Category 2 responders, as well as between neighbouring LRFs.

(Owner: Cabinet Office. Timing: by 2020). 

4.7 Conclusions on NAP objectives and actions 
Table 4.1 summarises progress against the objectives listed within the NAP for Built 
Environment theme (objectives 1-6) and the Heathy & Resilient Communities theme 
(objectives 11-14). 

In general, the objectives describe a number of processes and list actions by which the resilience 
of people and the built environment should be improved. 

Of the 104 actions originally listed in these chapters of the NAP: 

• 53 (51%) are complete;

• 40 (38%) are on-track; and

• Four (4%) have been revised or delayed.

One action was dropped and updates were not received for the remaining six actions (6%). 

43 (42%) of actions in the NAP for these themes are time-bound, with the remaining 60 (58%) 
classed as ‘on going’ or do not have an end date.236 

235 Ibid. 
236 NAP action update (2017). 

Chapter 4: People and the built environment 139 




Table 4.1. NAP objectives and a summary of progress for the built environment and health themes 

NAP objective Commentary on progress 

Objective 1. To work with 
individuals, communities and 
organisations to reduce the threat of 
flooding and coastal erosion, 
including that resulting from climate 
change, by understanding the risks 
of flooding and coastal erosion, 
working together to put in place 
long-term plans to manage these 
risks and making sure that other 
plans take account of them. 

Of the eleven actions under this objective, seven are complete 
and four are on-track. Whilst the long term investment need for 
flood alleviation schemes have been identified and cost-
effective schemes are being delivered accordingly, there is little 
progress toward reducing risks for the 153,000 households that 
are not cost-beneficial to protect with such schemes. Shoreline 
Management Plans identify policies to manage coastal change 
up to 2100, yet the affected communities have not yet been 
fully engaged in the changes that are likely to occur to coastal 
management approaches. 

Objective 2. To provide a clear local 
planning framework to enable all 
participants in the planning system 
to deliver sustainable new 
development, including 
infrastructure that minimises 
vulnerability and provides resilience 
to the impacts of climate change. 

Seven out of the eight actions supporting this objective are 
complete or on track. However, the planning system allows 
development to continue in areas of flood risk and this will add 
to the costs of future flood events and increase the need to 
maintain and improve flood defences. The lack of building 
standards to avoid overheating means the risk of heat-related 
deaths is not being managed. 

Objective 3. Help businesses and 
industries in the sector to access 
skills, training, knowledge and tools 
to understand and manage climate 
change risks.  

12 of the 16 actions under this objective are complete or on 
track, one was dropped, and no update was provided for the 
remaining three actions. Despite these actions, there is still a 
very low uptake and recognition among building designers 
and insurers of the need for property-level measures to reduce 
flood and overheating risks. Climate Ready and the Zero 
Carbon Hub, which were responsible for delivering four of 
these actions, have closed. 

Objective 4. To ensure that 
investors and developers have the 
financial and appraisal decision tools 
needed to support and promote 
adaptation to climate change. 

All six actions under this objective are complete or on track. 
Whilst guidelines and tools are now in place promote 
accounting for climate change when making development 
decisions, there is no evidence of their impact in practice. 

Objective 5. To increase the 
resilience of homes and buildings by 
helping people and communities to 
understand what a changing climate 
could mean for them, and to take 
action to be resilient to climate risks. 

All 14 actions under this objective are complete or on track. 
These actions aimed to tackle overheating and promote more 
efficient water use in domestic buildings. Whilst progress has 
been made in decreasing water consumption in buildings, 
there remain no plans to address overheating risk in new and 
existing buildings. 

140 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 




Table 4.1. NAP objectives and a summary of progress for the built environment and health themes 

NAP objective Commentary on progress 

Objective 6. To explore and build 
understanding of the long term 
implications of climate change for 
the location and resilience of 
population centres. 

Six actions support this objective, five of which have been 
completed, whilst one has been revised. The Environment 
Agency’s Long Term Investment Scenarios provide a national 
assessment of long-term river and coastal flood risk and the 
degree of investment needed to manage them, but the 
implications for levels of flood protection and residual risk in 
different parts of the country are not reported. The scale of the 
investment needed to tackle the lack of capacity in the public 
sewer network has yet to be assessed. CCRA2 collated evidence 
on the expected impacts of a range of climate-related risks to 
the built environment. The report concluded that more action 
is needed to address risks from flooding, overheating and 
water scarcity. 

Objective 11. To reduce the risk of 
death and illness associated with 
severe weather events and climate 
change and increase preparedness 
and resilience to the impacts on 
public health.  

21 out of the 43 NAP actions for the health theme fall under 
this objective. All but one of the actions are complete or on 
track. There is an increased understanding of the mental health 
impact from flooding, and actions are underway that might 
help to reduce these impacts. It is not known how the NAP 
actions have helped reduce heat-related mortality, though a 
review of the Heatwave Plan for England is underway. 

Objective 12. To promote climate 
resilience within the NHS, public 
health and social care system to 
ensure continuity of services and 
resilient assets/estates including the 
ability to deal with the increased 
demand for services associated with 
severe weather related events. 

All eight actions under this objective are complete or on track. 
Whilst the Heatwave and Cold Weather Plans for England 
provide guidance to health practitioners and the public, the 
impact of these plans in reducing the risk is not known. There 
remain no requirements in place to ensure that hospitals and 
care homes do not overheat in high temperatures. 

Objective 13. To minimise the 
impact of climate change on 
vulnerable groups in society by 
strengthening their resilience to 
better prepare for, respond to and 
recover from future climate risk.  

Of the three actions supporting this objective, two are 
complete and one has been dropped. Whilst progress has been 
made in increasing the coverage and uptake of flood warnings, 
there remains scope to improve community-level emergency 
planning. Data on the effectiveness of the heat warning system 
are being collected. The level of climate change awareness 
amongst vulnerable groups is unknown. 

Chapter 4: People and the built environment 141 




Table 4.1. NAP objectives and a summary of progress for the built environment and health themes 

NAP objective Commentary on progress 

Objective 14. To promote and 
strengthen community resilience to 
severe weather related events linked 
to climate change (preparation, 
response and recovery), and the 
climate resilience of the emergency 
services and other Category 1&2 
Responders of the Local Resilience 
Forums. 

Eight out of 11 actions under this objective are complete or on 
track, whilst one has been revised, one dropped and no update 
was provided for the remaining action. Whilst LRFs have made 
the best use of the resources available to respond to past 
events, they are not confident that they can cope with events 
more severe than those experienced to date, especially in the 
light of diminishing resources. Communication issues amongst 
Category 1 and 2 Responders are still reported. 

142 Progress in preparing for climate change   |    Committee on Climate Change 




Chapter 4: People and the built environment 143 




Chapter 5: Infrastructure 




Key messages 

Context 

This chapter examines climate change risks to the essential services provided by national and local 
infrastructure, including water supply, energy, communications and transportation. Weather extremes 
including flooding, high and low temperatures, droughts, and high winds, can cause infrastructure 
failures, sometimes with knock-on impacts for other networks and assets. Climate change poses 
multiple threats to UK infrastructure, making oversight by Government and regulators important 
because of the potential for systemic impacts. Timely action is required to manage risk in the most cost-
effective way.  

Summary of progress 

Since 2015 significant steps have been taken to improve the resilience of infrastructure systems. 
Reports under the Adaptation Reporting Power (ARP) have provided evidence of adaptation 
actions. Most infrastructure operators are aware of risks from climate change and incorporate 
these in their engineering design and asset management plans. However, although progress has 
been good, residual risks remain. Recent extreme weather events continue to highlight 
vulnerabilities, including those resulting from dependence on communication and power 
networks that were previously considered resilient. There remain limited data at the national 
level in some sectors to determine whether adaptation actions are reducing vulnerability and 
managing systemic risks effectively.  

Overview of progress 

Adaptation priority Is there a plan? Are actions taking 
place? 

Is progress being 
made in managing 

vulnerability? 

1. Design and location
of new infrastructure 

2. Resilience of
infrastructure services 

2a. Energy 

2b. Public water supply 

2c. Ports and airports 

2d. Road and rail Amber

Amber

Amber

Amber

Green

Green

Amber

Chapter 5: Infrastructure 145 

Green Green

Green Green

Green Green

Green Green

Green

Green Green




Key messages 

2e. Digital and ICT 

3. Infrastructure
interdependencies 

Note: See Annex 2.1 for a description of the criteria used to assign Red-Amber-Green (RAG) scores. 

There is evidence that operators across most infrastructure sectors are taking steps to improve the 
performance of their networks and services during periods of extreme weather.  

Location and design of new infrastructure: Sector-based National Policy Statements (NPSs) are in 
place. A water supply NPS is being developed for 2017 to guide decisions on the design, location and 
operation of water supply projects. The National Infrastructure Commission (NIC) was set up in 2016 
and will publish a National Infrastructure Assessment (NIA) once every Parliament. The NIA will set out 
the long-term vision for UK infrastructure. It is intended that the NIA will include the implications of 
climate projections for infrastructure investment. Adaptation is also being incorporated into some 
existing project designs (e.g. the High Speed 2 rail link). More broadly, Nationally Significant 
Infrastructure Projects are taking into account flood risks but less account is taken of other risks such as 
water scarcity, subsidence, wind, fog, lightning and surface water flooding.  

Energy: Ofgem's performance framework for gas and electricity companies incentivises investment in 
safe and reliable services. The cross-industry ETR 138 standard for network resilience to flooding has 
been reviewed by the Energy Networks Association and now includes surface water flooding. Roll-out 
of ETR 138 means that critical substations and other assets are being upgraded. National Grid is initially 
targeting investment toward assets at highest risk, while providing interim mobile flood defences 
elsewhere. Electricity generators that need water for cooling are addressing the risk of water scarcity. 
Good progress is being made in managing vulnerability, but residual risks remain. For example, the 
flooding of an electricity substation in Lancaster in December 2015 led to the loss of electricity supplies 
for over 30 hours to approximately 61,000 homes, businesses and local infrastructure. . 

Public water supply: The current Asset Management Plan period (AMP6) includes a new outcomes-
based performance framework. The framework allows operators the flexibility to deliver resilient 
services, at least cost. Water companies are looking at least 25 years ahead in their Water Resource 
Management Plans (WRMPs) and some are developing plans that can cope with the inherent 
uncertainty in climate change projections and other factors such as population growth. The new 
‘resilience duty’ on Ofwat will take effect in 2019, and this will formalise resilience as an objective for the 
industry. A new Strategic Policy Statement (SPS) for Ofwat will set out the Government's strategic 
priorities and objectives for Ofwat's regulation of the water sector in England. Investments in measures 
to reduce water demand and improve resilience of assets to flooding are taking place. However, there 
are opportunities to improve resilience further through more ambitious reductions in demand and 
leakage. Realising these opportunities will require more effort by water companies and regulators.  

Ports and airports: The 2014 Transport Resilience Review set out recommendations to improve the 
resilience of ports and airports. These assets received further attention in the 2016 National Flood 
Resilience Review. However, performance and resilience standards are largely left to operators to 
determine. Airports are investing in flood resilience measures. A number of ports have assessed future 
sea level rise and are implementing improvements, including raising quay heights. Plans to improve 
flood defences at the Port of Immingham have been approved. Evidence from ARP reports and in 

Amber Amber

GreyAmber

Amber

146 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


Red

Key messages 

response to recent severe weather events suggests that some actions are beginning to address 
vulnerabilities, though most actions seem to be in response to events rather than being based on 
proactive risk management.  

Road and rail: The Government provided £150 million to improve transport flood resilience in its 2016 
Autumn Statement. Network Rail has published an overarching Weather Resilience and Climate Change 
Strategy to provide a framework within which all work relating to weather resilience and climate 
change adaptation is undertaken. Network Rail is analysing risks and undertaking site-specific actions, 
which have mostly centred on embankments, bridges, and coastal defences. However, ageing railway 
infrastructure continues to be challenging to adapt. Highways England has addressed high risk and very 
high risk flooding hotspots and culverts. Fewer weather-related delays have been experienced on 
England's road and rail networks in recent years, but variability in annual delay data means that it is not 
yet possible to assess robustly whether this is a result of adaptation actions or other factors.  

Digital and ICT: The National Flood Resilience Review identified critical vulnerabilities in digital 
communications networks and ICT infrastructure. TechUK's ARP report provides an outline of where 
further scrutiny should be focused, but there do not appear to be systematic industry or Government 
plans to address these vulnerabilities. The National Adaptation Programme contains no specific actions 
relating to ICT, despite the sector being recognised as critical to the operation of other infrastructure 
sectors, as well as the economy in general. There is some evidence of actions taking place (e.g. from ARP 
reports), in response to recent weather events. However there remains a lack of evidence available to 
the ASC to assess the resilience of the sector. 

Infrastructure interdependencies: The risks from interdependencies between networks have been 
further emphasised in the second UK Climate Change Risk Assessment. The Cabinet Office annual 
resilience reviews have identified and considered specific vulnerabilities to interdependent networks. 
Recent events further highlight vulnerabilities caused by losses in electricity supply and ICT (e.g. the 
Lancaster floods in 2015). Members of the Infrastructure Operators Adaptation Forum including water 
companies are working to address the resilience of networks on which they depend, for example, by 
increasing resilience to power supply outages. Some new infrastructure projects are considering 
interdependencies (e.g. HS2). However, there is no national assessment of interdependency risk, or of 
the possible systemic implications of interdependencies. Data are not available to measure progress in 
reducing vulnerability. There need to be stronger connections between Local Resilience Forums and 
infrastructure operators to ensure there is a meaningful exchange of information on assets and 
vulnerabilities, and to enable the collaborative action required to manage interdependency risks. 

Recommendations for further progress 

More attention needs to be paid to digital and ICT infrastructure, and infrastructure interdependencies, 
in the second National Adaptation Programme (NAP).  

The ASC has limited access to data that the Government holds, which has inhibited our assessment of 
the NAP. During 2017/18, the ASC will identify the priority data needed to assess England's progress in 
adapting infrastructure systems.  

RECOMMENDATION 19: Defra should review and strengthen its guidance for ARP3 to elicit more 
comparable data and conclusions about the adaptation of infrastructure. Use of consistent incident 
reporting and indicators of network resilience will allow performance to be tracked over time. Reporting 
protocols should be developed in partnership with sector organisations, the Cabinet Office, the National 
Infrastructure Commission, and the new National Infrastructure Resilience Council. (Owner: Defra. Timing: 
2018). 

RECOMMENDATION 20: Defra should ensure that all major infrastructure operators in the digital and ICT 
sector take part in the third round of the ARP. This will ensure that the sector has considered risks, and that 

Chapter 5: Infrastructure 147 




Key messages 

operators, individually and collectively, have developed risk management plans. (Owner: Defra. Timing: 
2019). 

RECOMMENDATION 21: To assist with the assessment and management of interdependencies the Cabinet 
Office should review information sharing arrangements between infrastructure operators, as well as 
between operators and Local Resilience Forums. Further steps may be necessary to ensure that the legal 
duties within the Civil Contingencies Act are being fulfilled in practice, including the duty for Category 1 and 
Category 2 responders to cooperate and share information. (Owner: Cabinet Office. Timing: 2018).  

5.1 Introduction 
Climate change poses multiple threats to infrastructure systems, including water supply, 
energy, communications and transportation. Natural hazards such as storms, flooding, 
heavy snow, and droughts, already account for 10% to 35% of all delays or service 
interruptions to electricity, road and rail customers every year.237  

Infrastructure systems are long-lived, often sensitive to severe weather, and their failure can 
have knock-on impacts on other networks and assets. All economic activities rely upon 
infrastructure networks and services, whose quality and resilience are regarded as a pillar of 
global economic competitiveness. Acting now to improve the current and future climate 
resilience of our nation's infrastructure makes practical and economic sense. 

Infrastructure mostly comprises hard engineering assets and the systems that operate and 
maintain these assets. Built infrastructure can impact upon the natural environment, and there is 
growing recognition of the potentially synergistic interplay between "grey" infrastructure and 
natural capital ("green and blue infrastructure"). For example, enhancing the quality of water in 
rivers can reduce costs at downstream water treatment works; improving the resilience of 
intertidal wetlands in estuaries reduces the need for costly sea walls.  

5.1.1 Future infrastructure 

In 2015 the Government created the National Infrastructure Commission (NIC) (see Section 5.2 
for details) to provide expert, independent advice on strategic infrastructure issues. The NIC will 
produce an in-depth assessment of the UK's major infrastructure needs with a 30-year time 
horizon, with climate change identified as a key driver. The first National Infrastructure 
Assessment (NIA) is expected in 2018.  

Though the NIA has not yet been published, the latest version of the UK's National Infrastructure 
Plan238 sets out over £320 billion planned investment in infrastructure up to 2020/21. 
Investments in low-carbon and resilient infrastructure projects will be needed to meet domestic 
climate change obligations at lowest cost, to maintain the competitiveness of UK industry, and 
to unlock a range of co-benefits such as reducing air and water pollution. 

Infrastructure can be built from the outset to be resilient to the anticipated range of future 
climatic conditions, or designed to allow it to be upgraded cost-effectively as the climate 
changes (termed a ‘managed adaptive’ approach).  

237  Data from NaFIRS (2017), Network Rail (2017), Highways England (2017). 
238  HM Treasury (2015) National Infrastructure Delivery Plan 2016 to 2021. 

148 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 




5.1.2 Risks to infrastructure from climate change 

The Evidence Report for the second UK Climate Change Risk Assessment (CCRA2) identified 14 
specific areas of risk and opportunity for infrastructure.239 Key risks are shown in Figure 5.1.  

• Increasing frequency and severity of flooding represents the greatest climate change risk,
with the number of assets exposed to significant levels of flood risk potentially doubling by
the 2080s.

• Changes in temperature and rainfall will place additional pressure on infrastructure, in
particular the rail, road, water and energy sectors, e.g. increased rail buckling with higher
temperatures, and the possibility of water demand exceeding the available supply.

• Potential increases in maximum wind speeds experienced during storms would impact
infrastructure networks, e.g. electricity transmission cables and overhead power lines for
electrified railways, although projections of future wind speeds remain uncertain.

• Infrastructure assets could also become more exposed to subsidence, humidity, fog, storms
and lightning, but projections of these risks are uncertain. The National Adaptation
Programme (NAP) does not address these issues. The infrastructure chapter within the NAP
only considers the key risks highlighted in the first CCRA. These primarily relate to flooding
and water scarcity, and their impacts on water, transport and energy sectors.

The NAP sets four objectives for the infrastructure theme. We review progress in delivering the 
actions in the NAP against each objective in Section 5.5 at the end of this chapter.  

The following sections evaluate the extent to which actions and policies in the NAP and 
elsewhere are addressing the identified climate risks (following the method described in Chapter 
2), with a focus on action since 2015. Further details and the underlying evidence supporting the 
analysis for each of these factors can be found in an annex to this report available on the CCC's 
website.240 

239  Dawson, RJ., et al. (2016) UK Climate Change Risk Assessment Evidence Report: Chapter 4, Infrastructure. 
240  See: https://www.theccc.org.uk/publications/  

Chapter 5: Infrastructure 149 

https://www.theccc.org.uk/publications/




Figure 5.1. Key risks to UK infrastructure 

Source: See: https://www.theccc.org.uk/uk-climate-change-risk-assessment-2017/ccra-chapters/infrastructure/ 

5.2 Design and location of new infrastructure 

Is there a plan? A series of sector-based National Policy Statements (NPSs) for 
energy, transport and waste water require climate change to be 
taken into account when developing new infrastructure 
projects. A water supply NPS is being developed. 

The National Infrastructure Commission, which was formally 
established in 2017, will publish a National Infrastructure 
Assessment once every Parliament setting out the vision for UK 
infrastructure. Resilience to climate change is recognised by the 
NIC as a driver of need for future infrastructure investment. 

Are actions taking 
place? 

Most NAP actions are complete or ongoing. They focus on 
embedding climate change risks within key policy documents 
such as the Energy Security Strategy, operator business plans, 
and the series of NPSs. Environment Agency guidance on 
building climate resilience into infrastructure (originally due in 
2013), was published in November 2015. 

There is also evidence that engineers are incorporating 
adaptation into the design of major projects, for example HS2. 

Is progress being 
made in 
managing 
vulnerability? 

Nationally Significant Infrastructure Projects (NSIPs) are 
taking into account future risks from flooding and sea level 
rise. Less account appears to be taken of other climate 
hazards, where the impact of climate change is less certain 
but could be significant. 

Amber

150 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 

Green

Green

https://www.theccc.org.uk/uk-climate-change-risk-assessment-2017/ccra-chapters/infrastructure/


  

Is there a plan? 

The National Infrastructure Commission was formally established in 2017. The 
Commission will publish a National Infrastructure Assessment every five years, setting out 
a vision for UK infrastructure for the following 30 years.  

The NIC will provide expert, independent advice on strategy, and produce an in-depth 
assessment of the UK's major infrastructure needs with a 30-year time horizon. NIC's objectives 
are to: 

• Foster long-term and sustainable economic growth across all regions of the UK. 

• Improve the UK's international competitiveness. 

• Improve the quality of life for those living in the UK. 

The NIC will deliver welcome strategic oversight of infrastructure. Resilience to climate change is 
recognised by the NIC as a driver of need for future investment.  

The NIA will look 30 years ahead, but in doing so it is important that climate risks to 
infrastructure on longer timescales are also considered. The NIC should consider how to build 
new UK climate projections (due in 2018) into its work plans and ongoing advice. The NIC has 
published a discussion paper which sets out the framework for consideration of these issues in 
the NIA.241 

A series of sector-based National Policy Statements are updated annually. These require 
climate change projections to be taken into account when developing new infrastructure 
projects.  

Ten National Policy Statements (NPS) have been published since 2011 and cover the energy, 
transport, and waste water sectors. Since 2015: 

• A draft statement for airports242 was published in February 2017 which considers the 
implications of climate change and includes requirements for minimising flood risks for new 
runway capacity and infrastructure at airports in the south-east of England.  

• Applicants for new airport infrastructure (e.g. the proposed new runway at Heathrow Airport) 
must consider climate change when planning the design, build and operation. Any 
accompanying environmental statements should set out how the proposal will take account 
of the projected impacts of climate change. Flood risk should be considered as set out in the 
National Planning Policy Framework.243  

• A water supply NPS is being developed. This NPS will set out the need for new nationally 
significant water supply infrastructure projects, with the aim of accelerating the process of 
providing development consent where necessary.  

There is no over-arching NPS to guide the strategic location of important infrastructure assets, so 
in our 2015 report to Parliament we recommended that the Department for Communities and 
Local Government should develop an approach to assess whether systemic risk is increasing or 
reducing as a result of individual decisions on the location of new national infrastructure assets. This 

241 NIC (2017) The impact of the environment and climate change on future infrastructure supply and demand. 
242  Department for Transport (2017) Draft Airports National policy Statement: new runway capacity and infrastructure 

at airports in the south-east of England. 
243  Department for Communities and Local Government (2012) National Planning Policy Framework.  


  


Chapter 5: Infrastructure 151 


 

                                                           


  

should then inform a decision on whether there is a need for an overarching National Policy 
Statement to guide decisions on the design and location of new assets (Recommendation 9).  

In their response, the Government said it considered existing statutory and policy procedures to 
be adequate and did not believe an overarching National Policy Statement was necessary. The 
creation of the NIC now provides the opportunity to analyse systemic risks from a cross-sector 
perspective. The NIC should include in their assessment interdependencies between sectors, 
systemic issues, and their implications for infrastructure investment needs, as recommended in 
the CCC's briefing note to the NIC in March 2017.244  

Are actions taking place? 

Actions within the NAP are mostly complete or ongoing and focus on embedding climate 
change risks within key policy documents such as the Energy Security Strategy, operator 
business plans, and the series of National Policy Statements. There is also evidence that 
engineers are incorporating adaptation into project designs. 

One NAP action that had previously been delayed is now complete. Environment Agency 
guidance due in 2013 on building climate resilience into infrastructure was published in 
November 2015.245  

One action remains delayed. BEIS were due to review the adequacy of the NPS to deal with 
climate change for new energy infrastructure. The combination of shifting priorities and the 
inception of the NIC resulted in a decision to postpone the review process.  

HS2 Ltd has produced a Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience Policy, and is developing a 
Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience Strategy. These documents set out how the design, 
construction and operation of the proposed scheme will consider all relevant climate change 
risks and result in a climate resilient high speed rail network. HS2 is also considering 
interdependencies and cumulative impacts (see Section 5.4).  

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

Nationally significant infrastructure projects are taking into account climate change, in 
particular the risk of flooding. Less account is being taken of other climate hazards.  

An ASC commissioned review of Nationally Significant Infrastructure Projects in 2014 found that 
the primary climate risks that had been assessed were flood risk and sea level rise.246  

Since August 2010 there have been 75 new infrastructure projects listed on the 'register of 
applications', with a total of 48 granted in England.247  

• No project in England was granted planning permission with outstanding objections from 
the Environment Agency.  

• Of the 48 approved, 45 contained details of a Flood Risk Assessment (FRA). The three that did 
not were offshore developments.  

244  CCC (2017) Briefing note: the infrastructure needs of a low-carbon economy prepared for climate change.  
245  See: https://infrastructure.planninginspectorate.gov.uk/legislation-and-advice/advice-notes/  
246  HR Wallingford (2014) for the ASC. An assessment of applications for Nationally Important Infrastructure.  
247  ADAS (2017) for the ASC. Research to provide updated indicators of climate change risk and adaptation action in 

England. 


     

152 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


 

                                                           

https://infrastructure.planninginspectorate.gov.uk/legislation-and-advice/advice-notes/


  

‒ In 39 of the 45 FRAs the Examining Authority's recommendation report includes specific 
text stating that the EA was satisfied with the method, scope and findings contained 
within the FRA.  

‒ Evidence of the sequential and exception tests being applied was provided in the 
majority (33 out of 45) of applications where it was required.248  

Although flood risk is being taken into account, less account appears to be taken of other 
climate hazards, where the magnitude of impact is less certain but still could be significant. Such 
hazards include water scarcity, subsidence, windstorm, fog, lightning and surface water 
flooding. 

5.3 Resilience of infrastructure services 
This section provides an overarching assessment of infrastructure services in England. It 
covers policies and actions which overlap a number of infrastructure sectors, as well as 
synthesising our sector-level assessments (see Sections 5.3a to 5.3e).  


 

Is there a plan? 


 

Sector resilience plans, which consider the resilience of the UK’s 
critical infrastructure to a range of weather and non-weather 
related hazards, continue to be updated each year.  

The National Flood Resilience Review was published in 2016 
and examined the resilience of water, energy and fixed and 
mobile telecoms. It tested the robustness of Environment 
Agency flood mapping and gauged the vulnerability of 
infrastructure assets under an extreme flood scenario. Risks 
from river and tidal flooding were considered, but not from 
surface water flooding. 

Are actions taking 
place? 


 

The second round of Adaptation Reporting Power reports 
(ARP2) provided evidence of risk management actions being 
taken by organisations. Actions have largely focused on areas 
where evidence of climate change impacts is strongest, e.g. 
flooding and sea level rise. 

248  The Sequential Test ensures that the location of a new development is steered toward areas with the lowest 
probability of flooding. A planning authority should demonstrate, through evidence, that it has considered a 
range of options in the site allocation process, using the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment to apply the Sequential 
Test. If the Sequential Test demonstrates that there is no reasonable alternative site for a project in Flood Zones 
1 or 2, a project can be located in Flood Zone 3 subject to an Exception Test. 


  


Chapter 5: Infrastructure 153 


 

Green

Green

                                                           


  

Is progress being 
made in 
managing 
vulnerability?  

The ASC’s review of ARP2 concluded that in some sectors 
there is a lack of quantified evidence describing how 
adaptation actions taken have helped to reduce future 
vulnerability. However, in some sectors such as energy and 
water, vulnerability is being managed or is reducing.  

The National Flood Resilience Review (NFRR) assessed 
vulnerabilities across sectors and looked at protection to 1-
in-1000 year flood event as a resilience standard. It is not 
clear to what extent this standard of protection is in place in 
practice. The ASC has so far not been given access to the 
data the Government assembled for the NFRR on 
infrastructure resilience. 

Is there a plan? 

Sector resilience plans continue to be updated each year. These consider the resilience of 
the UK's critical infrastructure to the range of weather and non-weather related hazards 
set out in the National Risk Assessment.  

Resilience plans are updated each year and a public summary produced.249 The summary 
highlights: 

• Disruption to electricity supplies from flooding, storms and gales is a key risk – the plan 
prioritises assessment of flood risks to energy assets and flood protection enhancement 
programmes.  

• Disruption to power could result in the loss of mains water and affect the removal and 
treatment of sewage.  

• Priorities in the water sector include building a deeper understanding of the resilience of the 
water industry against power loss, and building a wider knowledge-base of the resilience of 
water supply assets to flooding.  

National Flood Resilience Review was set up following the severe flooding of winter 
2015/16. This tested the robustness of Environment Agency flood mapping and gauged 
the vulnerability of infrastructure assets within an extreme flood scenario. Risks from river 
and tidal flooding were considered, but not from surface water flooding.  

The NFRR examined the chance of widespread flooding in England, and assessed the exposure 
and resilience of key local infrastructure assets sited within an extreme flood outline (such as 
energy, water, transport and communications assets). The review identified 530 assets 
vulnerable to flooding, but provided no further information on the type or importance of the 
assets involved. The ASC welcomed publication of the review250 but also pointed out that the 
review was limited in its scope:  

• It failed to address our recommendation in our 2015 statutory report to Parliament on the 
UK’s National Adaptation Programme – for a new and comprehensive, long-term strategy to 
address the risk of flooding. This requires a ‘systems’ approach which considers all sources of 

249  Cabinet Office (2016) Summary of the 2015-16 Sector Resilience Plans. 
250  See: https://www.theccc.org.uk/2016/09/08/ccc-welcomes-national-flood-resilience-review-but-says-further-

action-needed-to-address-uk-flood-risk/  

Amber



     

154 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


 

                                                           

https://www.theccc.org.uk/2016/09/08/ccc-welcomes-national-flood-resilience-review-but-says-further-action-needed-to-address-uk-flood-risk/
https://www.theccc.org.uk/2016/09/08/ccc-welcomes-national-flood-resilience-review-but-says-further-action-needed-to-address-uk-flood-risk/


  

flooding and the full range of measures that should be used in combination to reduce the 
probability and consequences of flooding. The remit of the review was to focus on short-
term measures that could be taken to improve protection of key infrastructure sites, from 
river and coastal flooding, before the following winter.  

• The review ignored the risks posed by flooding from heavy rainfall overwhelming sewers – 
linked with the majority of flood damage in some recent events (for example, in 2007). 

• The review lacked specific detail about what will be done and by when. This means that it 
will be difficult to tell in the future whether the review has had any impact.  

• The report does not explain how the £700 million extra for flood risk management 
announced in the 2016 Budget will be spent. Of the £700 million, £350 million was held back 
to take forward the review’s findings. The review only explains how a small proportion of this 
will be spent - £15 million for additional temporary defences. Following further 
announcements in the Autumn Statement, around a quarter of the £700 million has yet to be 
allocated. See Chapter 4: People and the built environment.  

The Cabinet Office compiled a range of new datasets on the vulnerability of infrastructure assets 
to flooding as part of the NFRR. In February 2017, Baroness Brown wrote to the Cabinet Office 
minister to seek a meeting to discuss access to the data for the purposes of preparing this report. 
The Cabinet Office was unable to offer a meeting in the timeframe required for this report and 
the data were not provided.  

Are actions taking place? 

Actions within the NAP aimed at improving infrastructure resilience focus on where the 
evidence of climate change impacts are strongest. Reports prepared under the Adaptation 
Reporting Power provide evidence to assess risks and adaptation actions in most (but not 
all) important infrastructure sectors.  

Actions from the NAP are ongoing. These are discussed in more detail in the following sector-
specific sub-sections. As reported in 2015, the NAP contains no actions to address risk of 
shrink/swell subsidence, cold snaps, higher winds, fog and lightning – though some operators 
are taking these into account (e.g. airports).  

In our review of the second round of ARP we found extensive assessment of climate risks and a 
range of adaptation actions, although the level of evidence included varied across organisations 
and sectors. All reports from infrastructure operators contained risk management actions. 
Numerous case studies were provided in the ARP reports, including some data on the costs and 
benefits of different approaches.251  

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

There remains no published account of what has been achieved in recent years to improve 
the resilience of infrastructure systems. There is however evidence across some sectors 
that vulnerability to weather-related hazards is reducing.  

Although actions are taking place it is difficult to tell on a national basis to what extent 
vulnerability is reducing. The ASC's ARP review concluded that there is a general lack of 
quantified evidence describing how adaptation actions have helped to reduce present and 

251 ASC (2017) Adaptation Reporting Power: second round review. 


  

Chapter 5: Infrastructure 155 


 

                                                           


  

future vulnerability. Actions were not always reported consistently, so that tracking over time 
was difficult. In our analysis below we find that there is not yet a consistent basis for assessing 
vulnerability of infrastructure to climate risk. Nonetheless, there is diverse (and often disparate) 
evidence, concentrated in some sectors such as energy and water supply, indicating that 
vulnerability is being managed, as discussed in Sections 5.3a and 5.3b.  

In 2015 we recommended that the Cabinet Office should work with all infrastructure sectors as part 
of the next round of sector resilience plans in 2015 to develop consistent incident reporting, together 
with indicators of network resilience and performance, to allow improvements to be measured over 
time. The results should be presented by operators as part of their report under the third round of the 
ARP. Reporting as part of the third round of the ARP should be made mandatory (Recommendation 
10).  

In their response, the Government agreed to consider incident reporting in the review of the 
2015/16 sector resilience plans. The Cabinet Office has said that Lead Government Departments 
(LGDs) responsible for the UK's 13 critical national infrastructure sectors will produce annual 
Sector Security Resilience Plans (SSRPs). LGDs are required to provide an assessment of the 
effects of climate change on infrastructure risks; and are now also required to record incidents 
that are deemed significant - those which have had an impact on the ability of a sector to deliver 
essential services.252 Consultation on ARP3 is due later in 2017.  

RECOMMENDATION 19: Defra should review and strengthen its guidance for ARP3 to elicit more 
comparable data and conclusions about the adaptation of infrastructure. Use of consistent incident 
reporting and indicators of network resilience will allow performance to be tracked over time. 
Reporting protocols should be developed in partnership with sector organisations, the Cabinet Office, 
the National Infrastructure Commission, and the new National Infrastructure Resilience Council. 
(Owner: Defra. Timing: 2018). 

As mentioned earlier, the ASC has not been given access to the data that the Cabinet Office 
collected whilst updating sector resilience plans and in compiling the NFRR. The NFRR assessed 
vulnerabilities across sectors and looked at vulnerability to a 1-in-1000 year flood event. It is not 
clear to what extent this standard of protection is in place in practice. The ASC welcomes the de-
facto 1-in-1000 year flood protection standard set by the NFRR, which operators should use as a 
benchmark against which to assess themselves.  

The ASC would benefit from being able to see the summary statistics on infrastructure 
performance and vulnerabilities that the Cabinet Office holds, in order to be confident that 
progress in reducing vulnerability is being made across sectors.  

5.3a Energy generation, transmission and distribution 

Is there a plan? 


 

Ofgem's performance framework for gas and electricity 
companies incentivises investment in safe and reliable services. 
The Interruption Incentive Scheme (IIS) sets targets for the 
frequency and duration of both planned and unplanned 
interruptions (e.g. flooding). 

252  Correspondence with Cabinet Office.  


     

156 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


 

Green

                                                           


  

Are actions taking 
place? 


 

The cross-industry ETR 138 standard for network resilience 
against flooding has been reviewed by the Energy Networks 
Association, and now includes surface water flooding.  

Electricity generation and distribution companies are 
transparently taking steps to improve resilience to flooding of 
critical substations, and to water scarcity. National Grid is 
initially targeting investment to protect assets at highest risk 
(vulnerable to a 1:100 year flood), and providing interim mobile 
flood defences. A total investment of £173 million in substation 
flood protection and resilience measures was approved by 
Ofgem between 2010 and 2023. By 2015 £73 million had been 
spent. 

Is progress being 
made in 
managing 
vulnerability? 

 Progress in implementing flood protection measures 
appears to be on track with major substations serving 87% 
of customers due to have site-level protection measures 
implemented by 2020. However, residual risk will remain 
and disruption in severe storms and flood events can be 
expected.  

Is there a plan? 

Electricity and gas network performance, including outages related to weather, is 
regulated by Ofgem. Energy companies are penalised if they fail to meet interruption 
targets.  

Ofgem's performance standard for gas and electricity companies incentivises investment in safe 
and reliable services. The Interruption Incentive Scheme sets targets for the frequency and 
duration of both planned and unplanned, including weather-related, interruptions. Distribution 
Network Operators are rewarded if they meet or exceed these targets and are penalised if they 
fail to meet them.253 

The electricity and transmission and distribution companies have agreed business plans with 
Ofgem to address river and coastal flood risks by the early 2020s. 

Are actions taking place? 

The electricity network is recognised as being particularly exposed to climate hazards. 
Steps are being taken to improve levels of flood protection.  

Actions from the NAP are on-track or completed. For example, since 2015 the cross-industry 
ETR138 standard for network resilience for flooding has been reviewed by the Energy Networks 
Association. The standard now includes surface water flooding.254  

Energy UK reported in ARP2 that actions are being completed by generating companies.255 
National Grid is investing in flood mitigation work with the support of the regulator, Ofgem: 

253  Ofgem (2017) RIIO-ED1 Annual Report 2015-16. 
254  National Adaptation Programme action updates (2017). 
255  Energy UK (2015) Climate change risks and adaptation responses for UK electricity generation: a sector overview 

2015. 


  

Chapter 5: Infrastructure 157 


 

Green

Green

                                                           




• National Grid is undertaking work to reduce tidal and fluvial flood risk as part of a prioritised
investment programme. In their current regulatory price control period (from 2015 to 2023),
National Grid has allocated £153 million to network resilience, flooding and physical security.
Investment has been initially targeted towards assets at highest risk. Protection for all at-risk
sites is planned by 2021. Approximately £3 million has been invested in interim mobile flood
defences and supporting equipment.256

• A total investment of £173 million in substation flood protection and resilience measures
was approved by Ofgem between 2010 and 2023. By 2015 £73 million had been spent.257

Electricity generators use large volumes of water for cooling thermo-electric power plants. 
Abstractions and consumption of freshwater for power generation should fall in the 
coming decades as inland thermo-electric power plants re decommissioned, but could rise 
again in the longer-term under some energy-mix scenarios.258 Individual companies are 
taking action to improve resilience to future water scarcity. 

Higher temperatures coupled with a risk of reduced rainfall in summer months means an 
increasing risk of water scarcity, and increasing competition with other users for water. Box 5.1 
provides an example of the action being taken at one power plant. 

Box 5.1. Reducing power sector demand for water - Langage Energy 

Langage Energy Centre (owned by Centrica) is a modern Combined Cycle Gas Turbine power station 
near Plymouth in south-west England. Potential constraints on water availability due to water scarcity 
were identified as a risk in Centrica's climate adaptation report in 2011. In order to reduce demand for 
fresh water for steam generation, the Langage Energy Centre has initiated a programme of rainwater 
recovery using storage facilities on site. Approximately 12,000 m3 is collected per year and treated 
before being fed to the boilers. This leads to significant cost savings to the company as well as 
reducing the demand for fresh water.  

Source: Energy UK (2015) Climate change risks and adaptation responses for UK electricity generation: a sector 
overview 2015. 

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

Flood protection measures are being implemented by electricity supply, transmission and 
distribution companies over the coming decade, reducing the exposure of customers at 
risk of interrupted supply.  

Most weather-related customer outages are currently caused by high winds affecting 
distribution lines and substations. Customer minutes lost (CML) from wind-related incidents 
account for 42% of weather-related CML between 2006 and 2015 (Figure 5.2). Future projections 
of wind speed and direction are uncertain.  

Flooding incidents account for 8% of customer minutes lost. However, flooding is assessed as 
the greatest risk for transmission and distribution networks because it can affect substations 
which are generally single points of failure in the system. Moreover, flood events are typically of 

256  National Grid (2016) Second round adaptation response: National Grid Electricity Transmission UK. 
257  ENA (2015) Climate change adaptation reporting power second round. 
258  Byers et al. (2014) Electricity generation and cooling water use: UK pathways to 2050. Global Environmental 

Change 25: 16 -30. 

158 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 




longer duration and more difficult to recover from.259 The majority of investment in actions to 
address extreme weather impacts is to reduce flood risk. 

Electricity substations serving one million customers are due to benefit from flood protection 
measures by the end of the decade.260 Progress in implementing flood protection measures, as a 
result of ETR138 technical standards, generally appears to be on track with nearly 25% of 
customers reliant on major substations having already benefited since 2012. A further 62% are 
planned to be protected by 2020. However, by the end of the 2020s, climate change is expected 
to mean substations serving around half a million customers will fall in the high flood risk 
category.261 Further mitigating measures will be needed to keep the level of vulnerability from 
increasing again.262 

Residual risk of disruption during periods of severe weather remains. In February 2017 wind from 
storm Doris cut power to 231,000 homes across the south-east of England due to affected power 
lines. In December 2015 a major electricity substation flooded in Lancaster which led to power 
outages for 61,000 homes lasting over two days. The substation had been protected with new 
defences installed as part of the current upgrade programme, backed up with pumps and 
sandbags, but these failed to withstand the severe flooding. The absence of electricity led to a 
series of failures of other infrastructure, causing widespread disruption. Section 5.4 explores this 
further. 

Figure 5.2. Causes of energy customer minutes lost, 2006 - 2015, England and Wales 

Source: Data from National Fault and Interruption Reporting Scheme (NaFIRS).  
Notes: A total of 10.5 million customer minutes were lost across all incidents between 2006 and 2015. 

259  Correspondence with Energy Networks Association. 
260  Dawson, RJ., et al. (2016) UK Climate Change Risk Assessment Evidence Report: Chapter 4, Infrastructure. 
261  ASC (2014) Managing climate risks to well-being and the economy: ASC progress report 2014. 
262  Ibid.  


27%73%


Weather related incidents

Non-weather related incidents

Flooding (8%)

Snow and ice (5%)

Lightning (12%)

Wind (42%)

Other (32%)

Chapter 5: Infrastructure 159 


  

Overall, freshwater abstraction by power plants in England fell between 2000 and 2014. 

Over the period investigated, freshwater abstraction for power plants in England rose to a high 
of 3,499 million cubic meters (M m3) per year in 2001, falling to 1,085M m3 in 2006 and 2007 
before returning to 2,478M m3 in 2015.263 The lack of a detailed breakdown by use category (e.g. 
hydroelectric) means that these fluctuations cannot be satisfactorily explained. 

5.3b Public water supply 

Water abstraction sites, treatment works and pumping stations need to be located near to 
water courses. This means a large proportion of water company assets are in areas at risk 
of flooding. 

CCRA2 projected that by the 2080s the number of water treatment sites in the UK located in 
areas vulnerable to flooding is expected to rise by 33% from a baseline of 300 sites currently 
vulnerable, assuming a 4°C rise in global mean temperature.264 


 

Is there a plan?  


 

The current Asset Management Plan period (2015 - 2019) 
includes a new outcomes-based performance framework. The 
framework should allow operators the flexibility to deliver 
resilient services, at least cost. The new ‘resilience duty’ on 
Ofwat will take effect in 2019, and will formalise resilience as an 
objective for the industry. 

Water companies produce Water Resource Management Plans 
setting out how they will manage supply and demand balances 
over the next 25 years. In many cases companies are looking 
beyond this timescale.  

In March 2017 the Government consulted on a new Strategic 
Policy Statement (SPS) for Ofwat. This included a strong 
emphasis on demand management and water supply resilience. 

Are actions taking 
place? 


 

Water companies are taking action to improve the security of 
water supply and the resilience of assets to flooding. These 
actions include: sourcing alternative water supplies, drought 
plans, leakage reduction measures, raising electrical equipment, 
and providing standby generation for sites most vulnerable to 
power outage.  

Is progress being 
made in 
managing 
vulnerability?   

Measures to reduce water demand are being rolled out and 
there is evidence of reducing risk of water shortages, for 
example through improved water efficiency and reducing 
leakage. 

Individual companies have provided examples of where 
flood risk has been reduced in their ARP2 reports.  

263  Data from Defra, see ADAS (2017) for the ASC. Research to provide updated indicators of climate change risk and 
adaptation action in England. 

264  Dawson, RJ., et al. (2016) UK Climate Change Risk Assessment Evidence Report: Chapter 4, Infrastructure. 


     

160 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


 

Green

Green

Green

                                                           


  

Is there a plan? 

A planning framework is in place for Ofwat and the Government to secure long-term 
resilience in the sector.  

In March 2017 the Government consulted on a new Strategic Policy Statement for Ofwat.265 This 
draft statement sets out Defra's strategic priorities and objectives for Ofwat's regulation of the 
water sector in England, and how Ofwat's new primary duty to further resilience, introduced by 
the 2014 Water Act, will come into effect from 2019.  

• The resilience part of the draft SPS mostly addresses drought management, but also looks at 
the long-term and wider economic, social and environment benefits of water company 
investment.  

• There is also an emphasis on demand management and leakage as a way sustaining water 
resources and reducing customer bills.  

• The draft statement announced that the National Policy Statement on major water 
infrastructure will go ahead.  

The new outcomes-based performance framework and the emphasis on total expenditure 
('totex', capital expenditure plus operational expenditure) in this Asset Management Plan (AMP) 
period (AMP6, 2015-2019) should mean companies have the flexibility to deliver resilient 
services at least cost to customers. The Outcome Delivery Incentives (ODI) introduced in AMP6 
are underpinned by financial penalties and rewards.266 The majority of ODIs are related to 
weather either directly or indirectly.267  

Water companies are required to produce Water Resource Management Plans to set out 
how they will maintain a balance between water supply and demand over at least the next 
25 years. 

Water companies include measures to increase the resilience of assets in their business plans. 
They are required to look at least twenty-five years ahead in their next Water Resource 
Management Plan (WRMP) (draft versions are due to be released for consultation in early 2018). 
Some companies are taking the opportunity to look 100 years ahead and develop plans that can 
be adapted to respond to climate change as it unfolds (e.g. Thames Water, Box 5.2). The WRMP 
guidance requires companies to identify all the options available to them to meet demand over 
the long-term and show how they have decided which options to pursue.  


       

265  Defra (2017) The government's strategic priorities and objectives for Ofwat. 
266  See: http://www.pwc.co.uk/industries/water/insights/managing-amp6-incentives-penalties.html  
267  Severn Trent Water (2015) Future proofing: Severn Trent Water's climate change adaptation report. 


  


Chapter 5: Infrastructure 161 


 

                                                           

http://www.pwc.co.uk/industries/water/insights/managing-amp6-incentives-penalties.html




Box 5.2. Thames Water - Water Resource Management Plan 2019 

Water companies in England are developing their next Water Resource Management Plans, to be 
published in 2019, which aim to secure sustainable, affordable and resilient supplies of water for 
customers for at least the next 25 years. Thames Water's plan includes an 'adaptive pathways' approach 
to help navigate between the options that could contribute to closing a projected supply-demand gap 
of over 800 million litres per day by 2100. An adaptive pathways approach helps to cope with the 
inherent uncertainty in climate change and other factors such as population growth, by building in 
explicit flexibility and contingencies within long-term plans.  

• High, central and low range forecasts for population change, climate change, water demand and
water supply are combined to generate a total of 81 different future scenarios.

• An optimised portfolio of water resource options can then be created by testing which
combination of options performs best against these future scenarios to 2100.

• As the WRMP and investment plans are updated every five years, Thames Water will be able to
regularly assess which of the forecasted scenarios are most likely to materialise and whether the
preferred portfolio of options remains appropriate for meeting current and future demands.

Source: Correspondence with Thames Water. 

Are actions taking place? 

Nearly all actions in the NAP are on track or complete. Water companies have invested in 
resilience measures in AMP5. The water industry is the first sector to look at developing a 
comprehensive set of resilience metrics to assess vulnerability. 

Three actions have moved from being revised or delayed to being on-track: 

• Two drought exercises were conducted in 2016 by Severn Trent Water to test the
consequences of an extreme drought.

• New, albeit weak, standards and planning policies to promote sustainable drainage systems
(SuDS) came into effect in April 2015 (discussed further in Chapter 4: People and the built
environment).

• The risks associated with the dependence of water utilities on energy supplies are being
assessed. For example, Affinity Water has provided standby generation at the sites most
vulnerable to a power outage.

The NAP action that required water companies to form partnerships with Green Deal providers 
to offer joint energy and water retrofit programmes has been dropped due to cancellation of the 
Green Deal initiative.268  

During AMP5 water companies took action to improve the security of water supply and the 
resilience of assets to flooding. Examples include:  

• Improved leakage detection and reduction measures.

• Increased household metering.

• Prioritising investments on assets at higher flood risk.

268  The Green Deal was set up to help business and home owners employ more green technologies and make 
energy saving improvements to their properties. 

162 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


  

• Raising electrical equipment above predicted flood levels. 

• Implementing sustainable drainage systems. 

£374 million had been invested in resilience during the period 2008/09 to 2014/15 with Severn 
Trent accounting for 44% of this, followed by 16% from both Wessex and Anglian Water. 
Investment has ranged from £35.7 million in 2008/09 to £89.5 million in 2013/14. There was a 
drop in investment in 2014/15 to £54.9 million. A recent report from Water UK269 showed a 
strong rationale for further investment to reduce the risk of drought, which under an extreme 
scenario could cause billions of pounds in economic damages and unacceptable interruptions of 
water supply to consumers. 

Following a recommendation from Ofwat's Resilience Task and Finish Group,270 Water UK's Water 
and Wastewater Resilience Action Group (WWRAG) was set up in December 2016. The group will 
conduct research and develop metrics for resilience within the water industry.  

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

Measures to reduce water demand are being rolled out. There is evidence of a reducing 
risk of water shortages.  

Water companies' business plans in recent AMPs have, in general, increased the emphasis on 
water efficiency and reducing leakage: 

• Installation of water meters is progressing and overall water consumption per person271 is 
declining, albeit at a relatively slow pace and against a backdrop of population growth in 
many water-stressed areas (see Chapter 4: People and the built environment).  

• Leakage is down about a third from its 1994/95 high, to 3,084 megalitres per day (Figure 5.3). 
In 2014/15 most (73%) of water companies met or exceeded their leakage targets.272 
However, there has only been a small fall in leakage (0.1% per year on average) since 2012/13 
compared to a 10% fall in 2011/12.273 Ofwat made a commitment in its November 2016 
outcomes consultation to set stretching performance targets for reducing leakage further.274  

The Environment Agency, with support from Ofwat, has committed by 2020 to investigate a 
number of sites in England and Wales where there is a risk of damage to important conservation 
sites from over-abstraction of fresh water.275 Since 2008, 271 licences have been altered in order 
to preserve water in the natural environment. A plan to address the remaining 166 licences 
between 2017 and 2020 is in place (see also Chapter 3: Natural environment).276 


   

269  Water UK (2016) Water resources long term planning framework (2015-2065). 
270  See: http://www.ofwat.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/rpt_com20151201resiliencetaskfinish.pdf  
271  Correspondence with Environment Agency and Ofwat.  
272  ASC calculations. For data see: http://www.ofwat.gov.uk/regulated-companies/company-

obligations/performance/companies-performance-2014-15/  
273  Water companies (2017), see ADAS (2017) for the ASC. Research to provide updated indicators of climate change 

risk and adaptation action in England. 
274  Ofwat (2016) A consultation on the outcomes framework for PR19. 
275  Ofwat (2015) The case for change - reforming water abstraction management in England. 
276  Figures as of January 2017.  


  


Chapter 5: Infrastructure 163 


 

                                                           

http://www.ofwat.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/rpt_com20151201resiliencetaskfinish.pdf
http://www.ofwat.gov.uk/regulated-companies/company-obligations/performance/companies-performance-2014-15/
http://www.ofwat.gov.uk/regulated-companies/company-obligations/performance/companies-performance-2014-15/




Figure 5.3. Leakage reported by water companies in England and Wales 

Source: Ofwat (2017), see ADAS (2017) for the ASC. Research to provide updated indicators of climate change risk 
and adaptation action in England. 
Notes: As a percentage of distribution input, leakage accounts for approximately 23% of water use, using the 
latest available data between 2000 and 2012.  

A large proportion of water company assets are located in areas at risk of flooding. Several 
damaging flood incidents have occurred in recent years, though the industry maintains 
that impacts are rare. Water companies are continuing to invest in measures to improve 
resilience, as set out in their ARP reports.  
Whilst it is not possible to tell on a sector-wide basis whether services are becoming more or less 
reliable, individual companies have provided examples of where risk has been reduced. For 
example: 

• Yorkshire Water invested £0.5 million to provide flood protection to a critical raw water
pumping station near York. This investment proved its worth during the 2015 Boxing Day
floods, preventing the site from flooding and thus protecting drinking water supplies to
around 500,000 customers.277

• Severn Trent is investing £250 million in a scheme to provide Birmingham with an alternative
water supply. The current supply from Wales passes through terrain susceptible to landslides
and flood-related river scour, both of which are projected to increase over time due to
climate change.278

5.3c Ports and airports 

The ASC acknowledges that the risks to ports and airports from climate change differ, and 
thus the steps required to adapt to climate change may diverge in the future. At present 

277  National Adaptation Programme action updates (2017).  
278  Severn Trent Water (2015) Future proofing: Severn Trent Water's climate change adaptation report. 


 -

 1,000

 2,000

 3,000

 4,000

 5,000

 6,000


1992/31993/41994/51995/61996/71997/81998/91999/002000/012001/022002/032003/042004/052005/062006/072007/82008/92009/102010/112011/122012/132013/142014/152015/16Megalitres per day (Ml/d) 


164 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


  

their progress in adapting to climate change is similar, and as such they are assessed 
together in this report.  

Ports and harbours have a vital economic role, receiving 95% of the UK's imports and exports as 
well as more than 40 million passenger journeys per year.279 Half of UK port capacity is located 
on the east coast, where the risk of tidal surges is greatest. Potential sea level rise of around or 
beyond 50cm by 2080 is a particular concern, especially for some ageing port infrastructure. 
Flooding and physical damage to harbour infrastructure and transport connectivity in the 
hinterland will also become an increasing threat.280  

CCRA2 reported that the impacts of climate change on UK aviation are expected to be the least 
significant compared to other transport modes.281 The greatest challenges are currently due to 
extreme weather. 

The frequency of severe snow and ice is expected to decrease but not disappear altogether with 
a changing climate. Fog is a perennial issue, but the projections for fog impacts with climate 
change are limited and have low confidence. Flooding has caused impacts to airports even 
where they are not in the floodplain because of localised surface water flooding.  


 

Is there a plan? 


 

The 2014 Transport Resilience Review set out recommendations 
to improve the resilience of ports and airports. The 2016 
National Flood Resilience Review also considered transport 
infrastructure. However, resilience standards and performance 
is largely left to port and airport operators to determine. 
Gatwick and Heathrow Airports must produce operational 
resilience plans as a requirement of Civil Aviation Authority 
licence conditions. 

Are actions taking 
place? 


   

Airports are investing in flood resilience measures. A number of 
ports have assessed future sea level rise and are implementing 
improvements, including raising quay heights. Plans to improve 
flood defences at the Port of Immingham have been approved. 
Regional Port Resilience Groups have been established to 
promote closer working between ports and Local Resilience 
Forums. 

Is progress being 
made in 
managing 
vulnerability?   

Evidence in the ARP reports and in responses to recent 
severe weather events suggest vulnerabilities are 
beginning to be addressed, though most actions seem to be 
in response to recent events rather than being based on 
proactive risk management. Data regarding overall 
resilience are lacking. 

279  Department for Transport (2014) A review of the resilience of the transport network to extreme weather events. 
280  Dawson, RJ., et al. (2016) UK Climate Change Risk Assessment Evidence Report: Chapter 4, Infrastructure. 
281  Dawson, RJ., et al. (2016) UK Climate Change Risk Assessment Evidence Report: Chapter 4, Infrastructure. 

Amber

Amber


  


Chapter 5: Infrastructure 165 


 

Green

                                                           


  

Is there a plan? 

The Transport Resilience Review (TRR) in 2014 reviewed the impact of the 2013/14 winter 
storms, including for ports and airports. The 2016 National Flood Resilience Review also 
considered transport infrastructure. However, resilience standards and performance is, in 
general, left to individual port and airport operators to determine.  

The impacts of severe weather episodes on transport services are well documented, such as the 
winter storms of 2013/14 that prompted an independent review of road, rail, port and airport 
infrastructure in England and Wales.282 The TRR made 63 recommendations, all of which were 
accepted by the Government.283 Of the 63 recommendations, six were made directly for ports 
and airports.  

A new national Aviation Strategy (a revision of the 2013 strategy)284 is due provisionally in 
summer 2018. Details are still to be determined but it is likely to include consideration of the 
industry's resilience to climate change. The Department for Transport (DfT) will be engaging 
with the industry and other partners in the sector around the country. This engagement is likely 
to include a series of consultations and events over the next 18 months.285 

Ports and airports are owned and operated by private-sector companies. The Civil Aviation 
Authority (CAA) regulates the safety of airports but standards for the performance and resilience 
of port and airport operations are generally left to the operators to determine based on their 
commercial interests.  

However, as of 2014, Gatwick and Heathrow Airports are required by CAA licence conditions to 
produce operational resilience plans. Heathrow is also finalising a flood plan and surface water 
management plan, as part of a £16 million investment in surface water drainage.286  

Are actions taking place? 

Airports are investing in flood resilience measures, whilst a number of ports have assessed 
future sea level rise and are implementing quay improvements.  

Completed and ongoing actions in the NAP and TRR include:  

• DfT has promoted closer working between ports and Local Resilience Forums to understand 
risks and identify interdependencies. Regional Ports Resilience Groups have been 
established, and the port sector has come together to discuss risks and action planning.287  

• DfT is creating a tidal surge model for major ports, building on its 'Methodology for Assessing 
Resilience of Seaports' (MARS) port simulation model. At least twenty ports have volunteered 
to share their flood assessment methodologies. Asset management and business continuity 
practices have reportedly been updated. 

For the second round of ARP, 16 ports and airports submitted reports, although another six 
declined to participate. These reports received provide an update on actions taken since 2015:  

282  Department for Transport (2014) A review of the resilience of the transport network to extreme weather events. 
283  Department for Transport (2014) Government Response to the Transport Resilience Review. 
284  Secretary of State for Transport (2013) Aviation Policy Framework. 
285  National Adaptation Programme action updates (2017). 
286  Heathrow Airport (2016) Climate change adaptation and resilience progress report. 
287  National Adaptation Programme action updates (2017). 


     

166 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


 

                                                           


  

• Gatwick airport has invested £20 million in flood resilience measures. Following flood-related 
disruption in December 2013, the airport commissioned an independent review of its 
vulnerability to flooding and as a result is investing a further £10 million over the next two 
years.288 It has also provided a financial contribution towards the Environment Agency's 
Upper Mole Flood Alleviation Scheme which benefits both the airport and the surrounding 
area. Gatwick has also undertaken a Strategic Power Resilience review.  

• Heathrow airport has implemented actions to improve resilience to flood risk and snow 
events.289 For example, design standards address risks from water ingress and flooding to 
new buildings. Heathrow's flood plan also addresses risks of groundwater flooding to 
existing critical assets.  

• In February 2017, plans for a £7.4 million scheme to improve flood defences for the Port of 
Immingham were approved by Lincolnshire County Council. The plans include installing new 
outer lock gates at the port, replacing flood walls, and increasing the height of the existing 
defences to 6.1m above sea level. The new defences will significantly reduce the risk of 
flooding to the port. The Environment Agency is investing £4.5 million in the project.290 

• Teesport is in the process of renovating its quays. One quay is in the process of being raised 
by 50cm. The new quay is being built higher in large part to accommodate sea level rise and 
a potential for greater incidence of storm events. All future Teesport quay upgrades will be 
built to this standard or reflect best practice guidance at the time.291  

Is progress being made managing vulnerability? 

Vulnerabilities are beginning to be addressed, though most actions seem to be in 
response to recent events rather than being based on proactive risk management.  

The ARP reports show that vulnerabilities are beginning to be addressed. However, data 
regarding overall resilience are lacking across both the ports and airports sectors. This means it is 
difficult to tell whether lessons from recent weather events (especially the storms of 2013/14) 
have now been learned. More data are needed to assess the frequency of disruptions to port and 
airport operations from severe weather events.  

5.3d Roads and the rail network 

Is there a plan?  Network Rail has weather and climate resilience plans for each 
route. As of 2017, it has put in place an overarching weather 
resilience and climate change strategy to provide a framework 
for all work relating to weather resilience and climate change 
adaptation.  

Highways England reported under the second round of the 
Adaptation Reporting Power. Their report highlights where 
climate change will impact operations and networks and how 
they will address vulnerabilities as part of their 2015-2020 
delivery plan. 

288  Cabinet Office (2016) National Flood Resilience Review. 
289  Heathrow Airport (2016) Climate change adaptation and resilience progress report.  
290  See: http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-humber-39141063  
291  PD Teesport Ltd (2015) PD Teesport Climate Adaptation Assessment Update. 


  


Chapter 5: Infrastructure 167 


 

Green

                                                           

http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-humber-39141063


  

Are actions taking 
place? 


  

In the Autumn Statement in 2016 the Chancellor announced 
£150 million to improve transport flood resilience. 

Network Rail's adaptation actions have centred on embankment 
and bridge stability, and coastal defences.  

Highways England implemented works to reduce flood risk at 
124 flooding hotspots and culverts in 2015-16. National Flood 
Vulnerability Maps were updated in 2015, which has increased 
Highways England's understanding of risk to the Strategic Road 
Network from flooding, providing new evidence to inform 
decision making.  

Is progress being 
made in 
managing 
vulnerability?  

Fewer weather-related delays have been experienced on 
England's road and rail networks in recent years, but 
variability in annual delay data means that it is not yet 
possible to assess robustly whether this is a result of 
adaptation actions or other factors. 


 

The ASC acknowledges that the risks to road and rail networks differ and the two sectors face 
different challenges in adapting their assets. We recognise these differences in our assessment 
of Britain's land transport systems.  

Is there a plan? 

Weather resilience and climate change adaptation plans are in place for all of Network 
Rail's routes. In January 2017, Network Rail published a weather resilience and climate 
change strategy. The 2014 Transport Resilience Review is also still driving action to 
manage climate risks to the rail and road sectors.  

The Network Rail report for the second round of the Adaptation Reporting Power covered all of 
its routes. Network Rail's proposed adaptation actions were informed by recommendations from 
the Transport Resilience Review, and the Tomorrow's Railway and Climate Change Adaptation 
project (TRaCCA: 2014 - 2016).  

In June 2016 an internal audit of weather resilience and climate change activity within Network 
Rail raised a number of issues regarding ownership and governance. The audit identified the 
need for strategic targets and standardisation to manage risk, to inform decision making and 
prioritise work. In January 2017 Network Rail published a weather resilience and climate change 
strategy for 2017 to 2019. The new strategy aims to provide a framework within which all work 
relating to weather resilience and climate change adaptation is undertaken across Network Rail's 
routes. It intends to integrate activities to enhance weather resilience and adapt to future 
climate change into asset management processes. 

Highways England's ARP2 report focusses on steps to address vulnerabilities that form part of 
their delivery plan for the period 2015-2020.292293 

292  Highways England (2016) Climate Adaptation Risk Assessment Progress Update - 2016. 
293  Highways England (2015) Delivery Plan 2015-2020. 

Amber



     

168 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


 

Green

                                                           


  

Are actions taking place? 

All actions from the NAP relating to road and rail infrastructure are ongoing or complete. 
The Government is investing in specific projects to improve the flood resilience of the 
transport network.  

The latest update from DfT regarding implementation of the Transport Resilience Review294 
indicates that implementation actions continue. Many of the review's 16 sector-specific 
recommendations were dedicated to improving the resilience of the rail network. Actions taking 
place are discussed below.  

In the 2016 Autumn Statement the Chancellor allocated an extra £150 million to improve 
transport flood resilience. £100 million of this will be invested to make roads more resilient to 
flooding, including in areas that were affected by flooding in winter 2015/16. £50 million is to be 
invested in rail resilience projects, including in the Axe Valley and at Dawlish.295  

Site-specific measures, such as embankment stability and flood resilience, are being 
incorporated for each of Network Rail's routes and across the London Underground 
network.  

The actions in Network Rail's ARP report centre on embankment and bridge stability, flood 
resilience, coastal defences and managing lineside vegetation.296 This includes analysis to 
understand risk from bridge scour, rail buckling, and flooding of track and equipment, to help 
prioritise resilience interventions across the network.  

Network Rail has worked with the Energy Networks Association to pinpoint the electricity 
substations that Network Rail relies upon. Single points of failure are being prioritised for 
attention.  

The second phase of the Tomorrow's Railway and Climate Change Adaptation Programme 
concluded in 2016. The research programme delivered an assessment of climate change risks 
and developed a suite of decision support tools. Network Rail is working with the Rail Safety and 
Standards Board (RSSB) to implement the recommendations. 

Transport for London's ARP report describes their work to address overheating on the 
underground network and to reduce the risk of flooding (Box 5.3).  


       

294  Department for Transport (2014) A review of the resilience of the transport network to extreme weather events. 
295  See: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/autumn-statement-2016-transport-

announcements/autumn-statement-2016-transport-projects  
296  See: Network Rail route Weather Resilience and Climate Change Adaptation Plans, 

https://www.networkrail.co.uk/communities/environment/climate-change-weather-resilience/weather-
resilience/  


  


Chapter 5: Infrastructure 169 


 

                                                           

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/autumn-statement-2016-transport-announcements/autumn-statement-2016-transport-projects
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/autumn-statement-2016-transport-announcements/autumn-statement-2016-transport-projects
https://www.networkrail.co.uk/communities/environment/climate-change-weather-resilience/weather-resilience/
https://www.networkrail.co.uk/communities/environment/climate-change-weather-resilience/weather-resilience/




Box 5.3. Adapting London Underground for flooding and higher temperatures 

Heat mitigation activities: Temperatures on the London Underground (LU) are projected to continue 
to increase. LU uses UKCP09 projections for 2030 and 2050 when evaluating cooling requirements 
during line upgrades. The capacity of ventilation shafts on the Victoria line has recently been increased. 
LU has installed cooling units and mechanical chillers at two of the busiest stations on the line. LU is 
also investigating technologies and opportunities to reduce the amount of heat released by trains and 
to recover energy from braking.  

Flood Risk Review: Transport for London’s (TfL) Flood Risk Review was prompted by flooding of the 
Central Line in 2012 and in recognition of the recent impacts of flooding on mass transit systems in 
global cities, including New York and Paris. The review covered all assets and all sources of flooding:  

• Phase 1 of the project identified vulnerable assets including stations, track, shafts, signalling,
telecoms and sewers. Sites were categorised, leading to the prioritisation of ten sites. The
assessment used the UKCP09 projections.

• In Phase 2, TfL will review cost-effective mitigation options at priority sites, working with the
relevant Lead Local Flood Authorities. The project will make recommendations for the optimisation
of risk exposure in the future, by providing advice on the steps necessary to manage and mitigate
future flood events.

Source: Transport for London (2015) Climate change adaptation report: second round report. Jenkins et al. (2014) 
Transportation Research Part D, 30:1-9. 

Flood resilience and drainage is being improved on strategic and local roads. The 
Government has allocated funding to help improve local roads between 2015 and 2021. 
Additional funds were granted to authorities responsible for roads that were damaged 
during storms Desmond and Eva in December 2015.  

Climate change adaptation is considered as part of current standards, practices and procedures 
to ensure the resilience of Highways England's network. The Office of Road and Rail (ORR) are 
assessing Highways England's performance and delivery over the first 'road period' (2015 - 
2020).297 Flood mitigation is included in the performance assessment as an environmental KPI. 
Highways England addressed more high risk and very high risk flooding hotspots and culverts in 
2015/16 than 2014/15 (124 compared to 90).298 

Actions from the NAP and TRR for Highways England and local authorities are complete or 
ongoing. Actions have included:  

• Highways England conducted a flood risk assessment using updated EA flood risk maps and
other data to identify parts of the strategic road network that are at risk. This is
supplementing their log of actual flooding events.299

• A new methodology for prioritising drainage assets was piloted in 2015. This pilot has now
been extended nationally for completion in 2017. Climate change allowances will be
factored into future drainage design, to accommodate projected changes in the severity and
frequency in rainfall, via updated design manual requirements.

297  Road Periods and requirements were specified in the Road Investment Strategy. See: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/road-investment-strategy  

298  ORR (2016) Annual assessment of Highways England's performance. 
299  Highways England (2016) Climate Adaptation Risk Assessment Progress Update - 2016.  

170 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 

https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/road-investment-strategy


  

• Local transport agencies and local authorities (e.g. TfL and Newcastle City Council) are 
mapping risks and starting to use this information for prioritisation.300 TfL's Surface Highways 
Asset team is trialling porous asphalts, which can allow the infiltration of surface water, to 
assess their performance under London's road use conditions.301  

In the 2014 Autumn Statement the Government confirmed it would provide £6 billion between 
2015 and 2021 to improve local roads. The first £75 million from the new Challenge Fund grant 
was made available for local highway authorities in 2015/16. Successful bids to the Fund 
included road renewals, upgrades, and analysis of flooding and drainage problems. The 
Challenge Fund is available again in 2017. An additional £179 million was granted to those 
authorities with roads most damaged by storms Desmond and Eva. In 2015/16, £4.5 billion was 
spent on the maintenance of roads in England. Of this, £1 billion was spent on trunk motorways 
and 'A' roads, and £3.6 billion on local authority managed roads.302  

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

Fewer weather related delays have been experienced on England's road and rail networks 
in recent years (Figure 5.4), but variability in annual delay data means that it is not yet 
possible to assess robustly whether this trend will continue and what the causes might be.  

There is evidence that when major failures occur Network Rail seeks to improve resilience as part 
of reinstatement projects. Their Weather Resilience and Climate Change Strategy states that 
Network Rail is committed to adaptation action at both the construction and asset renewal 
phase in order to provide resilience in the most cost-effective manner. When weather events 
cause asset failure, such as the collapse of a sea wall or scour damage to a bridge, Network Rail 
will commit to 'build back better' rather than replace like for like. The vulnerability of Network 
Rail's Western route through Dawlish was dramatically highlighted in 2014 when, following 
heavy storms, the original Brunel seawall was breached. The wall took two months to reinstate, 
though the risk of failure has not been eliminated. Network Rail has proposed constructing a 
new wall that would be more resilient. Climate scenarios from UKCP09 have been taken into 
account in the design. 

Although there is evidence of site-specific measures being incorporated for each of Network 
Rail's eight routes in Great Britain, reductions in vulnerability are not strongly evident across the 
railway network. There is a large legacy of ageing infrastructure, much of which was not 
designed to modern engineering standards. Both the industry and the regulator recognise that 
historic investment has been insufficient to deliver acceptable levels of resilience. There is 
therefore a backlog that will require sustained investment over several decades to address. 


     


300  For example Newcastle City Council. See: 
https://www.newcastle.gov.uk/sites/default/files/wwwfileroot/environment-and-waste/climate-change-and-
energy-saving/climate_change_impacts_-_evidence_for_newcastle_upon_tyne.pdf 

301  Transport for London (2015) Climate change adaptation report: second round report.  
302  Department for Transport (2017): Road conditions in England: 2016. 


  


Chapter 5: Infrastructure 171 


 

                                                           

https://www.newcastle.gov.uk/sites/default/files/wwwfileroot/environment-and-waste/climate-change-and-energy-saving/climate_change_impacts_-_evidence_for_newcastle_upon_tyne.pdf
https://www.newcastle.gov.uk/sites/default/files/wwwfileroot/environment-and-waste/climate-change-and-energy-saving/climate_change_impacts_-_evidence_for_newcastle_upon_tyne.pdf




Figure 5.4. Annual delays on the strategic road network, and rail network 

a) Strategic road network

b) Rail network

Source: Highways Agency and Network Rail (2017), see ADAS (2017) for the ASC. Research to provide updated 
indicators of climate change risk and adaptation action in England. 
Notes: Data are for financial years i.e. data begin in April 2006 and end in March 2016. Delays on roads are lane 
impact durations. A lane impact results from any incident where the capacity (of one or more running lanes) has 
been reduced or where there is deemed to be a risk to a road user. An impact may or may not result in a full 
carriageway or motorway closure. A lane impact can relate to a single lane that has been closed for a period of 
time. A lane impact is recorded as one impact where it affects one or both sides of the carriageway i.e. it is not 
directional. Network Rail delay data only relate to Network Rail delays not those attributed to other rail 
organisations.  


0

20,000

40,000

60,000

80,000

100,000

120,000

140,000

160,000


2006/72007/82008/92009/102010/112011/122012/132013/142014/152015/16Minutes Wind


Snow / Ice /
Freezing Rain

Heavy rain

Flood


 -

 500,000

 1,000,000

 1,500,000

 2,000,000

 2,500,000


2006/72007/82008/92009/102010/112011/122012/132013/142014/152015/16Minutes Wind


Subsidence



Snow


Lightning



Heat Fog


Flood



Cold


Adhesion

172 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


  

5.3e Digital and ICT infrastructure 

Is there a plan?   The National Flood Resilience Review identified critical 
vulnerabilities in digital communications networks and ICT 
infrastructure. TechUK's ARP report provides an outline of where 
further scrutiny should be focused. There is no apparent plan by 
industry or Government to address these vulnerabilities.  

Are actions taking 
place? 


 

The National Adaptation Programme contains no specific 
actions relating to ICT, despite the sector being recognised at 
the time as critical to the operation of other infrastructure 
sectors as well as the economy in general. 

There is some evidence of actions taking place in response to 
recent weather events. These have included companies 
identifying assets at highest risk of flooding, installing flood 
defences, and engaging with the Cabinet Office-led Electronic 
Communications Resilience and Response Group (EC-RRG). 

Is progress being 
made in 
managing 
vulnerability?  

Whilst the ASC has extracted some evidence from two ARP 
reports (techUK and EC-RRG), as in the ASC's 2015 report to 
Parliament, there is insufficient evidence available from the 
industry or the Government to assess the resilience of the 
sector. 

Is there a plan? 

The NFRR assessed the vulnerability of digital and ICT infrastructure to flooding and 
identified some areas of vulnerability. TechUK's ARP report suggests where further 
scrutiny should be focused. As yet there is no apparent plan by the industry or the 
Government to address the vulnerabilities found.  

TechUK is the UK trade association for the IT, telecoms and electronics industries. Their ARP 
report explores the climate change readiness of the UK's data centres and also includes their 
assessment of fixed line and mobile communications. It sets out some of the approaches 
deployed already within the sector to identify, manage and mitigate risks, details of actions 
taken following high impact events, and provides an outline of where further scrutiny should be 
focused, to ascertain potential vulnerabilities and to prioritise action. The Electronic 
Communications Resilience and Response Group also submitted a report in June 2017 that 
included plans to enhance flood resilience.303 However, BT and Ofcom declined to take part in 
ARP2.  

Digital and ICT communications providers compete on the basis of reliability and there are legal 
requirements for telecoms providers to take steps to protect the security and resilience of their 
networks and services. Companies appear to be considering climate change and do so as part of 
managing their own business risks (e.g. Sky plc is investing in the resilience and robustness of 

303  Correspondence with Department for Culture, Media and Sport.  

Amber



Grey  


Chapter 5: Infrastructure 173 


 Red

                                                           


  

infrastructure;304 Vodafone Group plc considers climate change in its Sustainable Business 
Report.305) 

Recent events have shown that the sector can be subject to major disruption and cascading 
impacts including as a result of failures in other sectors. As yet, there is no evidence that the 
industry and Government have a plan to assess fully and address these vulnerabilities.  

RECOMMENDATION 20: Defra should ensure that all major infrastructure operators in the digital 
and ICT sector take part in the third round of ARP. This will ensure that the sector has considered risks, 
and that operators, individually and collectively have developed risk management plans. (Owner: 
Defra. Timing: 2019). 

Are actions taking place? 

The NAP contains no specific actions relating to digital and ICT, despite the sector being 
recognised as critical to the operation of other infrastructure sectors, as well as the 
economy in general. The next NAP should prioritise actions that are needed to enhance 
the resilience of the sector. Some actions are taking place by individual companies 
following recent events.  

TechUK reported that generally: 

• Data centres have back-up generators to mitigate the risk of disruption to mains power.  

• Fixed line operators assess risks to masts in high winds and strengthen those at highest risk.  

• Mobile networks can be re-routed if flooding or other disruption occurs, provided there is 
sufficient coverage. However, in some cases there is limited information, even within 
operators, on where mobile connections are, hindering ability to re-route services effectively.  

The EC-RRG is coordinating industry, government and Ofcom activity on infrastructure resilience 
issues in the telecommunications sector. Their adaptation report for ARP2, compiled in response 
to an ASC evidence session held with sector representatives, noted that various service providers 
have reviewed the likelihood of flood damage to critical assets in a 1:1000 year flood event (as 
specified by the NFRR). EC-RRG reported that temporary defences were in place by end of 2016 
and all participating companies have plans in place for permanent defences.  

A recent event impacting York and Leeds in December 2015 (Box 5.4) appears to have been a 
'wake-up call' for the industry. The event was severe enough to cause three separate outages 
affecting communications: the Vodafone network, a major BT exchange, and North Yorkshire 
Police's internal radio network. After the event the following actions took place: 

• BT undertook a risk assessment to identify how to protect its flooded exchange in the future. 

• BT engaged with the EC-RRG to ensure that lessons from these incidents are applied more 
widely. 

• Vodafone is working closely with EA and Cabinet Office as part of the NFRR, and has carried 
out a comprehensive assessment of their infrastructure resilience against new EA flood 
maps.  

• In Leeds, Vodafone has spent over £1 million improving the resilience of the site that 
flooded, including building a flood wall around the perimeter.  

304  Sky plc (2016) Annual Report 2016 principal risks and uncertainties. 
305  Vodafone Group Plc (2016) Sustainable Business Report 2015 -16. 


     

174 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


 

                                                           




• Vodafone has also worked closely with the emergency services to make sure engineers can
access sites during incidents.

Box 5.4. Severe weather impacts on communications infrastructure - York and Leeds, December 2015 

Over the Christmas weekend in 2015 severe flooding affected large parts of the UK, and Yorkshire in 
particular. 

The event was severe enough to cause multiple, concurrent failures: 

• In Leeds, flooding affected the Vodafone network and caused intermittent disruption to voice and
data services. The flooded site also supported North Yorkshire Police's non-emergency 101 phone
line. This was out of action for three hours at the height of the floods. Calls had to be re-routed via
an alternative number.

• BT's York exchange was also flooded, which affected landline services, including broadband, in the
local area. This exchange had never flooded before and was not considered to be at risk.

• North Yorkshire Police's internal radio network was affected after flooding occurred at several sites.
Emergency response vehicles provided a mobile base so that emergency services could
communicate with each other.

Source: Tech UK (2016) The UK's Core Digital Infrastructure: Data Centres Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience. 

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

Despite useful information in the two ARP reports from the sector, as in the ASC's 2015 
report to Parliament, there is insufficient evidence from the industry or Government with 
which to assess the resilience of the sector. The observed impacts of Storms Desmond and 
Eva suggest that vulnerabilities exist, and more action is needed to assess the scale of 
these vulnerabilities and to put plans in place to address them.  

ICT companies have provided information on network vulnerability and remedial action to the 
Cabinet Office as part of the NFRR. The NFRR assessed the vulnerability of digital and ICT assets 
to flooding, and committed the sector to develop and implement improvements to resilience in 
line with actions already taking place in the energy and water sectors. The data collected as part 
of the NFRR were requested by the ASC to help compile this and other sections of our report, but 
this request was declined.  

Given ICT’s pervasive and ‘unseen’ interdependence with all other infrastructure systems, and its 
role in underpinning business activities and public safety, it is crucial to assess the vulnerability 
of the UK’s ICT networks and systems, and the interdependencies, particularly with the energy 
sector in the context of a changing climate.  

Tech UK reported306 that there needs to be: 

• More information on interdependencies, in particular the need to consider whether digital
communication systems are sufficiently resilient to power failures.

• More data on how often operators reassess flood risks.

306  Tech UK (2016) The UK's Core Digital Infrastructure: Data Centres Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience. 

Chapter 5: Infrastructure 175 


  

5.4 Infrastructure interdependencies 

Is there a plan? 


 

The Cabinet Office's annual resilience reviews have identified 
and considered specific vulnerabilities to interdependent 
networks. However, there is no national assessment of 
interdependency risk, nor a comprehensive plan to address 
systemic risks. 

Are actions taking 
place? 


  

Members of the Infrastructure Operators Adaptation Forum 
including water companies are working to address the 
resilience of networks on which they depend, for example, by 
increasing resilience to power supply outages and the 
availability of water resources under drought conditions.  

New infrastructure projects are considering interdependencies. 
The most comprehensive example is HS2.  

Local Resilience Forums feel that better engagement is needed, 
on assets and vulnerabilities, between LRFs and infrastructure 
operators. 

Is progress being 
made in 
managing 
vulnerability?  

Recent events have further highlighted vulnerabilities 
caused by losses in electricity and ICT (e.g. the Lancaster 
floods in 2015). 

The NFRR assessed vulnerabilities across sectors and is 
looking at protection to a 1-in-1000 year flood event as de-
facto standard. However it is not clear to what extent this 
standard of protection is in place in practice. Information 
and data to measure progress in addressing vulnerabilities 
are not available. 

Is there a plan? 

The Cabinet Office annual resilience reviews have identified and considered specific 
vulnerabilities to interdependent networks and have set up the National infrastructure 
Resilience Council. However, there is no national assessment of interdependency risk, nor 
a comprehensive plan to address systemic risks. 

The Cabinet Office's 'annual resilience review' process has since been subsumed into the SSRP 
process (see Section 3.2). Three review cycles are now complete. The second review cycle 
focused on critical interdependencies and the results led to a series of actions and ministerial-
level meetings with regulators and operators, although there is no public account of these. The 
Cabinet Office has said that many of the actions identified in the review have been completed or 
have been incorporated into other programmes of work.  

The Cabinet Office set up the National Infrastructure Resilience Council (NIRC) in January 2017, in 
response to the NFRR, to enable infrastructure operators and corresponding government 
departments to fulfil their responsibilities for both planning for and supporting the response to 
emergencies arising from all risks. The Council has met several times and is chaired on a rotating 
basis by sector representatives. 

Amber

Amber

Amber



     

176 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


   


Are actions taking place? 

Some infrastructure operators are addressing interdependencies, which are also being 
considered in some infrastructure projects.  

The NAP includes a specific objective to minimise the risk of cascade failures, where a loss of 
service in one network has knock-on consequences more widely. Ten (11%) of the NAP actions 
for the infrastructure theme support this objective. All actions except one are complete or on 
track.  

• Since 2015 Infrastructure UK has published new guidance on interdependencies and systems 
thinking.  

• Members of the Infrastructure Operators Adaptation Forum (IOAF) are addressing risks 
associated with interdependencies between infrastructure networks. For example actions are 
ongoing to increase water company resilience to power supply outages. 

• The Climate Ready Support Service, which had responsibility for some of the relevant NAP 
actions, ended in March 2016. However, some actions are being continued by EA's Climate 
Adaptation Team in support of their own climate change adaptation commitments. The IOAF 
working group on interdependencies is aiming to produce guidance on how best to assess 
the risks of cascading failure, following a review of different approaches that are currently 
used. 

• New infrastructure projects are considering interdependencies. The most comprehensive 
example is HS2 Ltd. It has assessed the risks faced from climate change impacts on 
interdependencies, such as the rail network, electricity supply, and ICT. This included an 
analysis of the locations at highest risk along the HS2 route. Engagement with infrastructure 
operators helped to identify key interdependencies. Recommendations for the design of HS2 
include considering: increased redundancy within the system; collaborative working 
arrangements with local infrastructure operators; the use of ‘what if’ scenarios; and the use of 
common standards across sectors/operators where possible.307  

• The Department for Transport is working to identify bridges that could fail in a severe flood 
event and be a single point of failure for other infrastructure networks (for example by 
carrying telephone or power cables, or gas pipelines).308 

The ASC's review of ARP2 found that strategic interdependencies were often stated in reports by 
operators but with little explanation or detail included. Many operators have considered their 
interdependencies, and continue to take part in cross-sector forums such as the IOAF, but the 
consequential adaptation actions are not evident.  

The National Infrastructure Resilience Council aims to:309 

• Improve co-operation, co-ordination and information sharing between Government and 
infrastructure operators and owners. 

• Sponsor co-operation and information sharing between sectors. 

• Develop cross-sector proposals on infrastructure resilience. 

• Examine and document interdependencies between sectors. 

307  Correspondence with HS2 Ltd.  
308  Correspondence with Department for Transport.  
309  Correspondence with Cabinet Office.  


  


Chapter 5: Infrastructure 177 


 

                                                           


  

We recommended in our review of ARP2 that for ARP3 more advice and support is given to 
organisations to help them assess, describe and present the risks from interdependencies. 
Leadership is required to take the necessary cross-sectoral overview. It could be appropriate for 
either the new National Infrastructure Resilience Council or the Cabinet Office to undertake 
studies, take an oversight role in relation to the management of interdependencies, and report 
on progress. 

Infrastructure operators and emergency planners remain concerned that they do not have 
the information they need about other networks, and their interdependencies, to be able 
to plan for emergencies effectively.  

The UK Regulators Network (UKRN)310 provides the means to share lessons but could be doing 
more to drive and co-ordinate action. Our previous recommendation in 2015 was accepted by 
the UKRN. This was for the UKRN to ensure that proportionate and cost-effective approaches to 
increasing resilience and reducing climate change risks are in place for the economically-regulated 
sectors. A cross-sector review of reward and penalty regimes should be conducted in time for the 
ASC's next progress report in 2017, to ensure there are sufficient incentives in place for operators to 
manage severe weather incidents effectively and preserve services where possible (Recommendation 
13). UKRN produced a questionnaire to gather information on the resilience of assets and the 
approach to performance penalties, and provided us with the results in June 2017.311 UKRN 
members (Ofgem, CAA, Ofwat, Ofcom and ORR) have shared approaches to monitoring and 
promoting appropriate asset protection and investment policies by regulated utilities. 
Regulators each have a range of existing monitoring requirements in place to scrutinise the 
performance of regulated businesses. A more detailed review of incentives has not yet been 
implemented. However, UKRN has stated that they are committed through their infrastructure 
and resilience network to continue to share best practice to promote and monitor good asset 
management.  

In 2015 we also recommended that information on asset and network resilience should be shared 
between operators of interdependent assets, and with Local Resilience Forums. The Cabinet Office 
should facilitate the piloting of secure information sharing arrangements within a year of the report’s 
publication. Based on the results, the Cabinet Office should consider introducing in Parliament a legal 
duty to co-operate and share such information. (Recommendation 12). This was rejected by 
Government, who argued that the Civil Contingencies Act places a duty on Category 1 and 2 
responders to share information to enhance co-ordination, and the Green Book Guidance 
provides tools to identify and manage interdependencies that affect resilience in projects.312 

A survey of 17 Local Resilience Forums (LRF)313 commissioned by the ASC in March 2017 re-
iterated previous findings we presented in our 2014 report.314 LRF coordinators felt that there 
was reluctance from some utility and telecommunication providers to share information about 
their infrastructure due to commercial sensitivities. A few of those interviewed also stated that 
access to data on Critical National Infrastructure was restricted, and that this was a barrier. 
Telecommunications were cited by four interviewees, out of the sample of 17, as being 
particularly challenging to engage with, as they did not prioritise engagement with LRFs. For 
more results from this survey see Chapter 4: People and the built environment. 

310  See: http://www.ukrn.org.uk/  
311  Correspondence with UKRN. 
312  HM Treasury (2015) Valuing infrastructure spend: Supplementary guidance to the Green Book. 
313  Jacobs (2017) for the ASC. Local Resilience Forum 2017 Interviews. 
314  ASC (2014) Managing climate risks to well-being and the economy: ASC progress report 2014.  


     

178 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


 

                                                           

http://www.ukrn.org.uk/


  

On the whole, there was a perceived need to develop stronger connections between LRFs and 
other stakeholders (both public and private) so that there is a meaningful engagement and 
exchange of information.  

This exchange should not be limited to LRFs. It is important that information sharing and 
engagement occurs between infrastructure operators with co-dependent networks.  

RECOMMENDATION 21: To assist with the assessment and management of interdependencies the 
Cabinet Office should review information sharing arrangements between infrastructure operators, as 
well as between operators and Local Resilience Forums. Further steps may be necessary to ensure 
that the legal duties within the Civil Contingencies Act are being fulfilled in practice, including the 
duty for Category 1 and Category 2 responders to cooperate and share information. (Owner: Cabinet 
Office. Timing: 2018). 

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability?  

Recent events have further highlighted vulnerabilities caused by losses in electricity and 
ICT. The Cabinet Office annual resilience reviews have identified and considered specific 
vulnerabilities to interdependent networks. The NFRR assessed vulnerabilities across 
sectors using 1-in-1000 year flood event as de-facto standard. It is not clear to what extent 
this standard of protection is in place. Data to measure progress in addressing 
vulnerabilities are not available. 

Common standards of resilience would help with investment planning, and help emergency 
planners better understand the potential for service disruption arising from assets in an area.  

The Cabinet Office rejected our 2015 recommendation to confirm that the services provided by all 
critical national infrastructure (CNI) are now resilient to a 1-in-200 year flood event. The Cabinet 
Office should agree, for a wider range of climate risks, sector resilience standards that are in the 
national interest and see they are implemented. This process should inform the 2016 round of sector 
resilience planning. (Recommendation 11). Nonetheless, the NFRR assessed vulnerabilities across 
sectors and looked at a 1-in-1000 year flood event as de facto standard of protection.  

It is not clear however, if this standard of protection in place. Data to measure progress are not 
available and recent events, such as flooding in Lancaster in December 2015 (Box 5.5), have 
shown that cascading failures of infrastructure can occur in practice.  


 

Box 5.5. Collapse of Lancaster's critical infrastructure networks 

In December 2015 intense rainfall caused flooding in many parts of Lancaster when surface drainage 
networks, including new underground storm water drains, were overwhelmed. This led initially to 
flooded roads, bridges, homes and businesses. The most devastating impact however was when 
floodwater entered a major electricity substation, despite pumps, sandbags, extra emergency pumps, 
and new defences built in 2007 that were designed to withstand a 1-in-100 year flood event. Electricity 
supplies were lost for over 30 hours in approximately 61,000 homes in Lancaster and the neighbouring 
towns of Carnforth and Morecombe. This led to secondary infrastructure failures and widespread 
disruption across Lancaster and the surrounding areas, including: 

• Failure of home broadband and public internet services. 

• Mobile phones were inoperable. 


  


Chapter 5: Infrastructure 179 


 


Box 5.5. Collapse of Lancaster's critical infrastructure networks 

• Roads which were unaffected by flooding had no streetlights or traffic lights.

• Petrol stations ran out of fuel.

• Trains were delayed or cancelled.

• Problems occurred with drinking water supplies.

• Outpatient and non-emergency appointments at the hospital were cancelled with military and
mountain rescue teams helping to transport medical staff to and from work.

• Lancaster University and local schools had to close temporarily.

Source: Weather magazine (January 2017) A perfect storm? The collapse of Lancaster's critical infrastructure 
networks following intense rainfall on 4/5 December 2015.  

5.5 Conclusions on NAP objectives and actions 
Table 5.1 summarises progress, as far as can be established, against the objectives listed within 
the NAP for the infrastructure theme. In general, the objectives describe a number of processes 
by which the resilience of national and local infrastructure should be improved. 

In 2017 we received updates on 95 actions, including four new actions since 2015:315 

• A further 17 (18%) of actions are now complete, bringing the total to 56%.

• The majority (69%) of the remaining actions are not time-bound.

• An action relating to the Green Deal has now been dropped after the Green Deal was
cancelled.

Table 5.1. NAP objectives and a summary of progress for the infrastructure theme 

NAP objective Commentary on progress 

Objective 7. To ensure 
infrastructure is located, 
planned, designed and 
maintained to be resilient to 
climate change, including 
increasingly extreme weather 
events. 

60 (62%) of the NAP actions for the Infrastructure theme fall under 
this objective. All but two of the actions are complete or on track. 

Overall, new Nationally-Significant Infrastructure Projects appear to 
be taking account of the primary climate risks, particularly flooding 
and sea level rise. Less account is taken of projected changes in 
water scarcity, subsidence, and surface water flooding. 

315 An annex to this report presents the current status of each action, see https://www.theccc.org.uk/publications/ 

180 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 

https://www.theccc.org.uk/publications/




Table 5.1. NAP objectives and a summary of progress for the infrastructure theme 

NAP objective Commentary on progress 

Objective 8. To develop 
regulatory frameworks to 
support and promote a resilient 
and adaptive infrastructure 
sector. 

13 (14%) of the NAP actions for the theme support this objective, 
all of which are complete or on track. 

Action by regulators is more apparent in some sectors than others, 
most notably in the electricity transmission and distribution sector 
where Ofgem has worked with the industry to develop a 
comprehensive approach. 

Ofwat is continuing to work with the water companies and Water 
UK is looking to develop resilience metrics. DfT continues to discuss 
the Office of Rail and Road’s role in monitoring climate change 
resilience for rail's Control Period 6 (2019-2024).  

Objective 9. To better 
understand the particular 
vulnerabilities facing local 
infrastructure from extreme 
weather and long term climate 
change to determine actions to 
address the risks. 

12 (13%) of the NAP actions fall under this objective, all of which 
are complete or on track. The use of SuDs in new development is a 
material consideration as part of a revised planning policy, which 
came into effect in April 2015 (discussed further in Chapter 4).  

The primary focus to date has been on improving understanding of 
climate change, and the resilience of critical national infrastructure. 
The Environment Agency's Climate Ready Support Service ended in 
March 2016.  

Objective 10. To develop 
understanding and promote 
expertise in managing 
interconnected and 
interdependent services, to 
minimise the risks of cascade 
failures which could be 
exacerbated by climate change 
and identify how systems 
thinking can support this 
objective. 

Ten (11%) of the NAP actions support this objective. All actions 
except one are complete or on track.  

Since 2015 Infrastructure UK has published new guidance on 
interdependencies and systems thinking.  

The Infrastructure Operators Adaptation Forum continues to share 
good practice between sectors and is working on addressing risks 
arising from interdependencies between infrastructure networks.  

The one action which has been revised and delayed is for Climate 
UK to address interdependencies via regional or sub-regional 
analysis, knowledge sharing, and via capacity building activity. Six 
out of nine Climate UK regional partnerships closed in 2016 when 
funding from central Government came to an end. Whilst Climate 
UK is no longer working on this, it is still a priority for the IOAF.  

Chapter 5: Infrastructure 181 




Chapter 6: Business 




Key messages 

Context 

Climate change risks are increasing for business and industry in England, with flooding and extreme 
weather events likely to pose the greatest challenge. Through international supply chains, distribution 
networks and global markets, businesses are also exposed to risks from extreme weather, flooding and 
water shortages around the world. Climate change presents opportunities to business through 
increases in demand for some existing goods and services, including those specifically related to 
adaptation, and the emergence of opportunities for new products and services. Risks caused by 
disruption to national and local infrastructure services are discussed in Chapter 5. 

Summary of progress 

The environmental, social and governance (ESG) performance of listed companies is becoming a 
mainstream concern within the investment community and many leading companies now report 
on their assessment of climate change risks and opportunities. Yet action to reduce the direct 
impacts of extreme weather is less apparent, as is the management of climate risks within supply 
chains, especially amongst small and medium sized enterprises. The next NAP needs to restate 
the Government's objectives and priorities for adaptation within the business sector in light of 
the support programmes that were in place, such as the Environment Agency's Climate Ready 
Support Service, coming to an end in 2016. 

Overview of progress 

Adaptation priority Is there a plan? Are actions taking 
place? 

Is progress being 
made in managing 

vulnerability? 

1. Business impacts
from extreme weather 

2. Supply chain
interruptions 

3. Water demand by
industry 

4. Business
opportunities from 
climate change 

Note: See Annex 2.1 for a description of the criteria used to assign Red-Amber-Green (RAG) scores. 

There have been some positive developments in the business sector that could in time make a 
difference: 

• New initiatives to support the uptake of property-level flood resilience (PLR) measures by
businesses are underway in response to the severe weather events in December 2015 and

Amber Amber

Green

Amber Amber

Amber

Amber

Amber

Chapter 6: Business 183 

Green

Green Green

Green




Key messages 

January 2016. Actions include the development of recognised standards and certification for PLR 
products and services. 

• In December 2016, the British Insurance Brokers' Association (BIBA) launched a new flood
insurance scheme for SMEs to help more businesses obtain affordable flood insurance, including
those affected by recent flood events. Unlike Flood Re - the subsidised flood insurance scheme for
households - pricing and terms under the BIBA scheme encourage investment in resilience
measures and will allow the costs of flood resilient repairs to be included in claims. This is a
welcome development that should be mirrored by Flood Re in the household sector.

• The UK introduced new Non-Financial Reporting Regulations in December 2016, requiring
large companies to report from next year on the materiality of non-financial risks. A Task Force on
Climate-related Financial Disclosures, reporting to the Financial Stability Board, has also
consulted on a series of recommendations that aim to encourage meaningful, voluntary reporting
on actions to cut greenhouse gas emissions and to reduce exposure to climate change risks. These
developments will add to existing voluntary and market reporting initiatives aimed at the
investment community.

• Retail competition in the water sector for non-domestic customers in England began in April
2017, and this is expected to increase the focus by businesses on water efficiency. The reforms
allow many companies to choose for the first time who supplies their water and wastewater
services. Some water retailers may look to differentiate their offering through value-added services
such as water efficiency audits, better information on consumption and leakage, and tariffs that
incentivise water conservation.

Since the ASC last reported to Parliament in 2015 there has been a notable reduction in NAP-related 
activity in the business sector. It is therefore timely for the Government to reassess its priorities and 
policies for enabling and encouraging adaptation by businesses and industry. 

• The Environment Agency's Climate Ready Support Service ('Climate Ready') has closed after
Defra decided it was no longer a priority for funding. Climate Ready was the lead national
adaptation support service for businesses, as well as other sectors, and was responsible for a large
number of actions in the National Adaptation Programme. The funding also supported Climate
UK's network of regional climate change partnerships, more than half of which have since closed.
This puts at risk the legacy of information, tools and guidance developed over the last decade.

• There is limited evidence to indicate that businesses are taking steps to reduce the physical
risks of climate change impacts, including from flooding and arising within supply chains. The
uptake of property-level flood resilience measures to date has been low, even though grants have
been made available. There are only individual examples of companies actively identifying and
managing climate change risks in their supply chains.

Recommendations for further progress 

While each business is responsible for their own adaptation to climate change, there is the potential for 
the Government to work through existing business networks, processes and initiatives to provide 
businesses with information and advice, and to promote and embed climate change risk management 
as part of standard business practice. 

RECOMMENDATION 22: The Government should promote voluntary disclosure of climate change risks by 
both large and small companies, including the risks in relation to supply chains. 

• The investment community should further emphasise the need for meaningful disclosure of how 
companies assess and manage climate change risks, in line with the recommendations of the Task Force 
on Climate-related Financial Disclosures.

184 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change  




Key messages 

• The Financial Reporting Council's UK Stewardship Code should ask investors to consider company 
performance and reporting on adapting to climate change. 

• As a form of disclosure, the Government should promote corporate natural capital accounting and 
reporting, as recommended by the Natural Capital Committee. 

(Owner: Defra/BEIS. Timing: by 2020). 

RECOMMENDATION 23: The Government should consult on the measures needed in the next NAP to 
provide appropriate information and advice to support adaptation activity by businesses in England. For 
example, the Government could work with bodies such as the Confederation of British Industry, the Institute 
of Directors, the Federation of Small Businesses, Local Enterprise Partnerships, local chambers of commerce, 
and key individual sector associations, to promote use of the guidance and tools that were developed by the 
Environment Agency and Climate UK before their closure. (Owner: Defra/BEIS. Timing: by 2018). 

RECOMMENDATION 24: The Government should examine how public procurement rules could be used to 
promote the disclosure and management of climate change risks including within supply chains. For 
example, the Crown Commercial Service could require companies tendering for contracts to explain how 
risks have been considered and addressed both within tenders and by their overall business. (Owner: 
Defra/Crown Commercial Service. Timing: by 2020). 

6.1 Climate change risks to business 
Businesses are exposed to physical, financial, and reputational risks from climate change, 
affecting their operations in the UK and abroad. These include the risks of direct physical 
damage to business assets, and changes to the price and availability of materials, 
ingredients and other inputs sourced locally and overseas. Whilst it is ultimately for each 
business to determine their strategy for adapting to climate change, the Government has 
a role in enabling and promoting private sector adaptation.316 

Severe weather events have caused significant costs to businesses in recent years. Flooding has 
in particular caused damage and the loss of business activity in affected regions. Smaller 
businesses may take several years to recover from serious flooding incidents, with some never 
reopening. Business impacts can be felt far beyond the areas directly affected, including as a 
result of the loss of road, rail, energy and communications infrastructure (discussed further in 
Chapter 5). Flooding and storms also incur high costs to the insurance industry, and to the 
Government through demands for grants and support packages to help businesses to recover. 

The interconnected nature of global supply chains means businesses in the England (the scope 
of this report) can be exposed to climatic events around the world. As extreme weather events 
become more frequent, building resilient supply chains will become increasingly important and 
could give some businesses a competitive advantage. 

There will also be opportunities arising for businesses that anticipate how climate change will 
affect the demand for certain goods and services, and where and how they are produced in this 
country and around the world. Climate change is likely to alter global patterns of food 
production and other climate-sensitive raw materials, and increase the demand for adaptation-

316 Surminski, S. et al. (2016) UK Climate Change Risk Assessment 2017, Chapter 6: Business and industry. 

Chapter 6: Business 185 




related goods and services such as flood alleviation, drought management and climate change 
risk advice. 

Since 2015 there have been significant developments within the investment community 
regarding listed businesses and their assessment and disclosure of climate change risks. 
But climate change has to compete with other issues, such as EU exit, for board-level 
attention. 

Companies' environmental and sustainability performance has progressed in recent years from a 
niche topic to a mainstream subject within the investment community. Listed companies are 
now expected to address an array of social, economic and ecological challenges, including 
emissions reduction and climate change risk management. This trend is likely to continue, with 
investors placing increasing pressure on companies to disclose how their assets and liabilities 
could be affected by climate change, and expecting greater maturity in the assessment of risks 
and the adaptation actions being taken. 

However, the risks and opportunities that will arise from the process of the UK leaving the 
European Union is likely to feature highly in company risk registers and to some extent will 
dominate board-level discussions for some time. The consideration and management of climate 
change risks and opportunities is likely to have been deprioritised as a result.  

The ASC's evidence report for the 2017 UK Climate Change Risk Assessment identified 
seven specific areas of risk and opportunity for businesses in the changing climate. Figure 
6.1 summarises the results of the assessment for the business sector. 

The results reinforce the need for further action to help businesses manage their exposure to 
flood damage, and for more research to support future policies and proposals on coastal 
change. The impacts of higher temperatures on employee well-being and productivity were also 
highlighted as an area for further exploration. 

Figure 6.1. Risks to business identified by the UK Climate Change Risk Assessment 2017 

Source: Surminski, S. et al. (2016). 
Notes: The urgency associated with each risk and opportunity (shown in top row) was determined by the ASC on 
the basis of the evidence presented in the CCRA chapter. See Chapter 2 of the CCRA Evidence Report for a 
description of the urgency scoring methodology. 

The risks highlighted above are discussed in this chapter under the headings of the four priority 
areas for business activity presented in the ASC's first progress report to Parliament in 2015: 
• Business impacts from extreme weather.

186 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change  


  

• Supply chain interruptions. 

• Water demand by industry. 

• Business opportunities from climate change. 

The final section of this chapter summarises progress against each of the objectives for the 
business sector set within the current National Adaptation Programme. 

6.2 Business impacts from extreme weather 

Is there a plan? 


 

Defra's six-year flood defence investment plan aims to achieve 
a 5% net reduction in expected annual flood damages by 
2021. The National Flood Resilience Review assessed the 
vulnerability of local infrastructure and committed to consider 
options to improve flood resilience in the six core city regions 
in England to levels equivalent to London, beginning in 
Sheffield in 2017. 

Are actions taking 
place? 


 

Most actions in the NAP are now complete or are considered 
ongoing by their owners. Outside of the NAP, developments 
since 2015 include the Bonfield Review of property-level flood 
resilience, and BIBA's new flood insurance scheme for 
businesses. There are also a number of new initiatives that aim 
to promote company disclosure of climate change risks. 

The Environment Agency's Climate Ready Support Service 
closed in April 2016, with consequential closures of Climate UK 
and most of the regional climate change partnerships in 
England. 

Is progress being 
made in managing 
vulnerability? 


 

Investment in flood defence projects, actions arising from 
the Bonfield Review, and BIBA's flood insurance scheme, 
are all positive developments but there is little evidence of 
action being taken more generally to identify and reduce 
business exposure to extreme weather. 

Where action is taking place by businesses it focuses 
primarily on flood risk management, not other extreme 
weather risks, such as from heatwaves and drought. 

Is there a plan? 

Flooding continues to be the most prominent weather-related risk to business operations, 
causing severe and enduring impacts. Other extreme weather events, such as high winds, 
heavy snow or heatwaves, have a lower risk of causing lasting physical damage to assets 
but still need to be considered in order to safeguard staff and ensure continuity of 
operations. 

Flooding imposes significant costs on businesses, causing disruption to business activity and 
damage to assets. 

Amber

Amber


  


Chapter 6: Business 187 


 

Green


  

• An economic analysis of the winter 2013/14 floods, published in 2016, estimated that costs 
to businesses in England were £270 million, with this representing 21% of the £1.3 billion 
total costs caused by the event. More than 3,000 businesses were impacted with an average 
of £82,000 in losses per business. The majority of damage to businesses over that winter was 
in coastal areas, including as a result of the period of surge tides along the east coast of 
England between 4th and 8th December 2013.317 

• More recently, in the winter of 2015/16, there were a number of extreme flood events caused 
by storms Desmond, Eva and Frank. Lancashire, Yorkshire and Cumbria were particularly 
affected. The Association of British Insurers reported shortly after the event that their 
members were dealing with more than 5,000 insurance claims from businesses, with claims 
overall (from business, residential and motor policies) expected to total £1.3 billion.318 

The majority of businesses (74%) responding to a survey conducted in Cumbria after the 
December 2015 flooding identified indirect effects such as reductions in trade as the most 
significant cost to their business.319 SMEs were disproportionately impacted by the storms. In the 
Calder Valley in Yorkshire, which experienced severe flooding in 2012 as well as in 2015, an 
economic assessment found that damages to SMEs were much higher as a proportion of their 
turnover than for larger businesses (Box 6.1).320 


 

Box 6.1. The impact of recent flooding on small businesses in the Calder Valley 

Flooding caused significant damage to businesses in Borough of Calderdale and the Upper Calder 
Valley on Boxing Day 2015. Over 1,600 businesses suffered losses in a region that was affected by 
serious floods only three years before. In March 2016, four months after the onset of the flooding, the 
damage to the local economy was estimated at £47 million. A year after the floods, the estimate had 
risen to £177 million and for many businesses the recovery process is still ongoing. 

A survey conducted immediately after the flood found that 45% of the surveyed businesses suffered 
structural damage to buildings, 75% lost stock, and 46% lost office equipment. Relative to income, 
damages were significantly higher in smaller businesses. Whilst businesses with more than 20 
employees experienced higher losses in total, damages for companies with less than four employees 
were twice as costly relative to their income. 

Around (60% of businesses had at least one type of flood insurance, with business equipment, stock, 
and business interruption the most commonly insured. Of those businesses that were insured, 14% 
reported that they did not make a claim as the excess was too high. Of those without insurance, 65% 
reported this was because they could not find any insurers willing to cover them, while 21% reported 
that the insurance premiums they were quoted were unaffordable. The ability to obtain affordable 
insurance in the future was an overriding concern for many businesses surveyed. 

The survey found high uptake of the government recovery funds of £2,500 per affected business that 
were made available. Around 900 businesses applied for the grant in the three months following the 
event. Grants of £5,000 were also made available for investment in property-level flood resilience 
measures. The uptake of these was much lower, reportedly due to a complex application process and a 

317Environment Agency (2017) The costs and impacts of the winter 2013 to 2014 floods. 
318 See: https://www.abi.org.uk/News/News-releases/2016/01/New-figures-reveal-scale-of-insurance-response-after-
recent-floods  
319 BMG (2016) for Cumbria Local Enterprise Partnership, Cumbria Business Survey 2015/16 Flood Impact Report. 
320 Paola, S., Holdsworth, A., & Curry. S. (2016) Economic Impact Assessment of the Boxing Day Floods (2015) on SMEs in 
the Borough of Calderdale. University of Leeds, Calderdale Council, Upper Calder Valley Renaissance. 


     

188 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change  


 

                                                           

https://www.abi.org.uk/News/News-releases/2016/01/New-figures-reveal-scale-of-insurance-response-after-recent-floods
https://www.abi.org.uk/News/News-releases/2016/01/New-figures-reveal-scale-of-insurance-response-after-recent-floods




Box 6.1. The impact of recent flooding on small businesses in the Calder Valley 

narrow application window. 

Despite these challenges, there are examples of local businesses successfully installing resilience 
measures. Where properties cannot be prevented from flooding, simple measures like installing 
shelves to allow stock and essential equipment to be raised above flood levels can help reduce 
damage costs and allow companies to begin trading again more quickly. 

The Upper Calder Valley Renaissance (UCVR), a community based social enterprise, led a valley-wide 
initiative that supported local businesses in their recovery. UCVR highlight that as well as improving 
physical flood protection measures, providing support to adapt business models can be just as 
important. For the communities in Calder Valley, heavily reliant on retail and tourism, an example of 
this is to grow online revenues so trading can continue even if local premises are disrupted. 

Source: Paola, S., Holdsworth, A., & Curry. S. (2016) Economic Impact Assessment of the Boxing Day Floods in 2015 
on SMEs in the Borough of Calderdale. University of Leeds, Calderdale Council, Upper Calder Valley Renaissance. 

Current Government policies in this area focus on flood risk management, and providing 
protection to businesses through national investment in flood alleviation schemes. The 
National Flood Resilience Review also included a commitment to consider how to provide 
improved standards of protection within the core cities. National plans and policies to 
help businesses prepare for extreme weather - beyond flood risk management - are 
limited. 

Overall, Defra's six-year investment plan for flood and coastal defence aims to achieve a 5% net 
reduction in expected annual flood damages between 2015 and 2021.321 300,000 households 
will benefit from new or renewed flood and coastal defences (see Chapter 5: People and the built 
environment). Protecting businesses is a stated aim of the programme but this is given less 
emphasis than protecting households when it comes to allocating limited national funding, 
given the scope for larger businesses in particular to invest in their own resilience or contribute 
towards the costs of community-level schemes in their area. Consequently, there is no national 
target for protecting businesses but many will nevertheless benefit from the 1,500 flood and 
coastal schemes beginning construction in England between 2015 and 2021. 

Aside from managing their own assets, businesses are also vulnerable to disruption from 
flooding caused by the loss of local infrastructure networks, such as electricity, roads, rail and 
telecommunications. The National Flood Resilience Review, published in September 2016, 
identified more than 500 vulnerable infrastructure assets in areas of flood risk (discussed further 
in Chapter 5: Infrastructure). The report also committed to review current standards of flood 
protection within the English core cities, given their relative vulnerability to flooding in 
comparison with London. A pilot in Sheffield is underway, looking at how self-financing options 
for urban development could also deliver flood resilience benefits. If successful, work with other 
cities could follow in 2018. 

321 Defra (2014) Reducing the risks of flooding and coastal erosion: an investment plan 2014. 

Chapter 6: Business 189 


  

Are actions taking place? 

Significant developments since 2015 include the Bonfield Review of property-level flood 
resilience,322 and the launch of a new flood insurance scheme for businesses. 

• In our 2015 report we recommended that Defra should evaluate the ‘Repair and Renew’ grant 
scheme within a year and develop new policies in time for the next NAP, due in 2018, to 
encourage businesses in high risk areas to improve their resilience to flooding and fit property-
level flood protection measures where appropriate (Recommendation 32). In response to this, 
the Government said that learning from past grant schemes would be applied to relevant 
future policy. Lessons were subsequently considered by the Bonfield Review (see Box 6.2, 
and discussed further in Chapter 4: People and the built environment). 

• A new flood insurance scheme targeted at SMEs was launched by the British Insurance 
Brokers' Association in December 2016 (also discussed in Box 6.2). The scheme aims to 
increase the availability of insurance products to SMEs including through the use of more 
detailed, property-level flood risk information, than is typically used by insurers. The scheme 
is industry-led, and operates without government involvement or public subsidy. Such an 
approach could become applicable in the household insurance market as Flood Re begins to 
be withdrawn from 2021. Flood Re is discussed further in Chapter 4. 


 

Box 6.2. A review of property-level resilience, and a new flood insurance scheme for businesses 

A survey of insurance brokers completed as part of the Bonfield Review explored the relationship 
between property-level flood protection and the availability and affordability of insurance. Key 
findings included: 

• There is currently limited recognition of resilience measures by insurers, in terms of an increased 
ability to quote or to offer improved terms. 

• Making internal improvements to buildings that might reduce the cost of a claim is the measure 
most likely to be recognised by insurers, while signing up to Environment Agency flood alerts is 
one of the least recognised. 

• There is no industry-recognised certification or standard for flood protection products, resilience 
measures, or installation firms. 

• Many insurers highlight the difficulty in making buildings more resilient following a claim, with 
28% of brokers reporting that their insurers would not make resilient repairs even if cost neutral, 
and 52% stating that their insurer would not allow more expensive, resilient repairs, even if the 
customer made up the additional cost. 

BIBA’s new flood insurance scheme for businesses, launched in December 2016, seeks to address 
some of these issues. The scheme has the following features: 

• A more detailed appraisal of risk due to higher resolution risk mapping. This assesses the risk for 
individual properties rather than applying the same risk profile to all properties in the same 
postcode. 

• Assessment of risk from multiple flooding sources: fluvial, coastal, surface water, groundwater and 
from sewers. 

• Incentives for the use of property-level flood protection, signing up to flood alerts, and installing 

322 Defra (2016) Improving property level flood resilience: Bonfield 2016 action plan. 


     

190 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change  


 

                                                           




Box 6.2. A review of property-level resilience, and a new flood insurance scheme for businesses 

resilience measures, in order to lower premiums or make an ‘unacceptable’ risk become acceptable 
and therefore insurable. 

• Flexibility in the level of excess, which can result in reduced premiums, allowing businesses to vary
the degree of risk they are willing to take.

• Allowing resilient repairs as part of the costs of claims.

Whilst the scheme's detailed flood modelling will avoid lower risk properties being incorrectly 
classified as high risk, there will still be some very high risk businesses that are uninsurable under the 
scheme. Unlike Flood Re, the scheme does not involve public subsidies, and therefore those properties 
identified as being at particularly high risk or with a history of claims may still struggle to find 
affordable cover. In the long-term such price signals from the insurance market are helpful to 
encourage vulnerable businesses to adapt or relocate to lower risk areas. 

No statistics are yet available on the uptake of the scheme, and it may take several years to assess how 
effective it is in improving SME flood insurance uptake or stimulating business investment in resilience 
measures. 

Source: Communication with the British Insurance Brokers' Association. For more information see: 
https://www.biba.org.uk/current-issues/flood-insurance/  

More generally, and encouragingly, there is an increasing onus at least on larger listed 
businesses to assess and disclose non-financial risks including as a result of climate 
change. 

We recommended in 2015 that the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills should assess the 
case for regulatory and non-regulatory measures and take action to encourage all listed companies 
to report on their exposure to risks from climate change, and how those risks are being managed 
(Recommendation 33). The Government's response said that it is for investors to hold directors 
to account for the management of risks to listed companies. There have since been a number of 
useful developments in this area (Box 6.3), and there is value in the Government promoting 
these initiatives as part of a specific focus on the investment community in the next NAP. 

Box 6.3. Company disclosure of climate change risks and opportunities 

Some companies report on their exposure to climate change risks and the management and 
mitigation plans they have in place. This is done predominantly by publicly listed companies as part of 
corporate sustainability reports. Because reporting is normally completed on a voluntary basis, 
compliance is far from uniform and standards of reporting vary between organisations. Companies 
understandably choose to highlight their best practice examples, which may not be representative of 
normal practice. Despite these caveats, voluntary disclosure is an important means of gauging 
performance across the business community and driving improved performance. 

Corporate sustainability reports focus more on carbon reduction than climate change adaptation. 
However, market disclosure initiatives such as the Global Reporting Index (GRI) and CDP (formerly the 
Carbon Disclosure Project) have categories relevant to climate change adaptation, such as evaluating 
climate change risks and opportunities, levels of water consumption, and supply chain risk 
management. London-based company CarbonClear publishes an analysis of FTSE100 sustainability 
reports on an annual basis, including company performance in relation to greenhouse gas emissions 

Chapter 6: Business 191 

https://www.biba.org.uk/current-issues/flood-insurance/




Box 6.3. Company disclosure of climate change risks and opportunities 

reduction and climate change adaptation (see Figure 6.2 for example). 

Since 2015 there have been two key developments regarding company disclosure that are relevant to 
climate change adaptation. 

• Non-Financial Reporting Regulations were brought into UK law in December 2016. These
regulations require companies with 500 employees or more to consider and report on
environmental and other non-financial risks as part of their financial reports. This will apply to
financial years commencing after 1st January 2017. The regulations require financial reports to
contain sufficient information to understand the company's development, performance and
position and the impact of its activity relating to environmental matters (including the impact of
the company's business on the environment). However, the regulations are no more prescriptive
than this, so the degree to which they will result in companies reporting on climate change risks
remains to be seen.

• A more prescriptive and ambitious set of recommendations have been made by the Task Force on
Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) on behalf of the Financial Stability Board (FSB). The
FSB is an international body that monitors and makes recommendations about the global financial
system and is currently chaired by Mark Carney, the Governor of the Bank of England. As requested
by the G20, the FSB set up the TCFD to develop climate-related disclosures that “could promote
more informed investment, credit [or lending], and insurance underwriting decisions” which, in
turn, “would enable stakeholders to understand better the concentrations of carbon-related assets
in the financial sector and the financial system’s exposures to climate-related risks". The task force
has divided climate risks into two major categories: risks related to the transition to a lower-carbon
economy; and risks related to the physical impacts of climate change. These physical impacts
include acute risks, such as extreme weather events, and chronic risks which refer to longer term
shifts in climate patterns.

Whilst voluntary, the TCFD aims for their recommendations to be adoptable by all organisations. CDP 
have announced that they intend to align with the TCFD's recommendations from next year. 

Sources: Global Reporting Index (2017) see: https://www.globalreporting.org/Pages/default.aspx 
Carbon Clear (2016) Sustainability reporting performance of the FTSE 100. 
HM Government (2016) The Companies, Partnerships and Groups (Accounts and Non-Financial Reporting) 
Regulations 2016, No. 1245. 
TFCD (2016) Recommendation of the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures. 
CDP (2017) Invitation to provide feedback on CDP’s Reimagining Disclosure Initiative. 

One of the weaknesses in current disclosure requirements is that they only apply to public 
listed companies. However, a green paper in 2016 sought views on strengthening 
corporate governance for the largest private companies.323 The BEIS Select Committee 
recently recommended that private companies, beginning with those with over 2,000 
employees, should be subject to similar reporting requirements to public companies.324 

The Government has not yet published a summary of stakeholder feedback on the green paper 
nor responded to the Select Committee's report. 

The BEIS Select Committee's recommendation is for a light touch approach focusing on 
revenues, company structure, executive pay, numbers of employees, and pension scheme 

323 BEIS (2016) Corporate governance reform: green paper. 
324 BEIS Select Committee (2017) Corporate Governance: Third Report of Session 2016-17. 

192 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change  

https://www.globalreporting.org/Pages/default.aspx


  

contributions. The scope of the recommendation also includes those areas covered by section 
172 of the Companies Act. This places an obligation on company directors to have regard for the 
'impact of the company’s operations on the community and the environment'. Reporting would 
be on a 'comply or explain' basis, as for listed companies. The Financial Reporting Council has 
offered to develop and oversee a new governance code for private companies. 

RECOMMENDATION 22: The Government should promote voluntary disclosure of climate change 
risks by both large and small companies, including the risks in relation to supply chains. 


 

• The investment community should further emphasise the need for meaningful disclosure of how 
companies assess and manage climate change risks, in line with the recommendations of the 
Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures. 

• The Financial Reporting Council's UK Stewardship Code should ask investors to consider company 
performance and reporting on adapting to climate change. 

• As a form of disclosure, the Government should promote corporate natural capital accounting 
and reporting, as recommended by the Natural Capital Committee. 

(Owner: Defra/BEIS. Timing: by 2020). 

Developments since 2015 also include the closure of the Environment Agency’s Climate 
Ready Support Service ('Climate Ready'). Climate UK and most of its regional climate 
change partnerships have also closed as a consequence of Environment Agency funding 
coming to an end. 

Climate Ready, and Climate UK, were responsible for a large number of actions within the 
National Adaptation Programme (see Section 6.6). Whilst many of these actions are now 
complete, it means that publicly-funded support for adaptation activity in the business sector 
has largely ceased, the tools that have been developed are not being maintained and promoted, 
and there is no longer the machinery that was in place to help the Government deliver new 
business-related actions in the next NAP. 

In our 2015 progress report we recommended that the Environment Agency should evaluate the 
impact of the adaptation tools and guidance it has published, including the Climate Ready Support 
Service, in time for the ASC’s next progress report in 2017. The results of this should be used to identify 
to what extent businesses at most risk are using the tools and whether there is a need to amend them 
to better reflect user needs, particularly for SMEs (Recommendation 31). 

Following an internal review conducted by Defra, as part of the 2015 cross-government 
spending review, the decision was taken to no longer make Climate Ready a priority for funding. 
The service closed at the end of March 2016, leaving no centrally-coordinated adaptation service 
provider to businesses. To illustrate the kind of activity no longer being funded, Box 6.4 provides 
examples of activity in support of adaptation in the business sector. 


 

Box 6.4. The Climate Ready Support Service: support for business-sector adaptation 

The Environment Agency’s Climate Ready Support Service was launched in October 2011 to support 
the process of preparing and adapting communities, businesses and infrastructure services within 
England. Climate Ready worked with partners to provide targeted advice to help key sectors increase 
their resilience. The following are some examples of what was achieved by engaging with businesses: 

• A 'Climate Adaptation Framework’ was developed with the retailer Asda, which claims to be the 


  


Chapter 6: Business 193 


 

Box 6.4. The Climate Ready Support Service: support for business-sector adaptation 

'UK’s broadest study on the future impacts of climate change on a multinational supply chain'. 
Climate Ready also engaged with suppliers to M&S and Sainsbury’s, to help them produce extreme 
weather plans and flood risk assessments. 

• Various tools and guidance documents were developed including 'Assessing and managing
climate change risks in supply chains' (still available as an online resource), and the Business Areas
Climate Impacts Assessment Tool (BACLIAT). This provides a simple process for organisations to
assess the potential impacts of climate change on their business.

• The Business Resilience Healthcheck tool is a free online service that can be used to gain an insight
into potential risks and receive practical advice on how to prepare for extreme weather. The tool
has been accessed by more than 8,000 businesses so far. The tool is now hosted on the Climate UK
website but is no longer maintained and was not working at the time of writing.

• A Good Practice Guide for Local Enterprise Partnerships (LEPs) was developed, in partnership with
Sustainability West Midlands, to integrate climate adaptation and the low carbon economy into
regional economic strategies.

• A series of workshops, training and other events were organised, such as for company
sustainability managers, and local authority officers.

Source: Environment Agency Climate Ready Programme Board papers (unpublished). 

Relevant tools and guidance have also been developed by others to build awareness of risks and 
promote adaptation action. For example, the ‘Know Your Flood Risk’ campaign has published a 
Flood Guide for Business, providing advice on where to find information and how to increase the 
resilience of small business premises.325 The guide was updated and re-released following the 
winter 2015/16 floods. The private sector also provides a range of goods and services to 
businesses, such as consultancy, technical guidance and products, both flooding-focussed and 
related to adaptation more broadly. At this stage, it is not clear whether others can and will step 
up to fill the gaps left by Climate Ready and Climate UK and how many businesses will value this 
kind of advice enough to pay for it. 

RECOMMENDATION 23: The Government should consult on the measures needed in the next NAP 
to provide appropriate information and advice to support adaptation activity by businesses in 
England. For example, the Government could work with bodies such as the Confederation of British 
Industry, the Institute of Directors, the Federation of Small Businesses, Local Enterprise Partnerships, 
local chambers of commerce, and key individual sector associations, to promote use of the guidance 
and tools that were developed by the Environment Agency and Climate UK before their closure. 
(Owner: Defra/BEIS. Timing: by 2018). 

Another means to embed climate change risk management within the business 
community would be to use public sector procurement rules.  

The 2012 Public Services (Social Value) Act requires buyers of public sector services to consider 
"how what is proposed to be procured might improve the economic, social and environmental 
well-being of the relevant area". The Crown Commercial Service is the UK's public procurement 
organisation, spending almost £13 billion in the 2016/17 financial year on behalf of 17,000 

325 See: http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk/sites/default/files/FloodGuide_ForBusinesses.pdf 

194 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change  

http://www.knowyourfloodrisk.co.uk/sites/default/files/FloodGuide_ForBusinesses.pdf


  

public sector organisations. As well as directly managing procurement projects, the Crown 
Commercial Service works to improve supplier and contract management across government.326 

In April 2017, the Crown Commercial Service published a statement outlining how it will support 
public bodies to deliver more 'social value' through their procurement activity.327 Planned 
activities include the development of tools and guidance to build social value into contracts and 
to evaluate the social value of bids received. Such tools and guidance could have a particular 
focus on climate change adaptation. 

RECOMMENDATION 24: The Government should examine how public procurement rules could be 
used to promote the disclosure and management of climate change risks including within supply 
chains. For example, the Crown Commercial Service could require companies tendering for contracts 
to explain how risks have been considered and addressed both within tenders and by their overall 
business. (Owner: Defra/Crown Commercial Service. Timing: by 2020). 

Is progress being made in managing vulnerability? 

There is limited quantitative data to indicate how prepared businesses are for the risks 
associated with extreme weather.  

A range of indicators were used in our 2015 report to assess how prepared businesses were for 
extreme events. These included survey results of businesses showing how many had business 
continuity plans in place, plus Environment Agency metrics on the number of businesses at risk 
of flooding and the rate of new non-residential development in areas of flood risk. These 
datasets have not been updated since 2015 but should continue to be monitored in future 
updates. 

A more recent dataset that is available analyses what FTSE100 companies publish in their 
sustainability reports. While this data has some drawbacks, highlighted in Box 6.3, it is a useful 
indicator of company and shareholder priorities. Figure 6.2 shows the proportion of FTSE100 
companies completing a materiality assessment of climate change risks over the last three years. 
While the overall number of companies completing a materiality assessment has decreased 
slightly, the number making a more extensive assessment of risks and putting management 
plans in place, rather than just undertaking a high level assessment, has increased. This suggests 
that at least some leading companies are taking more action to manage climate change risks. 


         


326 See: https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/crown-commercial-service/about  
327 Crown Commercial Service (2017) CCS Social Value Policy. 


  


Chapter 6: Business 195 


 

                                                           

https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/crown-commercial-service/about




Figure 6.2. FTSE100 company assessments of climate change risks in sustainability reports 

Source: Data provided by CarbonClear (unpublished). 
Notes: The quality of reporting by FTSE100 companies varies considerably. Feedback from CarbonClear suggests 
that outside the top 15-20 companies the quality of reporting drops off notably. Membership of the FTSE100 
changes from year to year which may explain some of the fluctuation in the results. 

6.3 Supply chain interruptions 

Is there a plan? Introduction of the Non-Financial Reporting Regulations may 
encourage greater consideration of supply chain resilience in 
company reporting. The green paper on the UK's Industrial 
Strategy emphasises the importance of 'strong' supply chains 
but not their resilience. The UK Food Security Assessment is 
due to be reviewed by 2020 in light of the ASC's evidence 
report for the second UK Climate Change Risk Assessment. 

Are actions taking 
place? 

A Business Resilience Healthcheck tool was developed by the 
Environment Agency Climate Ready Support Service before it 
closed in April 2016. The tool helps companies think about 
supply chain risks but will no longer be maintained and 
promoted. 


0102030405060708090100

2014 2015 2016


Per cent of FTSE100 companies

High level assessment
of risks but not a
detailed plan

Reasonable assessment
of climate risks

Extensive assessment of
the risks and an action
plan to manage

Amber

Amber

196 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change  


  

Is progress being 
made in managing 
vulnerability? 


 

Around a quarter of FTSE100 companies mention supply 
chain resilience or adaptation in their sustainability 
reports, with this proportion at similar levels over the past 
five years. 

There is a range of initiatives underway to promote 
company disclosure of climate change risks, including in 
supply chains, but it is too soon to evaluate the impact 
these might have. 

Is there a plan? 

Extreme weather impacts and market forces, including from the investment community, 
are currently more influential on supply chain risk management than government policy. 
However, the new regulations in place to promote disclosure of non-financial risks are 
likely to achieve some consequential benefit in terms of the visibility and management of 
supply chains.  

Through their supply chains, distribution networks and participation in global markets, 
businesses are exposed to risks from extreme weather elsewhere in the UK and around the 
world. The risks relate to, in particular, supply chains and distribution networks that involve more 
vulnerable countries, such as in south and south-east Asia, and in sub-Saharan Africa.328 

Greater connectivity and interdependencies across markets mean that whilst in the past an 
event may have only affected one or two companies, today losses have the potential to impact 
entire regions or market sectors. Flooding continues to be the major business risk associated 
with climate change in England, but around the globe this is not necessarily the case. Sensitivity 
to climate hazards will differ depending on the sector, with our non-statutory progress report in 
2014 highlighting the types of primary industry and raw materials most at risk.329 The extent to 
which weather events in other continents can have long lasting consequential effects on 
multiple business sectors was highlighted by the Thailand floods in 2011 (see Box 6.5). 


 

Box 6.5. Supply chain impacts from the Thailand floods 

The Thailand floods of 2011 represent the insurance industry's highest recorded flood loss event, with 
disruption to over 14,000 companies worldwide. The World Bank estimates the total damage and 
economic losses resulting from the floods at around $45 billion, including the impact on international 
supply chains. 70% of this loss is estimated to have been borne by the manufacturing industry due to 
the flooding of several industrial estates. The Lloyds of London insurance market alone incurred $2.2 
billion in claims from the Thailand floods. 

The floods were reported to have disrupted international supplies of motor and consumer electronic 
parts. In the UK, Honda cut production at its Swindon plant by 50% and delayed the launch of a new 
model. The floods in Thailand also raised the issue of reliance on ‘clustered’ industries where similar 
types of suppliers are grouped in the same region. 

328 ASC (2016) UK Climate Change Risk Assessment 2017: Synthesis Report. 
329 See Section 4.4 of ASC (2014) Managing climate risks to well-being and the economy, 
https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/managing-climate-risks-to-well-being-and-the-economy-asc-progress-
report-2014/  

Amber


  


Chapter 6: Business 197 


 

                                                           

https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/managing-climate-risks-to-well-being-and-the-economy-asc-progress-report-2014/
https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/managing-climate-risks-to-well-being-and-the-economy-asc-progress-report-2014/




Box 6.5. Supply chain impacts from the Thailand floods 

The impact on the global hard-drive disk (HDD) market was pronounced. Before the 2011 floods, 
Thailand produced approximately 43% of the world’s HDDs. Production of HDDs is concentrated 
between four major manufacturers, two of which had key facilities inundated during the floods. 
Western Digital Corporation has one third of the global HDD market and the company lost 45% of its 
global production due to a single facility flooding. Toshiba also had flooding at a key facility. The other 
two significant manufacturers (Samsung and Seagate) did not suffer direct impacts, but still had to 
drop production as they relied on parts from facilities that were affected. Globally the prices of desktop 
HDDs increased by 80–190% and mobile HDDs by 80–150%, with price impacts lasting for around six 
months and consequences for many other markets and products. 

This example demonstrates the interconnectedness of global supply chain networks and how the 
indirect damage of regional disasters can affect consumer markets globally. The companies and sectors 
involved will have learnt from the Thailand floods and put in place plans to ensure greater business 
continuity in similar future events. However, the degree to which they, and the wider business 
community, are prepared for other climate related events in different locations is less clear. 

Sources: Savitz, E. (2011) Long after the floods recede, supply chains feel the pain. 
Lloyd’s Global Underinsurance Research (Date unknown) Thailand Flooding 2011. 
Haraguchi, M, Lall, U. (2014) Flood risk and impacts: A case study of Thailand’s floods in 2011 and research questions 
for supply chain decision making. 

The Industrial Strategy green paper published in January 2017330 makes reference to developing 
strong UK supply chains, although this focuses on achieving economic rather than climate 
resilience. In the future, regulatory changes such as Non-Financial Risk Reporting, and initiatives 
such as the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (Box 6.3) may begin to shift 
businesses to more actively assess and report on climate change risks in their supply chains. 

The ASC's Evidence Report for the 2017 UK Climate Change Risk Assessment highlighted 
supply chain risks from disruption to international food production and trade as part of a 
wider concern about future food security.331 In presenting the Government's CCRA report 
to Parliament in January 2017, Defra committed to review the UK Food Security Risk 
Assessment. 

The ASC's Evidence Report concluded that access to safe, nutritious and affordable food was one 
of six priority areas of climate change risk for the UK that needs to be addressed as a matter of 
urgency in the next National Adaptation Programme. About 40% of UK food is imported, with 
some crops coming from a limited number of trading partners. Individual UK businesses are 
heavily reliant on imported ingredients, such as cereals, vegetables, oil crops, and sugar.332 The 
food supply chain in the UK contributes £100 billion to the economy and employs 4 million 
people.333 

An increasing risk of extreme weather events abroad will affect overseas production and supply 
chains, and potentially disrupt global markets. Incremental changes in temperature, rainfall 

330 HM Government (2017) Building our Industrial Strategy– green paper. 
331 Challinor, A., Adger, W. N., et al. (2016) UK Climate Change Risk Assessment 2017, Chapter 7: International 
dimensions. 
332 De Ruiter et al. (2016) Global cropland and greenhouse gas impacts of UK food supply are increasingly located 
overseas. 
333 See: https://www.fdf.org.uk/publicgeneral/stats-2017.pdf 

198 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change  

https://www.fdf.org.uk/publicgeneral/stats-2017.pdf


  

patterns and ocean acidification are likely to shift the global pattern of food production posing 
risks to the UK's trading partners and the price of food here in the UK. In our evidence report we 
called for a greater focus on the UK food system from the perspective of climate change. 
Relevant policies in the next NAP would include the effective management of natural resources 
(both here and overseas), and understanding and managing the response of international 
markets to climate risks. 


 

Are actions taking place? 


 

The Business Continuity Institute (BCI) undertakes a supply chain survey amongst 
businesses around the world on an annual basis. Participation is voluntary, so is not 
necessarily representative, but provides some insight into action on global supply chain 
issues. 

Surveyed businesses were asked how severely their supply chain had been affected over the last 
12 months.334 From a list of 23 potential responses, adverse weather was consistently cited as 
one of the top six sources of disruption. The BCI report suggests supply chain visibility remains 
one of the biggest challenges for businesses. 

In the 2016 BCI survey, 61% of large businesses and 37% of SMEs reported that they insure 
against supply chain losses. The ability, particularly for larger businesses with complex 
supply chains, to insure against supply chain disruption may be why many businesses do 
not appear to be actively managing supply chain risks (see 'progress' section). 

Passing the financial risks of supply chain disruption to the insurance industry will be an 
appropriate and cost-effective strategy for many businesses. The risk of insurance companies 
defaulting due to the potential scale of extreme weather claims has been reviewed by the 
Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA).335 The report concluded that at least in the near term, 
insurance firms are 'reasonably well equipped' to manage the potential for damages including 
as a result of disruption to supply chains.  

Other parts of the finance sector could also be exposed to climate change, but this has yet to be 
considered in detail. In our 2015 progress report we recommended that the Bank of England 
should undertake research to better understand the potential systemic risks from climate change to 
the finance sector, building on the PRA's report regarding the UK insurance industry, and that the 
third round of ARP reporting should be extended to cover all areas of the finance sector 
(Recommendation 34). In response the Government said that the Bank of England and PRA will 
continue to undertake further analysis and research, with the initial phase to be completed in 
time to inform the next National Adaptation Programme due in 2018. Further research has yet to 
be published. 

The impact of climate change on overseas production facilities and supply chains is a 
subject of increasing interest within the investment community. Tools are now available 
that allow investors to assess the financial exposure of businesses to water scarcity in 
vulnerable regions. 

The abstraction and use of freshwater in many parts of the world is currently unregulated. The 
price of water, and restrictions on its use, are likely to increase as resources become scarce and 
less dependable, and countries are forced to intervene. This will have implications for water-

334 Business Continuity Institute (2016) Supply Chain Resilience Report. 
335 PRA (2015) The impact of climate change on the UK insurance sector, 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/pra/Documents/supervision/activities/pradefra0915.pdf 


  


Chapter 6: Business 199 


 

                                                           

http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/pra/Documents/supervision/activities/pradefra0915.pdf




intensive industries operating in vulnerable regions, and as a result, the risk-adjusted returns 
expected by investors. 

One tool now available to investors is the Water Risk Valuation tool developed by Bloomberg LP, 
the Natural Capital Declaration, and the UN Environment Programme Finance Initiative (Box 6.6). 

The Environment Agency's Climate Ready Support Service provided supply chain 
guidance and advisory services, working with a number of individual businesses. 
The Environment Agency's supply chain guidance sets out a methodology for analysing and 
managing supply chain climate risk and includes case studies on a variety of businesses, 
including textile producers, flower growers, and timber and coffee bean importers. As discussed 
earlier, Climate Ready was discontinued in early 2016 and is therefore no longer able to offer 
businesses practical support.336 This means businesses seeking advice on supply chain risk 
management will now likely need to pay for it. This will restrict the uptake and application of 
such advice. 

Box 6.6. A shadow price for water in vulnerable regions and its implications for investors 

Water is under-priced in many parts of the world and at best reflects the long-term costs of investing in 
water and waste water management infrastructure. The premium for increasing scarcity or increasing 
unpredictability of supply is rarely reflected in prices. If it was many companies’ costs would increase, 
profitability would decrease, and they would become less attractive to investors. 

The Water Risk Valuation tool was created to model the potential impact of water scarcity on earnings, 
and hence the profitability and share price of businesses. The tool is open-source and freely available. 

The tool provides a standard methodology for incorporating the risk of water shortages and price 
effects into the financial valuations of companies. The tool calculates a 'shadow price' of water in each 
region based on a range of factors, including the value of water to other users. The difference between 
the shadow price and the market price in a region provides a measure of the financial risk that 
companies are exposed to. The tool has been applied globally to mining, utilities and beverage 
producing companies. 

Source: Bloomberg LP, Natural Capital Declaration, see: http://www.naturalcapitaldeclaration.org/bonds-water-
scarcity/ and https://www.environmentalleader.com/products/bloomberg-lp-the-water-risk-valuation-tool/ 

Is progress being made in reducing vulnerability? 

It is in businesses' own interests to ensure their supply chains are robust and resilient. 
However, while businesses are experienced at driving down costs in supply chains, there is 
less evidence to show that resilience to climate change is yet a consideration. Where 
companies do report on supply chains, much greater emphasis is placed upon ensuring 
compliance with ethical and sustainability principles, rather than looking at the potential 
for disruptions in supply. 

Climate change risks within supply chains do not feature prominently in listed companies' 
sustainability reports. Figure 6.3 shows that for most global businesses participating in a recent 
survey, non-climate related issues were considered greater priorities for supply chain 
assessment and risk management. Climate risk and resilience was 8th, water availability 10th, 
and emergency/disaster preparedness 11th, behind a range of ethical, social and environmental 

336 Environment Agency (2013) Climate Ready: Assessing and managing climate change risks in supply chains. 

200 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change  

http://www.naturalcapitaldeclaration.org/bonds-water-scarcity/
http://www.naturalcapitaldeclaration.org/bonds-water-scarcity/
https://www.environmentalleader.com/products/bloomberg-lp-the-water-risk-valuation-tool/




issues.337 Perhaps unsurprisingly, the issues at the top of the list are those that are subject to 
regulatory standards, and those where a lack of supervision and control could lead to reputation 
damage. 

Analysis of FTSE100 sustainability reports also suggests that supply chain assessment of climate 
risk is not a priority for many companies. Around a quarter of FTSE100 companies mentioned 
business or supply chain resilience or adaptation to risks in their most recent reports.338 This 
proportion has remained relatively stable over the last five years. Amongst other industry 
leaders, supply chain assessment may be considered unnecessary, too challenging, or not a 
priority for sustainability reporting. 

Figure 6.3. Relative importance of different 'sustainability' issues within company supply chains 

Source: BSR (2016) The State of Sustainable Business 2016. 
Notes: Companies were asked "What do you believe are the three most important sustainability issues in your 
supply chain?" Companies were provided with a list to choose from and asked to rank their top three issues. 

337 BSR (2016) The State of Sustainable Business 2016: Results of the 8th Annual Survey of Sustainable Business Leaders. 
338 Based on data from CarbonClear (unpublished). 

0 10 20 30 40 50 60

Freedom of association

Water availability

Emergency/disaster preparedness

Workforce skills

Climate risk and resilience

Chemicals and hazardous substances

Waste, pollution and effluents

Raw material sourcing

Wages, benefits, and working hours

Supply chain traceability

Supplier ethics and transparency

Working conditions including health and safety

1st priority 2nd priority 3rd priority

Chapter 6: Business 201 


  

6.4 Water demand by industry 

Is there a plan? 


 

The introduction of retail competition for non-domestic 
customers from April 2017 could increase the focus on water 
audits and leakage reduction as part of value-added services 
on offer to businesses. The 2014 Water Act commits the 
Government to provide an update to Parliament in 2019 on 
progress in reforming the system of abstraction licences, to 
improve the allocation and efficiency of water use including by 
businesses. 

Are actions taking 
place? 


 

Some Food and drink manufacturing sites claim to have 
achieved 30% reductions in water use. WRAP's Rippleffect 
scheme is no longer active but a new 'Courtauld 2025' 
commitment is being developed. This includes an aim to 
encourage companies to commit to reducing water use in 
supply chains. 

Is progress being 
made in managing 
vulnerability? 


 

Direct abstraction of freshwater by industry has been 
declining, as has non-domestic use of public water 
supplies. However, water shortages and restrictions can 
still be expected from time to time and action to reduce 
water use by businesses should continue as part of 
national efforts to tackle the long-term risks of water 
scarcity. 

Is there a plan? 

Many businesses that use large volumes of water are located in areas that are already 
water stressed. Climate change is projected to reduce the reliability of water resources 
whilst the growing population will create additional demand.339 

Companies reliant on plentiful, and cheap, water need to plan for potential reductions in water 
availability but also the opportunities that could arise from more water trading. All businesses 
need to manage water more efficiently as part of a national effort to improve the resilience of 
long-term water supplies.340 

The most significant policy development since 2015 is the introduction of water retail 
competition for non-domestic customers in England. Retail competition allows businesses to 
choose who supplies their water and wastewater services, an option that was previously only 
available for consumers using in excess of five million litres of water per year.341 Retail 
competition began in April 2017, enabling an additional 1.2 million businesses to choose their 
supplier. 

The focus on water efficiency is expected to increase as a result of retail competition. Businesses 
will be able to bring together separate contracts with suppliers across the country into a single 
bill. This will allow much easier benchmarking of water efficiency across different sites, including 

339 ASC (2016) UK Climate Change Risk Assessment 2017: Synthesis Report. 
340 ASC (2016) UK Climate Change Risk Assessment 2017: Synthesis Report. 
341 See: http://www.open-water.org.uk/about-open-water/how-it-works/ 


     

202 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change  


 

Green

Green

Green

                                                           

http://www.open-water.org.uk/about-open-water/how-it-works/




through smart metering and online reporting. Competing suppliers may offer pricing structures 
that incentivise reduced water consumption. Customers will also be able to access tailored  

 services such as advice on water efficiency, leakage and waste reduction.342 

 As the market has only recently been opened in England, it is not yet possible to assess how 
effective it will be in reducing water demand. However, a water retail market has been operating 
in Scotland for almost a decade and has delivered some promising results (Box 6.7). 

Reforms to the system of water abstraction licencing are due in England by the early 
2020s.343 The existing system, in place since the 1960s, allows many companies to continue 
to take water from the environment even when water levels are low. Abstraction reform is 
important to help manage water resources sustainably and allocate it between users more 
efficiently. 

Abstraction reform is intended to increase the efficiency of water allocation and use in order to 
protect the environment, particularly recognising the need to limit abstraction during times of 
water scarcity. Proposals for abstraction reform include a specific licencing regime in the most 
water-stressed catchments (called 'enhanced catchments'), and for licence holders to be able to 
trade water more easily.344 Abstraction reform is therefore important to create the conditions for 
water-intensive businesses to take water efficiency measures more seriously, and to encourage 
users to more actively participate in drought response management.345 

342 See: http://www.open-water.org.uk/about-open-water/the-benefits/ 
343 Defra (2016) UK Government response to consultation on reforming the Water Abstraction Management System. 
344 Water UK (2016) Water resources long term planning framework (2015-2065). 
345 Defra (2016) Water Abstraction management reform in England – What would reform mean for abstractors? 

Box 6.7. The impact of water retail competition in Scotland 

Businesses in Scotland have been able to choose their supplier for water and sewerage services since 
2008. In the five years to 2013, while only 5% of businesses changed their supplier, around 50% of 
businesses renegotiated their terms. The retail company Scottish Water Business Stream claims to 
have helped customers save 16 billion litres of water over this period. 

For retailers to differentiate themselves and win business they need to offer added value, which may 
be in the form of improved customer services, billing and reporting, or tailored advice such as on water 
efficiency and leakage reduction. 

Publicised examples of project successes in Scotland include five schools that were able to reduce 
their water use by 44% (31 million litres per year), with their chosen retailer helping by benchmarking 
consumption in 50 schools against national standards, repairing leaks at five schools with excessively 
high usage, and installing smart meters. This led to a reduction in water and wastewater charges in 
excess of £56,000 a year. In another example a water supplier in Scotland helped a caravan park reduce 
their metered consumption by 20% through installing rainwater harvesting for services that can use 
untreated water, such as toilet flushing. 

Source: Water Commission (2010) Competition in the Scottish water industry, blog post on 
www.financingsustainablewater.org (June 2015) Lessons from the UK on water efficiency through retail competition 
for water services. 

Chapter 6: Business 203 

http://www.open-water.org.uk/about-open-water/the-benefits/
http://www.financingsustainablewater.org/


  

Are actions taking place? 

There are many initiatives underway across and within sectors, including commitments 
made by individual companies, to reduce water consumption. 

• Aside from water companies and regulators, others active in promoting water efficiency 
include: the UK Water Partnership, a private-public model focussing on innovation 
established in 2015346; Waterwise347; sector-specific industry bodies such as the Food and 
Drink Federation348; and a range of NGOs. These organisations publish guidance and advice, 
but do not have the resources to offer direct support to individual businesses. The Waste and 
Resources Action Programme (WRAP) Rippleffect349 website has an archive of guidance 
available, but is no longer active in providing direct support. There are also a few examples of 
multi-sectoral regional partnerships where stakeholders from industry, the water sector, and 
regulators, collaborate on water resource issues.350 

• There are also examples of industry-wide initiatives. The Federation House Commitment for 
food and drink manufacturers ran from 2008 to 2014 and aimed to contribute towards the 
UK Food and Drink industry target of reducing water use by 20% by 2020.351 The scheme was 
administered by WRAP in partnership with the Food and Drink Federation (FDF) and Dairy 
UK, with support from Defra and the Environment Agency. By 2014 its participants had 
together reduced their water consumption by 15% (excluding water embedded in final 
products). Although the original Federation House Commitment is no longer monitored, the 
Food and Drink Federation continues to encourage signatories to report their water 
consumption. Data submitted by 56 companies with 223 sites show water consumption in 
2015 was 30.1% less than in 2007.352 

• Some companies voluntarily set themselves water reduction targets, as evidenced within 
FTSE100 sustainability reports. In 2016, 39% of FTSE100 companies reported a water 
reduction target. This compares to 70% of companies with a carbon reduction target, 
indicating that for many, addressing water efficiency is a lower order priority.353  

The fact that some businesses voluntarily set and report against water reduction targets is a 
positive step. However, examples of best practice by industry leaders, or those at greater risk 
from water scarcity, are not necessarily representative of businesses as a whole. Managing water 
consumption and planning for a future involving potentially scarce water resources does not 
appear to be a high priority when compared with more immediate business needs. 

Is progress being made in reducing vulnerability? 

Overall, industry use of water represents a relatively small proportion of total abstraction 
(9%) and has been on a downward trend. Business use of public water supplies has also 
been declining. This reduces the general likelihood that businesses will be disrupted 
during times of water scarcity, but this national picture masks the continuing risk of 

346 See: https://theukwaterpartnership.org/  
347 See: http://www.waterwise.org.uk/  
348 See: https://www.fdf.org.uk/home.aspx  
349 See: http://www.wrap.org.uk/content/rippleffect  
350 For example see: http://waterresourceseast.com/about-water-resources-east/ 
351 See: http://www.wrap.org.uk/content/federation-house-commitment 
352 Food and Drink Federation (2016) Environmental Ambition: Progress Report. 
353 Carbon Clear (2016) Sustainability reporting performance of the FTSE100. 


     

204 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change  


 

                                                           

https://theukwaterpartnership.org/
http://www.waterwise.org.uk/
https://www.fdf.org.uk/home.aspx
http://www.wrap.org.uk/content/rippleffect
http://waterresourceseast.com/about-water-resources-east/
http://www.wrap.org.uk/content/federation-house-commitment


  

severe water shortages and restrictions being imposed within individual catchments from 
time to time. 

In 2014, water abstraction by industry from freshwater sources was 848 million cubic meters. 
This is a 37% decrease from abstraction levels in 2000 (of 1,357 million cubic meters), an annual 
decrease of over 44 million cubic metres.354 There could be a number of possible drivers for this 
including changes in the economic activity of water intensive industries, improved water 
efficiency, or changes to abstraction licence conditions. 

In our 2015 report we recommended that Defra should develop options in time for the next NAP, 
due in 2018, to encourage industry to improve water efficiency particularly in water stressed areas. 
This will help companies to make the transition to the likelihood of tighter restrictions and higher 
prices for water use during times of water scarcity, under abstraction reform (Recommendation 35). 
In response to this, the Government highlighted a number of initiatives already in place which 
will allow industry to improve its water efficiency, such as the Enhanced Capital Allowance for 
water efficiency investments355, the recently formed UK Water Partnership, and the expected 
savings in water from the introduction of retail competition. 

Major changes in the water sector, such as the introduction of retail competition and abstraction 
reform, provide an opportunity to make further improvements to water efficiency amongst 
businesses and industry. This should be monitored closely, together with levels of production 
from manufacturing, mining and quarrying, and other water-intensive industries in the UK, as 
patterns of production change. Further intervention, beyond that already planned, may become 
necessary to ensure that water use by industry continues to contribute towards national water 
resource management efforts. 

6.5 Business opportunities from climate change 

Is there a plan? 


 

The Government is no longer looking to promote the potential 
economic opportunities for the UK from climate change. The 
Industrial Strategy green paper makes no mention of climate 
change adaptation or those sectors that could see growing 
economic activity in the changing climate. 

Are actions taking 
place? 


 

The Bonfield Review led to a number of initiatives to promote 
property-level flood resilience products and services, with the 
potential for positive consequences for this nascent UK 
industry. Innovate UK, Climate-KIC and the UK Water 
Partnership are encouraging investment in adaptation and 
resilience-related business opportunities. Climate UK's 
engagement with Local Enterprise Partnerships' growth 
strategies has been affected by funding cuts. 

354 ADAS (2017) for the ASC, Research to provide updated indicators of climate change risk and adaptation action in 
England. 
355 Defra (2016) Water efficient enhanced capital allowances. 

Amber


  


Chapter 6: Business 205 


 

Green

                                                           


  

Is progress being 
made in managing 
vulnerability? 


 

Adaptation goods and services are difficult to define and 
value but the available evidence suggests the changing 
climate is not yet driving significant investment in new 
markets and technologies that could contribute towards 
GDP growth.  

Is there a plan? 

Climate change will affect the production costs and demand for certain goods and 
services. Businesses that anticipate these changing markets may be able to gain an 
advantage. Specific adaptation-related goods and services include water engineering, 
climate risk insurance, finance for adaptation projects, and precision farming 
technologies.356 Businesses can be expected to respond to market signals and exploit 
these opportunities as they arise. There is a role for Government to make sure that 
companies are aware of the potential opportunities and have information that will help 
them to make sound investment decisions. 

Business opportunities from climate change mitigation (low carbon) activities are not 
considered in this section, which instead focuses on how climate change globally could increase 
the demand for certain adaptation-related goods and services, and as a result create new market 
and export opportunities for UK companies. 

In addition, climate change in the UK may have some beneficial effects for certain industries, 
such as agriculture, horticulture, forestry and tourism, due to more favourable conditions 
emerging relative to other parts of the world. Evidence of this to date is difficult to find but one 
example is the UK wine industry, which could benefit from warmer weather and longer growing 
seasons. The world’s total vineyard surface area has been decreasing since 2000, mainly due to 
the reduction in area of European vineyards. Over this period the area of vineyards in England 
and Wales has doubled (albeit from a low base), from around 800 hectares in 2000 to almost 
1,900 hectares in 2015.357 This may be due to more suitable climatic conditions, but other factors 
will also be in play. Farmers and other land owners may be responding to wider market signals 
and looking to diversify.358 

Figure 6.5 shows the size and geographic spread of vineyards in England and Wales. The 
concentration of major wine producers in the south east of England is a natural consequence of 
the climate and soil conditions, but is also where water and soils may become under particular 
stress. Climate change therefore poses risks as well as opportunities to wine growers. 


    

356 Surminski, S. et al. (2016) UK Climate Change Risk Assessment 2017, Chapter 6: Business and industry. 
357 UK vineyards statistics, reported in ADAS (2017) for the ASC, Research to provide updated indicators of climate 
change risk and adaptation action in England. 
358 For example, declining interest in golf has led one course in Surrey to convert nine of their 36 holes to vineyards, 
see: http://www.todaysgolfer.co.uk/news-and-events/general-news/2016/september/mannings-heath-to-be-uks-
first-golf-club--wine-estate/  

Amber



     

206 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change  


 

                                                           

http://www.todaysgolfer.co.uk/news-and-events/general-news/2016/september/mannings-heath-to-be-uks-first-golf-club--wine-estate/
http://www.todaysgolfer.co.uk/news-and-events/general-news/2016/september/mannings-heath-to-be-uks-first-golf-club--wine-estate/




Figure 6.5. Location of wine-producing vineyards in England and Wales 

Source: Nesbitt, A. et al. (2016) Impact of recent climate change and weather variability on the viability of UK 
viticulture – combining weather and climate records with producers' perspectives. Australian Journal of Grape and 
Wine Research, 22, 324–335. 
Notes: The majority of commercial vineyards are situated in south east England with approximately 1,186 
hectares under vine in Kent, East and West Sussex, Surrey, Hampshire, and the Isle of Wight. There were 
approximately 235 hectares in the South West (Cornwall, Devon, Dorset, Somerset Wiltshire and Gloucestershire). 

The adaptation-related goods and services offered by businesses in England include 
science, engineering, insurance, and finance. These are areas where the UK has a 
competitive advantage and there could be justification for giving these markets greater 
emphasis. 

The UK leaving the European Union may mean there is a need to develop new trading partners, 
so in this context there may be additional value and urgency in promoting adaptation-related 
goods and services as one potential area of export growth.  

The Prudential Regulation Authority completed a review of the insurance sector and highlighted 
several climate change-related opportunities for insurance firms. These include new sources of 
premium growth, such as supporting resilience to climate change through risk awareness and 
risk transfer, investments in ‘green bonds’, and providing financial sector leadership on climate 
change.359 

Defra's property-level flood resilience action plan includes a series of measures to promote flood 
protection products and services in areas at high flood risk. The recommendations include the 
development of independent standards with certification processes, such as the new BSi 
Kitemark scheme for measures meeting the PAS1188 standard.360 The development of a trusted 
certification scheme is considered to be advantageous for growing this market as a business 
opportunity both in the UK and overseas. 

359 Prudential Regulation Authority (2015) The Impact of climate change on the UK Insurance sector. 
360 See: https://www.bsigroup.com/en-GB/our-services/product-certification/industry-sector-
schemes/construction/flood-protection-and-waterproofing-materials/  

Chapter 6: Business 207 

https://www.bsigroup.com/en-GB/our-services/product-certification/industry-sector-schemes/construction/flood-protection-and-waterproofing-materials/
https://www.bsigroup.com/en-GB/our-services/product-certification/industry-sector-schemes/construction/flood-protection-and-waterproofing-materials/




In Scotland, Adaptation Scotland and Sniffer give the adaptation market a particular 
emphasis, and the Netherlands successfully markets and exports its expertise in flood and 
water management. There is no equivalent approach in England. 

The National Adaptation Programme includes an objective to raise awareness and 
understanding amongst businesses about domestic and international adaptation opportunities 
(Objective 25). The relevant actions in this area are now complete or ongoing (see Section 6.6), 
with no further activity planned at the current time. 

Are actions taking place? 

There are examples of innovation and investment in adaptation-related goods and 
services, such as those funded and coordinated through Climate-KIC and Innovate UK (Box 
6.8). The UK Water Partnership361 is also active in promoting water sector innovation - 
aiming to develop, implement and commercialise new technologies and approaches. 

Box 6.8. Initiatives underway to promote adaptation-related goods, services and expertise in England 

Innovate UK is the UK’s innovation agency, formerly known as the Technology Strategy Board. Since 
2007 Innovate UK has run a number of competitions that have supported projects relevant to 
adaptation: 

Solving business problems with environmental data: This competition provided 33 feasibility studies with 
a total of £4 million. Relevant projects that were funded include: 

• Agriculture and food examples: Crop pest and disease warning system for food security in the
developing world, crop forecasting, incorporation of satellite-based data into weather index-based
insurance and adaptation, management and mitigation of sustainability and climate change issues
within grocery supply chains.

• Energy generation and supply: Forecasting climate change impacts on electricity distribution loads
at the network asset level, and improving African dust storm forecasts for oil and gas operations.

• Infrastructure: Near real-time assessments of flood impact for the insurance and civil contingencies
sectors, and a groundwater modelling service for flood and drought decision support.

Design for Future Climate: The competition looked at climate change considerations in the design of 
construction and building refurbishment projects in the UK. It ran over two phases between 2010 and 
2014 and granted £5 million to 45 projects. The 240 companies working on this programme were 
tasked with developing adaptation strategies for their building projects over the course of the 21st 
century. 

Climate-KIC is a public-private partnership created in 2010 by the European Institute of Innovation 
and Technology. The UK branch of Climate-KIC is working with Innovate UK to establish a Resilience 
Innovation for Growth programme to support start-ups and other businesses that are developing 
innovative climate- and disaster-related products and services. The programme has four key themes: 

• Delivering education and professional training through a network of associated higher education
and professional development courses.

• Growing resilience innovation by working with businesses in the climate and disaster management
fields and offering small grants to establish pathfinder projects, promote them and strengthen

361 See: https://theukwaterpartnership.org/ 

208 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change  

https://theukwaterpartnership.org/




Box 6.8. Initiatives underway to promote adaptation-related goods, services and expertise in England 

investment networks. 

• Strengthening the market for resilience goods, by completing market research and developing
demand side innovation challenges based on real world issues and drawing in investment.

• Bringing together a resilience innovation community, creating learning and sharing environments
and fostering a sense of business community through resilience trade shows.

Source: Innovate UK (date unknown) Directory of Projects. Innovate UK (2017) Design for Future Climate. 

Is progress being made? 

Defining and measuring the size of the market related to climate change adaptation is 
difficult. The best data currently available suggest UK companies are behind their 
overseas competitors in exploiting this new market opportunity.362 However, there is at 
least some evidence that a growing proportion of large companies are becoming aware of 
the opportunities that could arise in the changing climate, which may be particularly 
important to specific UK regions where there is already expertise (Box 6.9). 

Understanding the size of the adaptation market opportunity is challenging for several reasons. 
There are very few companies that solely focus on adaptation-related goods and services, with 
these normally part of a wider and more general offering. Attributing market- and company-
level activity to climate change adaptation is therefore difficult. 

Box 6.9. Regional expertise in climate change adaptation and environmental risk management 

South West England and South East Wales was one of five regional science and innovation audits 
completed in 2016, in the first wave of audits completed by the Department for Business, Energy and 
Industrial Strategy. Expertise related to innovation in resilience, environment and sustainability was 
found to be strong in the region, with the presence of the Met Office, other world leading research 
institutions, and a significant business community. The audit estimated that the environmental goods 
and services sector in the region comprises 25,000 companies providing 153,000 jobs, and has grown 
16 times faster than other sectors in the region. The audit identified two areas where the region has the 
potential to be globally competitive: environmental risk and data innovation, and sustainable 
technologies and development. Relevant sites in the region include the Global Environmental Futures 
campus at Exeter Science Park, catalysed in-part by the presence of the Met Office; the South West 
Satellite Applications Catapult Centre of Excellence, based at Goonhilly Earth Station in Cornwall; the 
Rural Innovation Centre and Berkeley Science and Technology Park in Gloucestershire; and the Porton 
Science Campus in Wiltshire. The market opportunity to utilise environmental data to tackle the risks 
from natural hazards and protect the resilience of socio-economic systems was highlighted in the audit 
as an urgent priority. 

Source: BEIS (2016) South West England and South East Wales Science and Innovation Audit. 

362 ASC (2015) Progress on preparing for climate change. See p217. 

Chapter 6: Business 209 




In 2016, 43% of FTSE 100 companies reported that they had assessed future climate change 
opportunities for their business, up from 25% in 2015.363 This will not be representative of the 
business sector as a whole, and the proportion of businesses that actively follow up to respond 
to climate opportunities will be a smaller number. However, the results do indicate that a greater 
number of companies are aware of the business opportunities that could arise. 

6.6 Conclusions on NAP objectives and actions 
Table 6.1 below summarises progress against the objectives listed within the NAP for the 
business theme. In general, the objectives describe a number of processes and list actions 
by which the resilience of businesses should be improved. 

Of the 33 actions in the business chapter of the NAP: 

• 19 (58%) are complete;

• 6 (18%) are on-track;

• 1 (3%) has been revised; and

• 3 (9%) have been dropped.

Updates were not received on the remaining 4 actions (12%). 

17 (51%) of actions in the NAP for the business theme are time-bound, with the remaining 16 
(49%) classed as ‘ongoing’. 

Table 6.1. NAP objectives and a summary of progress for the business theme 

NAP objective Commentary on progress 

Objective 23. To raise 
awareness and understanding 
amongst businesses about 
climate change risks. 

There are nine actions for this objective, which focus on raising 
awareness and capacity through guidance, tools, training and 
professional standards. Three actions were completed before the 
2015 update and two more have been completed since. Of the 
remaining four actions, two actions are on track, one has been 
revised, and we've not received an update on the final action. 

While it is positive that five actions have been completed and that 
guidance documents produced are in the main still available as a 
business resource, there is a risk that progress on this objective is 
losing momentum without ongoing support to promote the 
guidance and engage with businesses. Six of the nine actions were 
owned by EA Climate Ready and/or Climate UK, funding for which 
has been discontinued with no equivalent organisation to replace 
them. The degree to which other forms of business support (e.g. from 
the private sector) are fulfilling these functions is unclear. 

363 CarbonClear (unpublished). 

210 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change  




Table 6.1. NAP objectives and a summary of progress for the business theme 

NAP objective Commentary on progress 

Objective 24. To increase the 
extent to which businesses are 
actively considering climate 
change impacts in their risk 
management and resilience 
planning and decision-making 
process and taking 
appropriate adaptive action. 

There are eight actions for this objective, which are similar to those 
listed under Objective 23. Three actions were completed before the 
2015 update, one more has been completed since and two actions 
have been dropped. One of the remaining actions is on-track, which 
is to increase the number of businesses using management 
standards to manage climate risks. We did not receive an update on 
the final action, which is for the Health and Safety Executive to review 
their guidance regarding work place temperatures following a 
consultation. 

Similarly to Objective 23, while actions have been completed and 
some progress made, there is a potential lack of ongoing activity. 
Three of the eight actions for this objective were owned by Climate 
Ready and/or Climate UK, which are no longer active, and the two 
dropped actions relating to water efficiency were owned by the 
WRAP Rippleffect service which has also closed. 

There are signs that the need to demonstrate climate resilience to 
company shareholders may be becoming increasingly important, 
although as yet there is little evidence that it is having a significant 
impact on business risk management decisions. For SMEs at risk of 
flooding there remain barriers to uptake of resilience and resistance 
measures, such as property level protection. Recommendations from 
the Bonfield Review are underway in an attempt to address these 
barriers. 

Objective 25. To raise 
awareness and understanding 
amongst businesses about 
domestic and international 
adaptation opportunities. 

There are ten actions for this objective, one of which was completed 
before the 2015 update and two more have been completed since. 
Three further actions are on-track, one has been dropped, while three 
actions have had no new updates provided. 

The actions for this objective relate to raising awareness of markets 
for adaptation goods and services and providing practical support in 
growing these markets and enabling business opportunities. Several 
agencies (e.g. Innovate UK, DfID, Climate-KIC UK) are supporting 
businesses offering adaptation goods and services, but the market is 
diffuse and not well understood or promoted, and does not have a 
strong business support community around it. As the UK is leaving 
the EU, nurturing export market opportunities for these types of 
services may become a greater priority.  

Chapter 6: Business 211 




Table 6.1. NAP objectives and a summary of progress for the business theme 

NAP objective Commentary on progress 

Objective 26. To help 
businesses better understand 
and manage climate risks to 
their supply chains. 

There are four actions for this objective, three of which were 
completed prior to our 2015 report and the remaining one has been 
completed since. Three of the actions relate to EA guidance on 
supply chain resilience, which has been produced and is available 
online. There were a few examples where businesses collaborated 
with Climate Ready to investigate and manage climate risks in their 
supply chain before the support service was discontinued. 

The other actions relate to the UK Industrial Strategy. The last 
Government published an Industrial Strategy green paper, seeking to 
grow UK based supply chains but it did not make any explicit 
reference to climate resilience. 

Supply chain management from a climate risk perspective is on the 
whole not widely understood by businesses. In 2016, only 25% of 
FTSE 100 companies reported on supply chain adaptation or climate 
risk in their annual sustainability reports. The introduction of Non-
Financial Reporting Regulations and initiatives, such as the Task Force 
on Climate-related Financial Disclosures, may begin to shift 
businesses to report more actively on climate change risks, including 
those related to supply chains. 

Objective 27. To undertake 
research to increase the 
understanding of climate 
change impacts on growth 
and the economy, working 
with investors, insurers and 
other partners. 

There are two actions for this objective, which focus on better 
understanding of the risks to finance and the insurance sector and 
the links between adaptation and growth. Both actions were 
reported as being complete prior to our 2015 progress report. Since 
our 2015 Progress Report, the Prudential Regulation Authority 
published its review into the robustness of the UK insurance market 
to climate risks, and the Government has acknowledged that 
ongoing research in this area is necessary prior to the next NAP 
update. 

212 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change  


      

Chapter 6: Business 213 


 

Chapter 7: Local government


  

Key messages 

Context 

Local authorities are key partners in delivering many aspects of the National Adaptation Programme 
(NAP) discussed in the previous chapters, such as to manage flood risks and to respond to severe 
weather emergencies. To avoid duplication, in this chapter we review the progress being made by local 
authorities in assessing and strategically planning for climate change risks and opportunities, and in 
delivering key climate-sensitive functions that are important for adaptation such as spatial planning 
and public health.  

Summary of progress 

Local authorities have a critical role to facilitate and deliver adaptation action to address the 
specific needs, risks and opportunities faced by individual communities. Although the technical 
understanding of climate change amongst local authority officers has continued to improve, the 
resources and importance attached to local adaptation - including by central Government - have 
diminished since our last progress report in 2015. The evidence of progress being made by local 
authorities is limited and momentum in the sector is at risk of stalling. 

Officers have shifted from talking about climate change and adaptation to "community resilience" and 
"service continuity". This has the potential benefit of embedding climate change risks within corporate 
plans and risk registers. However, the pressures on local budgets, and lack of statutory requirements 
other than in relation to flood risk management, mean that the focus of resilience projects tends to be 
on addressing immediate issues, such as individual vulnerabilities highlighted by recent severe 
weather events. Evidence of strategic planning for longer-term risks from climate change is limited. 

For most local authorities there continues to be a focus on assessing and planning for flood risk, and 
responding to weather-related emergencies, with little attention paid to other aspects of adaptation. 

The current and future outlook for local government funding remains extremely challenging. In 
addition, the central government funding that was in place to engage and support local authorities on 
climate change adaptation has come to an end. This has resulted in the closure of the Environment 
Agency's Climate Ready Support Service, the Local Government Association's 'Climate Local' initiative, 
Climate UK, and more than half of Climate UK's regional climate change partnerships in England. The 
Local Adaptation Advisory Panel remains in place but the limited resources now active in the sector 
mean it is has restricted its activity toward informing the next NAP. 

Recommendations for further progress 

The completion of specific NAP-related activity, combined with a general lack of resources, has had a 
notable impact on momentum over the past two years. The lack of a requirement for authorities to 
monitor and report on the steps they are taking to adapt to climate change means there is little 
evidence at the national level to assess the level of progress being made. 

RECOMMENDATION 25: The Government should set out in the next NAP how it will ensure local 
authorities have access to the technical expertise, guidance, and practical tools they need following the 
closure of the Environment Agency's Climate Ready Support Service, Climate UK, and Climate Local. There is 
potential for professional bodies such as the Royal Town Planning Institute and the Chartered Institution of 
Water and Environmental Management to take a greater role in providing information, training and advice. 
(Owner: Defra/DCLG. Timing: next NAP report in 2018). 

RECOMMENDATION 26: To stimulate activity and improve monitoring and evaluation, local authorities 
should be included within the scope of the third round of reporting under the Adaptation Reporting Power. 
Defra should identify the most efficient and effective means for local authorities to report on the action they 
are taking and the progress being made to prepare communities for climate change. (Owner: Defra. Timing: 
2018). 


  


Chapter 7: Local government 215 


   

Key messages 

The devolution of powers to core city regions and elected mayors, and the associated changes in the 
way services can be funded and prioritised locally, provides an opportunity to tackle vulnerabilities. 
The emphasis on partnership working within the core cities and Local Enterprise Partnerships is well 
aligned with, and at an appropriate scale for, addressing climate change risks. Collaboration between 
Local Enterprise Partnerships and Local Nature Partnerships should be encouraged so that investments 
in natural capital and climate change adaptation are integral to regional economic growth plans. 

RECOMMENDATION 27: The next NAP should develop stronger sub-national approaches to climate 
change adaptation that promote business and infrastructure resilience, healthy communities, and 
investment in natural capital. For example, there is the opportunity to build on current arrangements and 
work with London and the core city regions, the metro mayors, and the Local Enterprise and Local Nature 
Partnerships. (Owner: Defra. Timing: 2018). 

Local authority land-use planning and building control functions are crucial in shaping local adaptation 
to climate change as well as in promoting policies that reduce greenhouse gas emissions. There is 
evidence that climate change has in effect been de-prioritised in the land-use planning system. 

RECOMMENDATION 28: The Government should review the effectiveness of the land-use planning system 
in achieving reductions in greenhouse gas emissions from buildings and transport, and enhancing the 
resilience of communities and the built environment to the impacts of climate change. The review should 
consider both strategic and local land-use allocation, and building and infrastructure design. (Owner: DCLG, 
Timing: By 2020). 

Many of the recommendations in previous chapters are also relevant to local authorities, including: 

• Recommendation 12: More and better co-ordinated action is needed to manage the lack of 
capacity within drainage systems to cope with increases in heavy rainfall. 

• Recommendation 13: Policy is needed urgently to address the outstanding barriers to deliver 
high quality, effective sustainable urban drainage systems (SuDS) in new development. 

• Recommendation 14: Defra should develop a long-term strategy to manage flood risk down to 
tolerable levels in each part of the country. 

• Recommendation 15: The Environment Agency, with coastal groups and relevant authorities, 
should review the progress being made in implementing Shoreline Management Plans and 
preparing communities for the coastal adaptation that will need to take place by the 2050s. 

• Recommendation 16: A standard or regulation should be put in place to reduce the risk of 
overheating in new homes. 

• Recommendation 17: Action should be taken to assess and reduce the risks of overheating in 
existing buildings, such as hospitals, schools, care homes and prisons.  

• Recommendation 18: The Cabinet Office should, in consultation with Local Resilience Forums 
(LRFs), (a) commission an independent review of the planning scenarios underpinning local Risk 
Registers and use the results to help LRFs assess the resources needed to manage these events, 
and (b) strengthen the Emergency Planning Guidance to clarify and test responsibilities for co-
ordination amongst Category 1 and Category 2 responders, as well as between neighbouring LRFs. 

• Recommendation 21: The Cabinet Office should review information sharing arrangements 
between Local Resilience Forums and relevant infrastructure operators. 

• Recommendation 24: The Government should examine the use of public procurement rules to 
promote the management and disclosure of climate change risks and adaptation measures. 



     

216 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


   


7.1 Local government action on climate change adaptation 
Local councils have a critical role to play in climate change adaptation. Local authorities 
are well placed to understand the short and longer term risks faced by their communities, 
and to lead and facilitate action to address them. This includes preparing for the 
opportunities which could arise from a changing climate. 

The important role that local authorities play in managing climate change risks has already been 
discussed in the previous chapters of this report. Local authorities hold important policy levers, 
such as local spatial planning and the enforcement of building regulations, and are responsible 
for the delivery of a range of relevant services such as local flood risk management, public health 
and social care, and emergency planning. This chapter therefore considers whether local 
authorities are using local policies and plans, and the delivery of important functions and 
services, to manage the risks and realise the opportunities from the changing climate for the 
benefit of local communities. 

Although the role of local authorities continues to be crucial to addressing local 
vulnerabilities, their capacity to respond is limited by budgetary pressures and the 
relative importance of other, often more immediate, local priorities.364  

Since 2010, councils have had to manage a 37 per cent real terms reduction to their core 
government grant and meet any funding gaps through council tax income, savings and 
efficiencies.365 Alongside this there have been escalating resource demands in other key services, 
in particular social care, meaning that councils are diverting funds from discretionary budgets 
such as climate change adaptation.366 This has resulted in reduced resources not only in 
dedicated climate change roles, but also within core functions discussed later in this chapter as 
being ‘climate sensitive’.367 In addition, the decision to leave the European Union will impact 
local authorities’ access to EU funding sources and networks, such as the European Structural 
and Investment Funds (ESIF). The last government committed to maintain funding to ESIF 
projects signed before the UK leaves the EU. It is not yet clear what domestic measures, if any, 
will replace ESIF in the longer-term. 

Key elements of the current National Adaptation Programme in the local government 
sector have come to an end since our last progress report in 2015.  

The Environment Agency's Climate Ready Support Service ('Climate Ready') was set up in 
October 2011 initially for a period of three years with a budget of £2 million per year.368 Climate 
Ready supported adaptation activity across the NAP's themes, including initiatives focused on 
enabling and supporting local authority adaptation activity. The Environment Agency also 
helped fund the regional Climate Change Partnerships (CCPs), coordinated by Climate UK, and 
the Climate Local programme run by the Local Government Association (LGA). Following an 
internal review in late 2015, ministers decided that Climate Ready was no longer a priority for 
funding and the programme closed in March 2016. 

364 JRF (2015) The Cost of the Cuts: The Impact on Local Government and Poorer Communities.  
365 National Audit Office (2014) The Impact of Funding Reductions on Local Authorities.  
366 Local Government Association (2016) Adult social care funding: 2016 state of the nation report. 
367 Based on a series of discussions with local government representatives. 
368 The Climate Ready programme began midway in 2011/12 with a budget of £1 million for the first six months. The 
budget was reduced to £1.6 million per year from 2013/14. In 2015/16 the budget was reduced further to around 
£1.3 million following an in-year savings exercise. 


  


Chapter 7: Local government 217 


 

                                                           

http://www.local.gov.uk/documents/10180/7632544/1+24+ASCF+state+of+the+nation+2016_WEB.pdf/e5943f2d-4dbd-41a8-b73e-da0c7209ec12


  

Climate Local and six of Climate UK's nine regional climate change partnerships in England 
closed in 2016. Three partnerships continue at a much reduced scale, utilising funding from 
other sources. Climate UK itself is in the process of being wound down and is expected to cease 
trading this summer. Alongside the direct impact of these closures, the change in funding has 
been perceived within the sector as a signal from central government that local adaptation is 
considered to be a low priority. 

RECOMMENDATION 25: The Government should set out in the next NAP how it will ensure local 
authorities have access to the technical expertise, guidance, and practical tools they need following 
the closure of the Environment Agency's Climate Ready Support Service, Climate UK, and Climate 
Local. There is potential for professional bodies such as the Royal Town Planning Institute and the 
Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management to take a greater role in providing 
information, training and advice. (Owner: Defra/DCLG. Timing: next NAP report in 2018). 

Alongside this reduction in funding and support for adaptation, there continues to be no 
obligation for local authorities to monitor and report their progress in managing climate 
change risks and opportunities. 

The limited requirement to report on adaptation activity under the Local Government National 
Performance Framework (specifically national indicator NI188) was withdrawn in 2010 and has 
not been replaced. The level of activity in voluntary action plans, progress reports and updates 
coordinated through Climate Ready and the Climate Local initiative has also dwindled over the 
past two years. The lack of data collection and reporting of local authority action makes it 
difficult to assess to what extent progress is being made. A lack of evidence will also hamper the 
ability to design and justify new initiatives. 

In our 2015 progress report to Parliament, we recommended that Defra and DCLG should 
introduce a cost effective and proportionate way of assessing the progress being made by local 
authorities, potentially by including local authorities in the next round of the Adaptation Reporting 
Power (Recommendation 36). The Government's response implied that options involving local 
authorities could be part of the public consultation exercise that will inform the approach to the 
third round of ARP reporting. The ASC's review of ARP Round 2 repeated the call for local 
authorities to be considered for inclusion in ARP3.369 

RECOMMENDATION 26: To stimulate activity and improve monitoring and evaluation, local 
authorities should be included within the scope of the third round of reporting under the Adaptation 
Reporting Power. Defra should identify the most efficient and effective means for local authorities to 
report on the action they are taking and the progress being made to prepare communities for climate 
change. (Owner: Defra. Timing: 2018). 

The remainder of this chapter is structured as follows: 

• Section 7.2 reviews the general progress being made by local authorities to assess and 
strategically plan for climate change risks. 

• Section 7.3 discusses the progress being made by local authorities in delivering climate-
sensitive functions such as spatial planning and local flood risk management. 

• Section 7.4 considers progress in relation to the four objectives set within the NAP for the 
local government sector. 

369 ASC (2017) Adaptation Reporting Power: second round review, https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/adaptation-
reporting-power-second-round-review/  


     

218 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


 

                                                           

https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/adaptation-reporting-power-second-round-review/
https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/adaptation-reporting-power-second-round-review/


  

7.2 Progress in assessing and strategically planning for climate change 
There are a number of good examples where local authorities are proactively assessing, 
strategically planning for, and taking action to address, climate change risks. However, 
this is not consistent across all local authorities and, in particular, monitoring and 
reporting activities appear to have lost focus and have diminished overall. 

Although some authorities continue to make progress, and individual actions established within 
local authority action plans are being implemented, the overall momentum for assessing and 
planning for climate change risks has diminished. A survey of local authority progress in 2016 
identified that most participating councils were planning and implementing climate change 
adaptation and resilience measures, either through a dedicated climate change strategy or 
identified within other council plans and strategies.370 However authorities were not typically 
revisiting and updating risk assessments nor were they monitoring and reporting on their 
progress.  

There is evidence that technical capability and understanding of climate change has 
improved over recent years, including within the climate-sensitive functions of local 
authorities. At the same time, the impact of budget constraints and other pressures mean 
local authorities have a reduced capacity to take action on climate change risks. 

Technical understanding of climate change within authorities appears to be improving. Officers 
involved in adaptation say there is a greater awareness of climate change risks across most key 
services and functions. For some authorities, for example Gloucestershire County Council, 
adaptation is an integral part of the risk management framework to be considered by all heads 
of services within their business continuity plans.371 

While there may be a greater proportion of planners, engineers and other officers who 
understand climate change risks and impacts, there is within councils an overall reduction in 
capacity and ability to respond. This means that achieving progress in adaptation can be 
dependent on informed and committed individuals and these people being in a role where they 
are able to influence funding and priorities. A Local Government Association survey of local 
authority progress highlighted that, for some councils, "climate change adaptation is a 
peripheral interest" due to the prioritisation of other core services.372 The LGA report also notes 
that the low response rate to the survey (20% of the 353 councils in England responded) means 
that the results may not be representative and that the response rate in itself could be an 
indicator of the importance and resources allocated to climate change adaptation. A survey of 
climate change adaptation resources and priorities commissioned by the Local Adaptation 
Advisory Panel in March 2017 received responses from only 32 local authorities in England.373 


  

370 LGA (2016) Climate Local adaptation survey. 
371 Based on discussions with council officers. 
372 LGA (2016) Climate Local adaptation survey. 
373 Online survey sent to local authority members of the Association of Directors of Environment, Economy, Planning 
and Transport (ADEPT), and the Association for Public Service Excellence (APSE). 


  


Chapter 7: Local government 219 


 

                                                           


  

Since the previous report there has been a change in the language used around climate 
change adaptation. The most significant is a general shift in focus from ‘adaptation’ as a 
primarily environmental issue towards discussing ‘resilience’ from a broader, economic 
and social perspective. 

In some cases this has been a conscious decision, to reposition the agenda and find ‘hooks’ for 
engagement which can be more easily aligned with the priorities of councils and other local 
partners.374 This has had a positive impact on the ability to embed climate change risks into local 
authority corporate plans and risk registers, and to secure funding for projects.  

A related change has been an increased focus on ‘service continuity’ as a driver for progress in 
addressing climate change risks. Climate-related disruption to services and the financial 
consequences of this are problematic especially where resources and budgets are already under 
pressure. A Severe Weather Impacts Monitoring System (SWIMS) tool developed by Kent County 
Council enables local authorities to monitor the financial impacts of severe weather events in 
order to help support the financial case for improved resilience.375 

The extent to which longer-term implications of climate change risks are being considered is less 
certain. In addition, there is a risk that accountability for adaptation or resilience sits with no 
single council department or individual; with examples of initiatives being driven by 
environmental, land-use planning or, as is increasingly the case, within emergency planning 
functions. 

The devolution of powers and budgets to core city regions has changed the way that 
services can be funded and how needs can be prioritised by the local government sector. 
Provided that this is combined with a strong focus on partnership working, devolution 
presents an opportunity for tackling regional climate change vulnerabilities. 

Under the 2011 Localism Act, the 'Core Cities amendment' allowed for decentralisation of 
decision-making and budgetary control for core cities, bringing enhanced powers and 
establishing combined authorities in some cases. There are now eight cities within England (and 
10 across the UK) which have been designated as ‘Core Cities’: Birmingham, Bristol, Leeds, 
Liverpool, Manchester, Newcastle, Nottingham, and Sheffield. 

Devolution means that prioritisation can be more readily influenced by the specific 
vulnerabilities of the region.376 The election of 'metro mayors' for six combined authorities in 
May 2017 offers further opportunities for local leadership on climate change risk management 
as part of policies that promote regional growth and investment in housing and transport, and 
in some cases also public health and social care.377 

The advantage of working with London and the core cities is that together they account for 
approximately a quarter of England's population and have established partnership 
arrangements in place at an appropriate scale for managing climate change risks and 
opportunities. London and the core cities, due to their staff numbers and connections, have the 

374 For example, the LGIU initiated dialogue with officers around ‘resilience’ and ‘business continuity’ to reposition 
adaptation and facilitate continued progress. 
375 Currently hosted by Climate UK at http://climateuk.net/resource/severe-weather-impacts-monitoring-system-
swims  
376 See: www.gov.uk/government/news/bringing-our-country-together-cities-towns-and-counties-to-get-stronger-
powers  
377 The six metro mayors elected in May 2017 are for: Cambridgeshire and Peterborough; Greater Manchester; 
Liverpool City Region; Tees Valley; West Midlands; and the West of England. The Sheffield City Region is due to elect 
a metro mayor in May 2018. 


     

220 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


 

                                                           

http://climateuk.net/resource/severe-weather-impacts-monitoring-system-swims
http://climateuk.net/resource/severe-weather-impacts-monitoring-system-swims
http://www.gov.uk/government/news/bringing-our-country-together-cities-towns-and-counties-to-get-stronger-powers
http://www.gov.uk/government/news/bringing-our-country-together-cities-towns-and-counties-to-get-stronger-powers


  

capacity and breadth to consider strategic issues in a way which smaller public authorities are 
less able to. In addition, the core cities' approach to ‘sustainable development’ is long 
established and provides a strong context for officers to address the adaptation and resilience 
agenda. The London Climate Change Partnership continues to be active, together with the Core 
Cities Climate Resilience and Adaptation Working Group. The core cities working group meets 
quarterly to provide a platform for sharing and support between cities on a range of climate 
adaptation areas, both within and beyond those set out within the Core Cities Commitment in 
the current NAP. 

RECOMMENDATION 27: The next NAP should develop stronger sub-national approaches to climate 
change adaptation that promote business and infrastructure resilience, healthy communities, and 
investment in natural capital. For example, there is the opportunity to build on current arrangements 
and work with London and the core city regions, the metro mayors, and the Local Enterprise and 
Local Nature Partnerships. (Owner: Defra. Timing: 2018). 

7.3 Progress in relation to ‘climate sensitive’ functions 

7.3.1 Land use planning and building control 

Local authority land-use planning and building control functions are crucial in shaping 
how local communities adapt to climate change as they develop and grow. The 
importance stems from the long life span of buildings and developments, and the 
infrastructure that serves them.  

Planning decisions have a direct influence on action to address climate change risk and to 
improve the resilience of communities. Decision-making which is misinformed, or with 
inadequate consideration of longer term implications, can exacerbate the potential risks for 
communities now and in the future. By demonstrating leadership in the development of 
planning policy, local authorities can:  

• Minimise flood and coastal erosion risk. In line with the National Planning Policy 
Framework (NPPF), local authorities should avoid inappropriate development in areas at risk 
of flooding and coastal change. Where such development is unavoidable, it should be 
delivered in a way which does not increase the risk of flooding elsewhere. The NPPF also 
requires local authorities to prioritise the use of sustainable drainage systems (SuDS) in 
developments. 

• Retain and enhance green infrastructure. The NPPF advises local authorities to take a 
strategic approach to planning for the creation and protection of green spaces. This can 
include measures such as green roofs, targeted urban tree planting, and constructed 
wetlands. Such measures can help to keep urban areas cool in summer and manage storm 
water in periods of heavy rainfall. 

• Address overheating risk. Local planning policies can reinforce the need for new 
developments to be planned and designed to manage internal temperatures. Factors such as 
solar gain and how this could be influenced by orientation, shading, window size and design, 
as well as ventilation and internal insulation, are all important for thermal performance. 

• Deliver resilient infrastructure. Local Planning Authorities (LPAs) need to make sure that 
new infrastructure is designed and appropriately located to take current and future climate 
change risks into account. 


  


Chapter 7: Local government 221 


 

Addressing climate change is a key component of delivering sustainable development and is a 
strategic priority in the NPPF.378 Making progress in assessing and planning strategically for 
these risks often requires collaborative approaches that cross authority boundaries. The duty 
placed on LPAs to cooperate with their neighbouring authorities provides an opportunity for 
achieving coordinated progress in addressing climate risks at an appropriate spatial scale. 

A recently published study by the Town & Country Planning Association (TCPA) concluded 
that local authorities are not using planning policy, as they are required to by law, to make 
progress on adaptation. Failure to use the full potential of the planning system will lead to 
avoidable impacts on local communities and the economy in the longer term.  

TCPA’s assessment of 64 Local Plans published since the NPPF was introduced in 2012 
highlighted a "large-scale failure" to implement the requirements of national planning policy, 
and specifically the policy requirements underpinned by the 2008 Climate Change Act.379 

The report found a wide variety of practice but concluded that climate change has been de-
prioritised as a policy objective in the spatial planning system. In contrast, the TCPA report 
highlights the "overwhelming’ priority" being given to the allocation of housing land within the 
planning system. The report also highlights the reduced capacity within the local authority 
planning service380, which hinders effective local policy-making, as well as a reduced capacity 
within the Environment Agency to support the development of local plans. 

Consideration of climate change within planning policy is centred on current flood risks. 

The Local Plans which do contain policy relating to climate change adaptation focus largely on 
current flood risks. Although heat stress was identified as a risk factor by almost half of the LPAs 
responding to the TCPA’s online survey, the assessment of Local Plans found only 15% to include 
policy wording on overheating or heat stress. Specific policies in favour of sustainable drainage 
systems was found in 56% of the local plans assessed but most policies were qualified with a 
‘where possible’ caveat. The TCPA study found that the climate resilience of locations was often 
not prioritised above other factors such as landscape and local infrastructure when considering 
land use options.381 

Although some authorities, particularly those in urban areas, are proactively planning to 
increase the use of green infrastructure, approaches and their impact are variable. 

There appears to be confusion among planners about what constitutes green infrastructure and 
how this differs to green space more broadly.382 It is important to consider not only the provision 
of individual green spaces, but how the network of trees, parks, green spaces, canals and rivers 
work together to deliver benefits to the community including in terms of climate resilience. 

RECOMMENDATION 28: The Government should review the effectiveness of the land-use planning 
system in achieving reductions in greenhouse gas emissions from buildings and transport, and 
enhancing the resilience of communities and the built environment to the impacts of climate change. 
The review should consider both strategic and local land-use allocation, and building and 
infrastructure design. (Owner: DCLG, Timing: By 2020). 

378 DCLG (2014) Climate Change Planning Practice Guidance.  
379 TCPA (2016) Planning for the Climate Challenge? Understanding the Performance of English Local Plans. 
380 On average there has been between a 35% and 45% reduction in capacity within planning departments.  
381 TCPA (2016) Planning for the Climate Challenge? Understanding the Performance of English Local Plans. 
382 Matthews, T, Lo, A.Y. and Byrne, J.A. (2015) Reconceptualising Green Infrastructure for climate change adaptation: 
barriers to adoption and drivers for uptake by spatial planners. Landscape and Urban Planning Vol 138, p155 -63. 

222 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 




7.3.2 Flood risk management 

The obligations on county and unitary authorities as Lead Local Flood Authorities (LLFAs), 
along with the impacts of recent flood events, has kept flood risk management high on 
local agendas. Despite this, progress in delivering on the requirements of the 2010 Flood 
and Water Management Act has been slow. Actions to tackle problems appear to be 
largely reactive. Vulnerability to damage from localised flooding remains significant and 
is likely to be growing. 

The Flood and Water Management Act requires unitary and county councils to take the 
leadership role on local flood risks and prepare a local flood risk management strategy. Further 
statutory obligations to prepare a register of key flood management assets, and investigate 
flood incidents, were also set. These obligations, along with the direct community and economic 
impacts of recent storms, mean local authorities place greater emphasis on assessing and 
planning for flood risk over other aspects of adaptation. These two factors have also assisted in 
justifying resources.383 

As of March 2016 only 114 out of the 152 LLFAs in England had completed and published their 
strategy.384 The Act requires strategies to include a cost-benefit assessment of the actions 
needed to meet the plans’ objectives. Only five out of the 90 strategies independently evaluated 
for Defra in 2015 met this requirement, with a further 30 strategies including a partial 
assessment.385 Most strategies did not specify how and when such actions would be 
implemented, again a legal requirement in the Act. Almost half of LLFAs had not developed a 
register of relevant flood risk management assets, and some of the registers that had been 
developed did not include assets owned by third parties. Knowledge of third-party assets, which 
could include local sustainable drainage features and water company drainage assets, is 
particularly important for managing surface water flooding. 

The impact of development on local drainage infrastructure is of particular, ongoing 
concern. A recent survey of relevant professionals found little confidence that efficient, 
high quality sustainable drainage systems are being included as part of new 
developments.386 

The Pitt Review in 2008387 identified two fundamental barriers to the widespread uptake of SuDS 
in new development. These were the automatic right developers have to connect developments 
to the existing drainage network, and difficulties agreeing who should be responsible for 
maintaining SuDS once constructed. As discussed in Chapter 4: People and the built environment, 
these barriers remain unaddressed. Where SuDS are included in new development the evidence 
suggests they tend to consist of 'grey' underground retention systems that do not deliver the full 
range of environmental co-benefits that are important for climate change adaptation. 

383 CAG Consultants (2017) Evaluation of the arrangements for managing local flood risk. 
384 Environment Agency (2016) Managing flood and coastal erosion risks in England, 1 April 2015 to 31 March 2016. 
385 CAG Consultants (2017) Evaluation of the arrangements for managing local flood risk. 
386 CIWEM (2017) A Place for SuDS? 
387 Pitt, M. (2008) The Pitt review: learning lessons from the 2007 floods. 

Chapter 7: Local government 223 




There are a number of examples of flood management measures which have successfully 
alleviated the impact of severe weather. Other examples of partnership and collaborative 
working on a regional level also provide useful models which could be replicated 
elsewhere. 

Although the pace of delivering the requirements of the Flood and Water Management Act may 
be slower than anticipated, there are some good examples of action that will help address 
climate-related vulnerability. After the widespread flooding in 2007, Gloucestershire County 
Council embarked on a programme of flood alleviation and management initiatives in 
partnership with a utilities provider and other agencies. There have been three severe weather 
events since 2012, considered by council officers to be of a similar scale to those in 2007, but 
with far less impact and the measures taken deemed effective. According to the officers, recent 
storms in Gloucestershire have affected tens of properties rather than hundreds or even 
thousands, as was the case in 2007. 

After the severe winter flooding on the Somerset levels and moors in 2013/14, a partnership 
between relevant organisations was created to improve the assessment and management of 
local flood risk. The establishment of the Somerset Rivers Authority (SRA) as a statutory body 
could also provide a useful model for other areas (Box 7.1). 

Box 7.1. A model partnership on local flood risk management? The Somerset Rivers Authority 

The Somerset Rivers Authority (SRA) was launched in 2015 as a response to the floods which occurred 
in the winters of 2013 and 2014, and the significant impacts of these events on local communities. 
Establishing the SRA was a key action of the Somerset Levels and Moors Flood Action Plan, developed 
at the Government’s request to provide greater control of and responsibility for work to maintain and 
improve water management in the area. 

The SRA’s purpose is to deliver higher standards of flood protection than can be funded from existing 
budgets and to create better protection and resilience against further flooding through the joint 
planning and delivery of projects. This is in addition to the partners’ existing flood risk management 
responsibilities.  

Established with interim funding of £2.7 million in the 2015/16 financial year (£1.9 million from Defra, 
£600,000 from Somerset County Council, and £200,000 in total from the county’s five district councils 
and the Somerset Drainage Boards Consortium), the SRA has a commitment from the Government to 
be established as a statutory body with the power to raise income. In the interim, in 2016/17, DCLG 
gave Somerset County Council and the five district councils the power to raise a shadow precept on 
council tax of up to 1.25%, for the purpose of funding the SRA’s business plan. This provided almost £3 
million towards its £12 million budget last year and gives confidence that funds will continue to be 
available in future years. 

Source: Somerset Rivers Authority. 

7.3.3 Highways and local transport 

Recent severe weather events have highlighted the consequences for local communities of 
disruption to roads and other transport infrastructure. An increase in strategic planning 
and investment in resilience by local authorities has begun in some regions (Box 7.2). 

Flooding is the most significant climate change risk to transport infrastructure in England, along 
with the impact of storm surges and erosion in coastal regions. The issue of vulnerability is not 

224 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 




limited to the roads themselves.388 Failure of key infrastructure components such as bridges, or 
landslides that block important transport corridors, can significantly increase travel times or can 
isolate local communities completely. For example, there was a significant impact for residents 
of Tadcaster, North Yorkshire, following storm Desmond in December 2015. This resulted in the 
loss of the only direct vehicular route over the river between the two parts of the town. Repairs 
took around 400 days, with the only access during this time being a temporary footbridge or a 
lengthy detour.389 

Box 7.2. HIRAM, the Highways Infrastructure Resilience Assessment Modelling tool 

Developed by the Southwest Highways Alliance (SWHA), HIRAM is a web-based application that 
enables authorities to assess resilience risks within the road network. It provides a network view of 
resilience risk and costs on an asset or weather event basis and as such supports an asset management 
approach to managing highways. It brings together individual authorities’ knowledge and enables a 
collective understanding of the costs likely to be associated with dealing with events affecting the 
highways network and the estimated benefits of building in resilience. 

Authorities plot resilience risk locations on a plan, and then enter details on the potential impacts. 
HIRAM analyses these data so authorities can see which events are more likely to happen and what 
disruption would be caused. HIRAM provides financial outputs which can be used directly in business 
cases as well as other details to support effective decision making. 

The South-West Highways Alliance invested £35,000 to establish the tool, with start-up funding of 
£25,000 from the Environment Agency's Climate Ready Support Service. The result is an improved 
picture of resilience across the whole of the South West to help understand the resilience risks and 
costs on a regional level, at minimal annual cost to the authorities (~£3,000). HIRAM continues to 
expand its coverage with the eleven authorities of the Eastern Highways Alliance recently joining. 

Source: South West Highways Alliance. 

388 ASC (2016) UK Climate Change Risk Assessment 2017: Synthesis Report, https://www.theccc.org.uk/uk-climate-
change-risk-assessment-2017/  
389 See: www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-york-north-yorkshire-38852930  

Chapter 7: Local government 225 

https://www.theccc.org.uk/uk-climate-change-risk-assessment-2017/
https://www.theccc.org.uk/uk-climate-change-risk-assessment-2017/
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-york-north-yorkshire-38852930


  

In Cumbria, storm Desmond caused three river systems to flood simultaneously. Dozens of 
bridges, many of which had stood for more than a hundred years, were damaged, swept away or 
undermined. Some bridges carry not only road and rail traffic but other vital services such a gas 
and water pipes, electricity cables, and digital networks. The loss of a bridge can lead to 
significant knock-on consequences. It is important for local authorities, in conjunction with 
utilities providers, to gain a better understanding of the consequences of common infrastructure 
such as bridges being lost, particularly for remote and vulnerable populations.390 

7.3.4 Public health and social care 

Under the 2012 Health and Social Care Act each county and unitary authority in England 
has a duty to take steps to improve the health and wellbeing of people in its area. 

Local authorities are responsible for commissioning services and initiatives which manage 
health protection incidents, disease outbreaks and emergencies, and reduce the public health 
impacts of environmental risks. 

There are examples of climate change risks to health being acknowledged within Joint Strategic 
Needs Assessments (JSNAs) produced by local authorities. There are fewer examples of these 
risks being reflected in the associated Joint Health and Wellbeing Strategies (JHWSs).391 
Although there is no statutory requirement to consider climate change within these documents, 
authorities are encouraged to do so and the Environment Agency’s Under the Weather toolkit392 
and Public Health England’s Public Health Outcomes Framework (PHOF) support this. Funding 
and resource reductions have led local authorities to focus on a narrower group of public health 
priorities, such as their statutory obligations on adult social care. Where relevant action is being 
taken, this is being driven by immediate objectives relating to flood risk management, fuel 
poverty and promoting active travel. 

Over the past two years there has been some work to assess overheating risks, particularly 
relating to vulnerable populations such as within care homes and other social care 
facilities. 

For example, the London Borough of Islington has a dedicated Seasonal Health and Affordable 
Warmth (SHAW) team, which sits within its environment department. As well as tackling fuel 
poverty, the SHAW team has also examined the effects of summer heat on health and wellbeing. 
A study of high-rise social housing in Islington surveyed 450 vulnerable households and 
provided support to help residents be better prepared for hot weather.393 

A study for the Joseph Rowntree Foundation reviewed the extent to which existing care homes 
and other care provision facilities are prepared for a hotter climate.394 The study found that 
summertime overheating is already a risk in care facilities but there is limited awareness and 
appropriate adaptation strategies to address the risks. Approaches could include both the 
design of facilities, and their day-to-day operation, particularly the control of heating systems. 
Building designs rarely consider overheating, or it is given a low priority within the design brief. 
Measures included in designs are sometimes later removed as part of 'value engineering' 
attempts to cut costs. Although there is an increased focus on understanding heat-related risk, 

390Dawson, R.J et al. (2016) UK Climate Change Risk Assessment Evidence Report: Chapter 4, Infrastructure. 
391 JRF (2016) Public health in a changing climate. 
392 Department of Health, SDU, PHE, EA (2014) Under the Weather: Improving Health, Wellbeing and Resilience in a 
Changing Climate. 
393 See: https://iris.ucl.ac.uk/iris/browse/researchActivity/6573  
394 JRF (2016) Care provision fit for a future climate. 


     

226 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


 

                                                           

https://iris.ucl.ac.uk/iris/browse/researchActivity/6573


  

progress in addressing it remains limited. There continues to be a perception that older people 
benefit from warmer conditions, with a more limited understanding of the potential health risks 
of excessive heat. 

7.3.5 Emergency planning and response 

Local authorities have a duty to cooperate with other key responders to plan and manage 
emergencies, including those from extreme weather events. Whist local authorities have 
improved their understanding of weather-related risks, they have concerns about capacity 
and resources to respond to such events. 

The 2004 Civil Contingencies Act requires local authorities, police, fire services, the NHS, the 
Environment Agency and other key responders in England and Wales to assess risks, plan for 
emergencies, and warn the public. These responders are organised in Local Resilience Forums 
(LRFs), established according to police force boundaries. 

Under the Act, local authorities have a specific responsibility to provide advice and assistance to 
business and voluntary organisations. All local authorities are also expected to have an 
emergency plan in place, including for severe weather, and to implement these as required. 
However, local authority responders interviewed by the ASC expressed concerns about 
decreasing resources to plan and respond to emergencies.395  

Recent events have shown that the effectiveness of community flood planning needs to be 
improved (see Chapter 4: People and the built environment). A review of storm Desmond found 
that the people affected felt unprepared for the event, suggesting they assumed that the 
physical flood defences in place would never fail to protect them. In many cases no formal or 
informal community-level flood emergency plans were in place, and people were either not 
registered for Environment Agency flood warnings or did not give enough credence to them.396 
The Cumbria Flood Action Plan commissioned after storm Desmond identifies actions to 
strengthen the approach to emergency planning and the responsiveness of agencies, together 
with actions to support communities in building their own resilience.397  

Although there has been an increased focus on understanding trends and impacts by some local 
authorities, supported by tools such as SWIMS, the extent to which this is used to look ahead 
and consider the longer term risks and vulnerabilities is less certain. LRFs say they feel prepared 
to deal with the events to which they have responded before, such as flooding, but less 
prepared for events that are more rarely experienced, such as heatwaves.398 


  

395 Jacobs (2017) for the ASC, Local Resilience Forum 2017 Interviews. 
396 JBA Trust, Zurich Insurance (2016) Flooding after storm Desmond.  
397 Cumbrian Floods Partnership (2016) Reducing flood risk from source to sea. 
398 Jacobs (2017) for the ASC. 


  


Chapter 7: Local government 227 


 

                                                           


  

7.3.6 Promoting local biodiversity and other natural capital assets 

As public authorities, councils have a duty to protect and enhance the biodiversity in their 
area.399 Local authorities also have responsibilities for managing parks, public gardens and 
other green spaces.  

Local authorities are able to use their functions to: 

• Improve and extend ecological networks to allow species to adapt and migrate as conditions 
alter with climate change. The resilience of green spaces can also be enhanced by choosing 
species suitable for the future climate. 

• Alleviate flood risk through the integration of green infrastructure in new developments and 
the protection of existing green spaces, which will help to manage surface water run-off. The 
incorporation of space for water within green spaces will also assist in managing drainage 
and flood risk issues. 

An assessment of the most recent Climate Local action plans identifies a number of actions 
related to both climate resilience and the natural environment.400 

For example, Climate Local action plans included commitments to: 

• use the planning system to promote biodiversity and create and protect networks of 
biodiversity and green infrastructure (including blue and green infrastructure mapping); 

• develop specific green infrastructure delivery plans; 

• explore ways to protect trees and plant new trees; 

• consider the impact of climate change on native wildlife and develop plans to address this 
(including alternative management regimes which may be required); 

• develop wildflower planting schemes; 

• review the parks and open space strategy; and 

• further enhance green spaces on housing estates. 

Natural England’s national biodiversity climate change vulnerability (NBCCV) assessment 
tool401 has been developed to enable the assessment of priority habitats for overall 
vulnerability to climate change. 

The tool analyses both sensitivity to climate change and the adaptive capacity of specific 
habitats. Local authorities are able to incorporate the outputs within their spatial planning to 
help protect and enhance biodiversity. The extent to which local authorities are aware of and 
using this tool is not known. 

The National Planning Policy Framework states that existing open spaces in developed areas 
should not be built upon unless the open space has been shown to be surplus to requirements; 
equivalent open space can be provided elsewhere, or the development provides alternative 
sports or recreation facilities. The last Government's housing white paper402 proposes to relax 
standards to protect open space, if there is deemed to be 'adequate provision' in the wider area, 
but gives no details on how this might be calculated. 

399 See Natural Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006, Section 40. 
400 LGA (2016) Climate Local Annual Report 2015/16. 
401 Natural England (2015) Natural England’s climate change risk assessment and adaptation plan (NE318) 
402 DCLG (2017) Fixing our broken housing market. 


     

228 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 


 

                                                           


  

There are no statutory requirements related to the maintenance of urban greenspaces, which 
leaves their management at risk from budget reductions. There is some anecdotal evidence that 
local authorities are removing trees from urban areas in order to reduce maintenance costs, 
including those which result from root damage to highways.403 

Recognising green infrastructure as a natural capital asset rather than a liability could help 
local authorities prioritise measures to protect and enhance their value, including in terms 
of improving human health and wellbeing, providing habitats, and contributing to 
adaptation. 

In other words, investments in green infrastructure can help local authorities deliver their 
statutory services as well as non-statutory ones. 

A key challenge for local authorities is how green infrastructure and other natural capital assets 
are accounted for on the balance sheet. At the moment the maintenance of such assets is 
considered a cost or liability. The ‘value’ of the asset is often taken as zero or given a nominal 
value because the accounting rules value assets at their resale value and community green 
spaces and natural infrastructure cannot be sold. It is important that the value of these assets is 
properly accounted for, recognising the range of benefits they deliver for the local community. 
This is beginning to happen with some local authorities taking better account of the 
environmental, economic and social benefits of green infrastructure, including how it can help 
reduce the burden on other services such as public health. 

7.4 Conclusions on NAP objectives and actions 
The objectives within the local government chapter in the NAP focus on the sector playing 
a central role in leading and supporting local adaptation. Of the eight actions relating to 
the local government theme,404 six are considered complete, with the remaining two 
identified as on track. 

The updates provided by the owners of these actions are presented in an annex to this report 
available on the CCC website. 

The responses from the owners of the actions demonstrate that the level of action seen in the 
period to 2015 has not been maintained due to resourcing pressures and the withdrawal of 
funding for the relevant national and regional support programmes. It is clear from the updates 
from action owners that there has been a need to refocus and reprioritise efforts. Commentary 
on progress in relation to each objective is summarised in Table 7.1. 


  

403 For example in Sheffield, see: http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-south-yorkshire-38024846  
404 Noting that there are a further 48 actions relevant to local government which are cross-referenced in the register 
of NAP actions. 


  


Chapter 7: Local government 229 


 

                                                           

http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-south-yorkshire-38024846




Table 7.1. Summary of progress for the Local Government actions and objectives in the NAP 

NAP Objective Commentary on progress 

Objective 28. To raise and 
maintain the profile of 
adaptation with local 
authorities and promote action 
to embed climate resilience 
across local authority services 
and responsibilities. 

The NAP has two actions against this objective, both owned by the 
Local Adaptation Advisory Panel (LAAP). The LAAP was established to 
support the local government sector, working closely with the 
Environment Agency’s Climate Ready Support Service, the Local 
Government Association, and Climate UK. Both actions are 
considered complete. 

In the period to 2015 the LAAP, working in collaboration with the EA 
and the LGA, helped to produce a number of outputs designed to 
raise awareness of climate risks and actions that can be taken by local 
government.405 For our 2015 report, the LAAP indicated that the 
actions set out in the NAP needed to be reviewed and made more 
challenging. In the subsequent period to 2017, in the context of 
reduced budgets and the closure of adaptation support services, the 
LAAP work programme has been reprioritised, from supporting local 
action, to focus on informing policy, in particular to feed into and 
prepare for the next NAP. 

Objective 29. To support local 
government to build a credible 
business case for action and 
take well-informed decisions 
both internally across service 
areas and externally with their 
local communities and 
businesses. 

The single action against this objective is considered complete, and 
refers to EA Climate Ready tools and guidance being developed and 
made available and accessible to all local authorities.  

In the period to 2015 Climate Ready, Climate Local, Climate UK and 
the Core Cities Group worked together to develop a business case for 
managing the impacts of severe weather and climate change. The 
guidance was launched at two regional seminars held in Birmingham 
and Warrington in the summer of 2015. It was circulated across a 
range of local government networks and received positive feedback 
from the sector. EA and the LGA also ran a webinar in the autumn of 
2015, to raise awareness of the report and in particular the work that 
can be done to address surface water flood risk. No further work is 
planned. 

The action also included the rollout of the Severe Weather Impacts 
Monitoring System (SWIMS) developed by Kent County Council. 
Although the SWIMS system is now available via the Climate UK 
website, no update was provided on how widely this is now in use. 
Only three of the nine Climate UK branches in England remain active, 
with significantly reduced capacity, after their funding from central 
government came to an end in April 2016. 

405 See: http://www.local.gov.uk/web/guest/climate-local/-/journal_content/56/10180/5832192/ARTICLE 

230 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 

http://www.local.gov.uk/web/guest/climate-local/-/journal_content/56/10180/5832192/ARTICLE




Table 7.1. Summary of progress for the Local Government actions and objectives in the NAP 

NAP Objective Commentary on progress 

Objective 30. To ensure the 
policy framework for local 
government supports councils 
to increase community 
resilience in partnership with 
local and regional players. 

The single action in this area is a general one for the Government to 
ensure policy and programmes are joined up, to enable and support 
local authorities to build resilience to the impacts of climate change. 
It is considered on track but with no specific further work planned. 

The update from the Government mentions a Cabinet Office 
initiative to develop and roll out a programme on community 
resilience in partnership with other government departments and 
relevant public agencies. This will include engaging local authorities 
and Local Resilience Forums, but with no further details provided. 

Objective 31. To support 
sector-led activities, which 
allow councils to make local 
commitments to address their 
own unique challenges and 
opportunities arising from a 
changing climate. 

The four actions against this objective refer to various local initiatives 
such as Climate Local, the Core Cities Group, and the Climate Ready 
Support Service. Three of the four actions are considered complete. 

There is limited progress on the remaining action, relating to the 
Core Cities Commitment. The Core Cities Climate Resilience and 
Adaptation Working Group continues to meet but reports that its 
activity has been constrained by resources and the loss of knowledge 
due to the movement of staff. The Working Group says these issues 
present a challenge to the Core Cities in continuing to make progress 
against this objective, including into the next NAP period. 

Chapter 7: Local government 231 




232 Progress in preparing for climate change   |   Committee on Climate Change 




Committee on Climate Change 
7 Holbein Place 
London 
SW1W 8NR

www.theccc.org.uk 

 @theCCCuk




