

   4 


1.5 Improving the evidence base 
As well as identifying priority climate risks in the UK, the second CCRA evidence report5 
identifies approximately 200 evidence gaps.  Each risk or opportunity in the CCRA2017 is 
assigned an urgency category based on the expert judgement of the ASC in consultation 
with CCRA report authors and reviewers. The ‘research priority’ category is reserved for 
those risks and opportunities where further evidence is needed to determine the urgency 
category that risk/opportunity falls into. The ASC continue to engage with others to find 
ways to address the evidence gaps highlighted in the second CCRA. They, and the 
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra), have secured funding for 
research projects for the third CCRA and are influencing other avenues of research to 
more closely address the highlighted gaps. 

Research Councils fund a significant amount of research relevant to climate change 
adaptation – such as the 2017 Marine Climate Change Impacts report cards6. Currently 
the majority of relevant research is supported by the Natural Environment Research 
Council (NERC), the Engineering and Physical Science Research Council (EPSRC) and 
the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC). The launch of UK Research and 
Innovation (UKRI) offers new opportunities for co-ordinating research across different 
academic disciplines and for multidisciplinary issues such as climate change.   

Following the recommendation to enhance communication of government research 
priorities in Sir Paul Nurse’s review of the UK Research Councils, the Defra Group 
published its areas of research interest in 20177. This document sets out the collective 
high level priority research questions across Defra and its agencies and public bodies and 
includes several relevant to climate risks and opportunities. 

The Met Office Hadley Centre Climate Programme (MOHCCP) was established by 
government (co-funded by BEIS and Defra) to provide world-leading scientific evidence on 
climate variability and change. The new 2018-2021 work plan has been designed around 
key questions that government has agreed with the climate science community need 
answering over the next five years and beyond. The new programme will make substantial 
advances in the prediction and projection of regional climate change with a greater focus 
on climate risks. It will also develop prediction and monitoring systems to enable rapid 
delivery of advice to government before, during and in the aftermath of extreme climatic 
events that affect the UK and other regions worldwide. The MOHCCP is also delivering the 

                                            
5 Climate Change Risk Assessment, 2017, URL: https://www.theccc.org.uk/tackling-climate-
change/preparing-for-climate-change/uk-climate-change-risk-assessment-2017/  
6 Marine Climate Change Impacts, URL: 
 http://www.mccip.org.uk/impacts-report-cards/full-report-cards/2017-10-year-report-card/ accessed 
05/07/2018 
7 Defra Group Areas of Research Interest URL: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/defra-group-
areas-of-research-interest accessed 05/07/2018 


 

https://www.theccc.org.uk/tackling-climate-change/preparing-for-climate-change/uk-climate-change-risk-assessment-2017/
https://www.theccc.org.uk/tackling-climate-change/preparing-for-climate-change/uk-climate-change-risk-assessment-2017/
http://www.mccip.org.uk/impacts-report-cards/full-report-cards/2017-10-year-report-card/
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/defra-group-areas-of-research-interest
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/defra-group-areas-of-research-interest


   5 


updated 2018 UK climate projections (UKCP18) which will provide an important building 
block for enhancing the evidence base for the third CCRA, due in 2022.   

1.6 Raising awareness and promoting action 
Adapting to our changing climate cannot be done by government alone. It will require 
collaboration across civil society, local authorities, private and public sectors and 
infrastructure providers. Communication of the risks, the impacts and the actions to take is 
an important part of this. 

Government will work to ensure that across society, people will be empowered with a full 
understanding of the climatic challenges and opportunities ahead. The 25 Year 
Environment Plan includes a goal to see more people from all backgrounds involved in 
projects to improve the natural world. We will make 2019 a year of action for the 
environment, putting children and young people at its heart. This “Year of Green Action” 
will provide a focal point for organisations that run environmental projects, and will 
encourage wider participation across society. The challenges and opportunities of a 
changing climate will inform the activities envisioned over the course of this year of green 
action. 

Government will also promote climate action within the business community and civil 
society. As committed to in the Clean Growth Strategy in 2017, government will work with 
businesses and civil society to introduce a Green Great Britain week in 2018. This will 
promote clean growth, showcase the latest climate science, and demonstrate our progress 
and successes on climate action and air quality issues. 

Under the 2018-2021 MOHHCP the Met Office will increase their commitment to 
communicating climate change to a wider range of audiences. The Met Office’s climate 
observations, predictions and projections will be made more accessible online. The new 
Climate Programme will continue to focus on exploring innovative ways to visualise and 
communicate climate data, in a way more likely to resonate with a public audience. 

Engagement with stakeholders will also take place within the context of climate projections 
work. Regular stakeholder engagement through user groups has been an integral part of 
the UKCP18 project. This will ensure that, when the new UK climate projections are 
released later this year, the data is useful and used both by government and wider 
organisations to ensure assets and operations are resilient to future climate and weather 
extremes.   

In addition to the engagement described above, there are several initiatives in the 
research community that are seeking to improve public engagement on climate science 
and impacts. For example, as part of the wider ‘Engaging Environments’ initiative8 NERC 

                                            
8 Engaging Environments initiative. URL: https://nerc.ukri.org/press/releases/2017/35-peprojects/ accessed 
05/07/2018 

https://nerc.ukri.org/press/releases/2017/35-peprojects/


   6 


are funding two projects to improve public engagement on climate change: the Climate 
Communications Project9 and Climate Stories10. The former is led by University of Leeds 
and aims to develop the national infrastructure to deliver high impact public engagement. 
The latter is led by University of Exeter and focuses on developing the narrative skills of 
scientists and evaluating the use of storytelling as a method to engage a diverse range of 
community groups. 

Government is also exploring how existing communication channels can be reinforced and 
we will continue working with professional bodies such as the Royal Meteorological 
Society to identify risks and actions to increase resilience and reduce vulnerability.  

1.7 Devolved administrations 
Climate adaptation policy is a devolved matter: Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have 
each established their own adaptation programmes. This NAP is primarily for England as 
well as covering UK reserved matters. The UK Administrations are committed to working 
closely together to share best practice and develop UK wide initiatives where appropriate. 

1.7.1 Scotland 

Scotland’s first statutory Climate Change Adaptation Programme Climate Ready Scotland 
was launched by Scottish Ministers in May 2014 under the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 
2009. The Programme has around 150 individual policies and proposals. Scotland’s 
second five-year Programme is under development and due to be published in 2019. 

Scotland is making significant investments in flood risk management; the water industry; 
improving the energy performance of housing; and increasing forest planting and restoring 
large areas of peatland. Other important developments include: public bodies climate 
reporting duties; climate adaptation indicators; a National Centre for Resilience; mapping 
flood disadvantage; Scotland’s National Coastal Change Assessment; risk assessment of 
Historic Environment Scotland's estate; risk assessment by the NHS Scotland estate; 
adaptation research fellowships; regional adaptation partnerships (Climate Ready Clyde, 
Edinburgh Adapts and Aberdeen Adapts); specialist support for the Programme by 
sustainability charity Sniffer under contract to the Scottish Government; and Glasgow’s 
hosting of the European Climate Change Adaptation conference in 2017. 

1.7.2 Wales 

Wales has strengthened its legislative requirements to build resilience to the impacts of 
climate change through the Wellbeing of Future Generations (Wales) Act 2015 and the 
Environment (Wales) Act 2016. Climate change is integral to all of the Well-being Goals 
and there is specific reference to a resilient Wales, which includes resilience to the effects 

                                            
9The Climate Communications Project. URL: http://theclimatecommsproject.org/ accessed 05/07/2018 
10 Climate Stories. URL: http://climatestories.virb.com/ accessed 05/07/2018 

http://theclimatecommsproject.org/
http://climatestories.virb.com/


   7 


of climate change. Climate change is also a key element of the Future Generations 
Commissioner for Wales’ role and the Future Trends Report and Public Service Board 
well-being assessments will need to take into account the latest Climate Change Risk 
Assessment. 

Welsh Government’s current Adaptation Delivery Plan was published in 2010, under the 
Climate Change Strategy for Wales. However, in light of the new legislation and emerging 
evidence such as the Climate Change Risk Assessment Evidence Report prepared by the 
Climate Change Committee, Welsh Government is now developing a new Climate Change 
Adaptation Plan for Wales which will be published in 2018. In addition, Wales is already 
taking significant steps in response to the latest Climate Change Risk Assessment. The 
Welsh Minister for Environment announced a £56m programme in March 2018 to improve 
flood and coastal erosion defences and support flood risk management activities across 
Wales over the next financial year. 

1.7.3 Northern Ireland 

In Northern Ireland, the Department of Agriculture, Environment and Rural Affairs 
(DAERA) takes the lead on climate change issues11. It works closely with Defra and the 
Devolved Administrations of Scotland and Wales. 

The current Northern Ireland Climate Change Adaptation Programme, produced in 2014, 
focuses on three adaptation principles: 

• Integrating adaptation into relevant key policy areas; 

• developing the evidence base; and 

• communication and cooperation. 

A second Northern Ireland Climate Change Adaptation Programme is being developed, as 
required by section 60 of the UK Climate Change Act 2008. It will contain the response of 
the Northern Ireland government to the risks and opportunities identified in the Northern 
Ireland Summary of the 2017 UK Climate Change Risk Assessment. 

                                            

11DAERA climate change. URL: https://www.daera-ni.gov.uk/topics/protect-environment/climate-change 
accessed 05/07/2018 

https://www.daera-ni.gov.uk/topics/protect-environment/climate-change


   8 


Chapter 2: Natural environment 
Vision 

The natural environment with diverse and healthy ecosystems, is resilient to climate 
change, able to accommodate change, and valued for the adaptation services it provides. 

Profitable and productive agriculture and forestry sectors that take the opportunities from 
climate change, are resilient to its threats and contribute to the resilience of the natural 
environment by helping to maintain ecosystem services and protect and enhance 
biodiversity. 

The 25 Year Environment Plan sets out our goals for improving the environment within a 
generation and leaving it in a better state than we found it. We will ensure that resources 
from nature, such as food, fish and timber, are used more sustainably and efficiently. 
Maintaining a healthy environment will mean that it is more resilient to the impacts of 
climate change.  


   9 


2.1 Climate change risks 
Our lives and livelihoods depend on our natural environment and the benefits it provides – 
from timber, food and clean water to pollination, carbon storage and the cultural benefits of 
landscapes, archaeological sites and wildlife. CCRA2017 identifies significant risks to this 
natural capital from the scale and rate of climate change, which may be too much for some 
natural systems to adapt to. 

As signalled in our Industrial Strategy12 and our 25 Year Environment Plan, the UK is 
using a ‘natural capital’ approach as a tool to help us make key choices and long-term 
decisions, reflecting the full value of the benefits offered by the environment. We have 
already begun to change the way we think about the environment throughout government 
policy, and in March 2018 the Treasury Green Book was updated in line with advice from 
the Natural Capital Committee to encourage across government the use of a natural 
capital approach. 

What is natural capital? 

Natural capital is the sum of our ecosystems, species, freshwater, land, soils, minerals, 
our air and our seas. These are all elements of nature that either directly or indirectly 
bring value to people and the country at large. They do this in many ways but chiefly by 
providing us with food, clean air and water, wildlife, energy, wood, recreation and by 
capturing and storing carbon and helping to protect us from hazards like flooding. 

We will work with academic partners to further develop the evidence base on issues 
affecting natural capital, with relevance to climate change adaptation. 

We are seeing changes to ecosystems due to temperature, sea level rise or extreme 
events, of which the latter are predicted to increase in frequency and severity. These all 
impact on the benefits the environment provides.  

We are also seeing shifts in the distribution and abundance of some terrestrial, freshwater 
and marine species due to higher temperatures. There is evidence that some species are 
already moving northwards and to higher altitudes, tracking where suitable climates are 
now found. Where species are unable to move in response to climate change there is a 
risk they will continue to decline.  

Such risks from climate change are heightened because the natural environment is 
already under pressure. Pollution, habitat loss and fragmentation, diseases and invasive 
non-native species, the continuing drainage of wetlands and the unsustainable use of soil, 
water and marine resources all reduce the natural resilience of species and ecosystems 
and their ability to adjust and adapt.  

                                            
12Industrial Strategy. URL: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/industrial-strategy-building-a-britain-
fit-for-the-future accessed 05/07/2018 

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/industrial-strategy-building-a-britain-fit-for-the-future
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/industrial-strategy-building-a-britain-fit-for-the-future


 

  10 

There are potential opportunities that arise from a modest level of climate change, through 
extended growing seasons and improved productivity in agriculture, forestry and fisheries. 
These opportunities will, however, only be realised if limiting factors such as water 
availability, soil health and pests and diseases are managed.  

Key risks identified in CCRA2017 where further action is needed are: 

Risks to 
species and 

habitats due to 
inability to 
respond to 
changing 
climatic 

conditions 

Risks to 
agriculture and 

wildlife from 
water scarcity 
and flooding 

Risks to soils 
from increased 

seasonal 
aridity and 

wetness and 
risks to natural 
carbon stores 
and carbon 

sequestration 

Risks of land 
management 

practices 
exacerbating 

flood risk 

Risks to habitats 
in the coastal 

zone from 
sea-level rise; 

and loss of 
natural flood 
protection 

2.2 Building ecological resilience 
One of the objectives in the first NAP was to build the resilience of wildlife, habitats and 
ecosystems (terrestrial, freshwater, marine and coastal) to climate change, to put our 
natural environment in the strongest possible position to meet the challenges and changes 
ahead. Building ecological resilience to address risks to species and habitats (and the 
benefits they provide) is a key recommendation of CCRA2017. 


 

  11 

We remain committed to delivering ecological resilience and building on the actions 
delivered as part of the previous NAP, as we take forward action aligned to the wider 
environmental goals of the 25 Year Environment Plan. Within this document, actions to 
build ecological resilience have been grouped by broad environments: on land and in lakes 
and rivers; and at sea. 

2.2.1 On land and in lakes and rivers 

Our approach to building ecological resilience on land and in lakes and rivers is to: 

Taking a targeted approach 

To address the risks of climate change we will target our interventions across urban 
and rural areas so that they restore, expand and link our existing ecosystems and 
wildlife habitats. Defra and its delivery bodies will increasingly use spatial analysis of 
where interventions are likely to have the greatest benefits for wildlife and people to 
underpin this targeted approach with evidence. 

For ecosystems, habitats and species on land and in our rivers and lakes, we have set 
out clear commitments in the 25 Year Environment Plan. We will continue to maintain a 
coherent network of protected sites and to take action to improve their condition. We 
will also develop a Nature Recovery Network to complement and connect our best 
wildlife sites. This will be an expanding area of increasingly connected wildlife-rich 
habitat to help build resilience to climate change. 

NE, working with other delivery bodies and with external partners, will increasingly 
operate at a catchment or landscape scale, seeking to connect areas of existing 
habitat. We will also work to deliver multiple benefits in urban and rural areas, by 
restoring landscapes, including woodland, peatland, wetland and coastal habitats that 
provide benefits for water quality, natural flood management, carbon capture and public 
enjoyment alongside wildlife gain.  

NE’s new Conservation21 strategy reinforces government’s commitment to developing 
resilient landscape and seas, and includes focus areas and landscape scale delivery 
pilots, where we are focussing our resources and engagement. Climate change 
adaptation will be an important part of these plans. 

1. Protect and improve our protected sites and other areas of important wildlife 
habitat; 

2. restore degraded ecosystems, for example by restoring ecological and hydrological 
functions and expand and connect high quality wildlife-rich habitat; and  

3. reduce pressures from other sources such as water and air pollution and 
invasive non-native species 


 

  12 

In some cases it will not be possible to build resilience through the management of sites 
and habitats, or by reducing other pressures and we will need to take specific action for 
species and habitats at particular risk. For example, we will need to address sea-level rise 
through a programme of coastal re-alignment (see section 2.5). We may also need to 
consider translocations for rare and isolated populations of climate-sensitive species and 
will consider this as we develop our code of practice on re-introductions. In some cases, 
impacts are unavoidable, and we will have to accommodate change, updating, for 
example, our protected sites common standards assessment criteria to take account of 
climate change. 

Our approach to building ecological resilience on land and in lakes and rivers is reflected 
in the long-term goals and commitments in the 25 Year Environment Plan, as set out 
below. 

1. Protect and improve our protected sites and our other areas of important wildlife 
habitat 

Protected sites networks are globally recognised as a key nature conservation tool, to 
protect important natural habitats and the habitats of rare, threatened and/or vulnerable 
species, including migratory species, so as to contribute to their long term survival. Our 
protected sites will also form a core component of our planned Nature Recovery Network 
and act as a focus for action to expand and link our best sites for wildlife. There are a 
range of national and international designations13 affording high levels of protection, 
principally achieved through a consenting regime that enables planning and other 
authorities to control activities that may adversely impact sites.   

Targeted action will be required to maintain and restore their condition to contribute both to 
the current target in Biodiversity 202014 (95% in favourable or recovering condition and 
50% in favourable condition), and as a contribution to our long term goal in the 25 Year 
Environment Plan (75% in favourable condition by 2042). 

Working with Natural England (NE), Defra will continue to support the management of our 
protected sites through the delivery of agri-environment schemes and supporting other 
project based-approaches, funded through a range of programmes or other external 
funding mechanisms. 

NE will maintain an active partnership with major landowners and other stakeholders to 
deliver a programme of improvements for protected sites, ensuring that climate change is 

                                            
13 Special Areas for Conservation, Special Protection Areas, Ramsar sites, Sites of Special Scientific Interest 
and National Nature Reserves. 
14 Biodiversity 2020 is the Government’s current strategy for Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services. 

25YEP Goal: Restore, by 2042, 75% of our terrestrial and freshwater protected sites to 
favourable condition, securing their wildlife value for the long term 


 

  13 

considered as one of the pressures in site management. For our most important sites, this 
will be informed by Site Improvement Plans (SIPs). 

NE will progressively incorporate adaptation planning into assessments of the condition of 
Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) and the conservation objectives on new sites. 
NE will also continue to assess the climate change vulnerability of all National Nature 
Reserves that they manage and include appropriate responses in site management plans 
by 2023. 

Government will also work to restore protected freshwater sites to favourable condition, 
and will remove or reduce other anthropogenic pressures (e.g. overfishing, over-
abstraction, damming, pollution, habitat destruction etc.). 

Defra will work to make sure that our management of protected sites facilitates the 
appropriate travel of species across habitat ranges, whilst at the same time working to 
ensure their survival in existing locations. 

Over time, habitats and species composition on protected sites will change in response to 
climate and other factors. Defra will work to make sure that our management of protected 
sites takes such changes into account, informed by periodic reviews of parts of the 
network (such as for Special Protection Areas). 

2. Restore degraded ecosystems and expand and connect high quality wildlife rich 
habitat 

To deliver the 25 Year Environment Plan’s goal of 500,000 hectares of wildlife-rich habitat, 
we will develop a Nature Recovery Network: an expanding network of wildlife habitat to link 
our existing protected sites and landscapes more effectively.  

The Network will comprise a series of Nature Recovery Areas and we will explore options 
for delivering up to 25 of these at landscape or catchment scale over the next 25 years. In 
addition to these defined areas, we will also take a targeted approach within the wider 
fabric of our countryside and urban areas. This will create both an improved buffer 
between, and better connect, our protected and local sites. It will deliver on the 
recommendations from Professor Sir John Lawton for more numerous, bigger, better and 
more joined-up sites for nature that are better able to adapt to the challenges they face, 
including climate change.  

NE and the wider Defra Group will work with a range of external partners during the five 
year period of the NAP to design and start to deliver the Network. NE will provide advice, 
resources and support to ensure that climate change resilience is enhanced in landscapes 
and habitats that are vulnerable to climate change, and throughout the Network. This will 

25YEP Goal: Create or restore, by 2042, 500,000 hectares of wildlife-rich habitat 
outside the protected site network, focusing on priority habitats as part of a wider set of 
land management changes providing extensive benefits 


 

  14 

include the development of ecological networks and the restoration of natural processes, 
soils and hydrology.  

The Network will be delivered through a range of funding streams. Although agri-
environment schemes are likely to be a key source of funding, Defra will seek to broaden 
the funding base for the Network, and maintain effective partnerships by working with 
delivery partners and with charitable and private sector funders. NE, advising Defra, will 
regularly review the evidence base to ensure the approach delivers resilience in the 
context of climate change. 

Agri-environment schemes have been the principal mechanism for improving the condition 
of habitats both on and off the protected site network and for creating new habitats. 
Government will develop a new Environmental Land Management System that will deliver 
benefits such as increased biodiversity and climate change mitigation and adaptation.The 
system will be introduced in the next Parliament.  

The 25 Year Environment Plan contains separate goals on woodland15, and this will also 
provide opportunities for developing our Nature Recovery Network. Further detail on plans 
in these areas is given in section 2.5, 2.6 and 2.7 of this report. 

3. Reduce pressures from other sources 

The 25 Year Environment Plan contains a range of goals and commitments on reducing 
environmental pressures such as water, air quality and invasive non-native species.  

Further detail on plans to increase resilience to disease and invasive non-native species is 
given in section 2.3 of this report. 

4. Take actions for species and habitats at particular risk from climate change 

This section primarily deals with species conservation actions. Section 2.5 provides 
information on action to address risks to habitats from sea level rise.  

Our species conservation action from the 25 Year Environment Plan is: 

As a party to the UN Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), the UK has committed to 
preventing extinction of known threatened species and improving their conservation status, 
particularly of those most in decline. 

                                            
15 Increase woodland in England in line with our aspiration of 12% cover by 2060 (planting 180,000 hectares 
by end of 2042) 

25YEP Goal: Take action to recover threatened, iconic or economically important 
species of animals, plants and fungi, and where possible to prevent human induced 
extinction or loss of known threatened species 


 

  15 

This commitment is reflected in our current Biodiversity 2020 strategy, which implements 
the CBD in England, and in our new 25 Year Environment Plan. Government has 
committed to developing and publishing a new strategy for nature, to take forward our 
international commitments at home and to replace Biodiversity 2020. It will also be aligned 
with the existing UK marine strategy. Defra will set out further details on our plans for 
species in this strategy, including consideration of climate adaptation measures. 

Alongside the development of this new strategy, the Defra Group will continue to take 
action for our threatened species such as red squirrel, grey long-eared bats, cirl bunting, 
stone curlew and bittern. We will do this through our agri-environment schemes, species 
recovery programme and partnerships with farmers, landowners and conservation 
organisations.   

In 2018/19, NE will develop and consult on a code and best practice guidance for 
assessing the merits and risks of species reintroduction and translocations projects, taking 
account of climate change as well as their contribution to global and domestic 
conservation priorities, community engagement and wider social and economic impacts.  

The Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science (CEFAS) and the 
Environment Agency (EA) will continue to develop methods to improve stock assessments 
and to quantify and manage human and natural impacts on fish populations, towards 
securing them in safe biological limits supporting sustainable levels of exploitation. 
Examples of progress include delivering eel management plans and adopting the Salmon 
5 Point Approach.  

2.2.2 At sea 

In the first NAP, Defra committed to protecting and restoring marine habitats to increase 
their resilience to climate change. This action was led by the designation of Marine 
Protected Areas and utilising conservation zones as a network of habitats to aid the 
movement of species affected by climate change and decrease threats such as over-
fishing. 

Looking forward, as we leave the Common Fisheries Policy we will introduce a sustainable 
fisheries policy. Government has published a Fisheries White Paper ahead of the new 
Fisheries Bill, setting out our future approach to ensure sustainable use of fish stocks, a 
healthy marine environment and a prosperous fishing industry as we leave the EU. 

The 25 Year Environment Plan sets out our commitment to: 

1. Increase and improve our management of the seas; 
2. ensure productive and extensive seafloor habitats which can support healthy, 

sustainable ecosystems; and 
3. Recover and maintain fish stocks at levels that can produce their maximum 

sustainable yield. 


 

  16 

Increase and improve our management of the seas 

The Marine Management Organisation will, by 2021, have prepared 10 marine plans, 
covering the whole of the English marine area, which will include policies for climate 
adaptation. The preparation of new plans will include horizon scanning to evaluate the 
potential longer term risks and opportunities from climate change.  

We will continue to establish Marine Conservation Zones to contribute to an ecologically 
coherent network of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs). Completion of the network and, 
where appropriate, introduction of new management measures, will take account of 

anticipated impacts of climate change. The Foreign and Commonwealth Office will 
continue to work to create a Blue Belt around the UK’s 14 Overseas Territories, subject to 
local support and environmental need, supported by £20 million of funding between 2016 
and 2020.  

On 8 June, World Oceans Day, we started a consultation on the third tranche of Marine 
Conservation Zones. Forty one new sites were proposed, to add to the 299 Marine 
Protected Areas already established in UK waters. The aim is that once these are 
designated our contribution to the international ecologically coherent network will be 
substantially complete. 

1. Ensure productive and extensive seafloor habitats which can support healthy, 
sustainable ecosystems 

Government will continue to support the United Kingdom Marine Climate Change Impacts 
Partnership (MCCIP), which brings together scientists, government, its agencies and 
NGOs to provide co-ordinated advice on climate change impacts and adaptation around 
our coast and in our seas Through its ‘Climate Smart’ working initiative, the MCCIP will 
continue to collaborate with selected marine sectors to develop adaptive capacity, using 
the best available evidence on climate impacts.  MCCIP will work with the EA, Public 
Health England (PHE), CEFAS, and the Food Standards Agency (FSA) to improve 
understanding of and responses to climate change impacts on water-borne pathogens and 
harmful algal blooms. 

Government will continue to support ocean acidification research in order to provide a 
robust baseline assessment which can be used to examine long-term changes. 

25YEP Goal: Increasing the proportion of well managed seas and better manage 
existing protected sites. 

25YEP Goal: Ensuring seafloor habitats are productive and sufficiently extensive to 
support healthy, sustainable ecosystems; reversing the loss of marine biodiversity and, 
where practicable, restoring it. 


 

  17 

2. Recover and maintain fish stocks at levels that can produce their maximum 
sustainable yield 

Seafish, the industry body with a remit to support the profitability and sustainability of the 
seafood industry, will publish a climate change adaptation report during this NAP period. 
This will describe the steps that the fisheries and aquaculture sectors are taking to 
respond to climate change, focussing on risks and opportunities associated with climate 
change in the UK aquaculture sector (such as new species that can be cultured in warmer 
waters). Seafish will also continue to produce annual climate change updates for the wild-
capture fishing industry to provide surveillance of new fishing opportunities.  

Action to address impacts of coastal sea level rise is set out in Chapter 4: People and the 
built environment. 

2.3 Enhancing biosecurity: increasing resilience to 
disease and invasive non-native species 
Pests, diseases and invasive non-native species are a threat to the environment and the 
services and benefits it delivers, as well as being problematic for our homes, gardens and 
the wider landscape. These pressures are likely to be exacerbated by climate change. We 
remain committed to our objective in the first NAP to increase resilience to natural 
hazards, pests and diseases so as to help protect biodiversity, maintain agricultural and 
forestry productivity and protect the UK’s ability to export products.  

As set out in the 25 year environment plan we aim to: 

1. Manage existing plant and animal diseases and lower the risk of new ones 

There is already a robust system of horizon scanning and international monitoring for 
animal disease threats. This ensures that we have a reliable early warning system that 
enables us to implement targeted active surveillance for high impact diseases to 
supplement our system of passive and scanning surveillance for new and emerging 
diseases. For example, the bacterial pathogen of plants Xylella fastidiosa has been 
detected in a number of countries in continental Europe and presents a threat to numerous 
plant species in the UK. Defra has successfully argued within the EU for stricter measures 
to be taken to reduce the risk of this pathogen being moved to the UK. Defra is also 

25YEP Goal: Ensuring that all fish stocks are recovered to and maintained at levels 
that can produce their maximum sustainable yield, while protecting the wider marine 
environment. 

1. Manage existing plant and animal diseases and lower the risk of new ones; and 
2. tackle invasive, non-native species. 


 

  18 

monitoring developments in Europe in order to determine whether additional measures are 
necessary. 

PHE has a targeted surveillance programme to monitor invasive disease vectors 
(organisms such as mosquitoes which transmit disease or parasites). This programme 
aims to develop and update our understanding of the status, distribution and abundance of 
potential vector species. There is now a cross-government contingency plan in place for 
dealing with invasive mosquitoes and this will be enhanced to cover other veterinary and 
medically important insect vectors. 

Defra and the Animal & Plant Health Agency work closely with the Met Office, PHE and 
UK reference laboratories to identify and model areas of the UK which are at most risk of 
notifiable exotic vector borne diseases and have the capability to model potential disease 
spread if a disease incursion takes place. 

Future research projects on plant health will make use of the forthcoming UKCP18.  This 
work will help to ensure that the plant health risk register reflects the risk posed by pests 
as the climate changes.   

Since the publication of the first NAP, the mechanism by which the UK assesses plant 
health risk has been updated, with the creation and deployment of the UK Plant Health 
Risk Register (UKPHRR). The UKPHRR allows not only for the characterisation of risk but 
also prioritisation, via a scientifically based process to decide on the key actions to be 
taken to reduce risks, such as research and contingency planning.  

External stakeholders (e.g. groups representing agriculture, horticulture, forestry and 
environmental protection) will continue to play an important role in contributing to plant 
health risk assessments, to help determine the scale and impact of current and possible 
future threats.   

Industry and private veterinarians also have a role to play in scanning surveillance for new 
and emerging threats, including those resulting from climate change. We are working 
across the industry to better utilise data held by business, private labs, veterinarians and 
animal keepers. This data will enable us to develop a more comprehensive surveillance 
system in the future. 

Pest specific contingency plans are being drafted for high priority plant health pests. 

See section 2.7 for more detail on forestry. 

2. Tackle invasive non-native species 

25YEP Goal: Tackling invasive non-native species by continuing to implement the GB 
invasive non-native species strategy.1 


 

  19 

We will continue to implement a programme of invasive non-native species surveillance 
and risk analysis across Great Britain, coordinated by the GB non-native species 
secretariat. We will continue action to prevent the establishment of novel, and the spread 
of established, invasive species by building on our successful contingency planning and 
rapid response action, working across government to contain outbreaks and prevent 
species such as the Asian hornet gaining a foothold in the UK. 

We have a dedicated alert system which allows the public to report Asian hornet sightings 
which are then identified by the National Bee Unit (NBU). There is also a network of 
sentinel apiaries that carry out active surveillance for the species. Over 4500 sightings 
were reported (including emails, online and through the app) in 2017 (compared to 2700 in 
2016). We remain vigilant, working closely with the National Bee Unit and their nationwide 
network of bee inspectors to monitor for further outbreaks. 

Volunteers play a key role in supporting government to implement the GB invasive non-
native species strategy. Between 2011 and 2015 Defra provided £1.5 million in grants to 
help establish Local Action Groups (LAGs) to tackle aquatic and riparian invasive non-
native species in England. Since 2015, Defra has been funding the role of the LAG Co-
ordinator to facilitate increased collaboration across the LAG network and develop a 
regionally based approach to tackling invasive non-native species. 

We will seek to eradicate high priority invasive non-native species identified by risk 
analysis, establishing contingency plans for high priority new arrivals, and implementing 
management plans for priority established species where eradication is not feasible. We 
will develop pathway action plans to reduce the risk of invasive species introduction into 
England from all high priority pathways. We will continue to support initiatives that compile 
and analyse species data so that we can track trends in species distributions.  

2.4 Water availability and quality 
In this section we set out our objectives to: 

2.4.1 Abstraction 

Water abstracted from our environment provides essential water for public water supply, 
agriculture and industry. Protecting groundwater levels and adequate flow in our rivers is 
also essential for supporting healthy ecology, enhancing natural resilience to drought, and 
ensuring that rivers continue to support wellbeing and recreation.  

1. Reform our approach to water abstraction; and 
2. improve water quality, reverse the deterioration of groundwater and reduce 

emissions of harmful substances. 


 

  20 

Our objective in the first NAP was to manage water resources effectively to maintain 
environmental resilience whilst meeting the needs of society, agriculture and industry.  

In the 25 Year Environment Plan, we set out our goal to reform our approach to water 
abstraction. This will be achieved in a number of ways: 

Since 2008 the EA has made changes to over 270 abstraction licences to prevent over 30 
billion litres of water per year being removed from the environment where abstraction is 
unsustainable. Currently, environmental actions are focused on meeting targets set for 
water bodies in the River Basin Management Plans and improving resilience to future 
pressures from climate change. Actions in catchments may include: 

• introducing controls on more licences to improve environmental protection, 
particularly at low flows; 

• capping licences to prevent increased abstraction damaging the environment; and 

• adjusting the use of surface water and groundwater sources to make the best use 
of water when it is available while protecting the environment. 

The government’s abstraction plan16 sets out in more detail how we will improve the way 
we manage water abstraction, to protect the environment and improve access to water.  

The plan has three main elements: 

• Addressing unsustainable abstraction: the EA will change abstraction licences to 
protect the environment where there is the greatest impact; 

• stronger catchment focus: bringing together the EA, abstractors and catchment 
groups to develop local solutions to existing pressures and to prepare for the future; 


and 


• modernisation: making sure all significant abstraction is regulated and bringing 
regulations in line with other environmental permitting regimes. Improving the online 
service provided to abstractors to reduce administrative burdens and provide real-
time information about the availability of water for abstraction.  

                                            
16 Water abstraction plan 2017. URL: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/water-abstraction-plan-
2017 accessed 05/07/2018 

1. By making sure that water companies take a leading role in addressing unsustainable 
abstraction as part of the Water Industry National Environment Programme; 

2. regulating all significant abstractions that have been historically exempt; and 
3. updating 10 abstraction licencing strategies to capture agreed solutions to 

environmental pressures in catchments. 

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/water-abstraction-plan-2017
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/water-abstraction-plan-2017


 

  21 

Defra will report to Parliament in 2019 on progress made on delivering abstraction reform. 

We believe that working collaboratively at a catchment scale will improve understanding of 
local challenges and help identify the right solutions to make better use of the water 
available. The EA will work with abstractors and existing local groups, such as catchment 
partnerships, in catchments facing the greatest challenges. It will produce updated 
abstraction licensing strategies that capture agreed solutions to environmental issues and 
set out approaches to help abstractors access the water they need.  

2.4.2 Water quality 

Water quality runs throughout the 25 Year Environment Plan and is discussed in more 
detail in the agriculture and forestry sections 2.7 and 2.8.  

NE will implement our Site Improvement Plans (SIPs), including actions arising from the 
climate change theme plan we have developed for Natura 2000 sites. Furthermore, we will 
work to restore natural processes within river systems. This will enhance water storage 
capacity to buffer against drought and will provide semi-natural habitat with a valuable role 
to play in increasing resilience of wildlife to a changing climate. 

The EA produces Catchment and River Basin Management plans which set out the 
actions we will take to improve the condition of or water environment. These take account 
of the value of the natural environment and the pressures on it including the potential 
impacts of climate change. The EA will continue working with external partners 
(particularly catchment partnerships) to ensure that third cycle RBMPs take account of 
pressures from long term climate change, and try to ensure that projects delivered in 
second cycle plans are also resilient to long term climate change.  

As set out in the Clean Growth Strategy17, we will work with industry in the agricultural 
sector to encourage the use of low-emissions fertiliser. We will explore the potential for 
new innovative and sustainable fertilisers, such as bio-stimulants, to improve nutrient use 
efficiency; and explore the viability of fertiliser production by recovering nutrients from 
wastes and other organic materials. Smarter targeting of fertiliser type and application will 
reduce the potential for negative impact on water quality and air quality. We will review the 
levels of take-up over the next five years using data from the British Fertiliser Practice 
Survey. This will provide evidence to shape our future policies. 

2.5 Natural flood management and protection of coastal 
habitats 
Our objective in the first NAP was to work with individuals, communities and organisations 
to reduce the threat of flooding and coastal erosion, encouraging natural flood 

                                            
17Clean Growth Strategy. URL: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/clean-growth-strategy accessed 
05/07/2018 

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/clean-growth-strategy


 

  22 

management solutions, including that resulting from climate change, by understanding the 
risks of flooding and coastal erosion, working together to put in place long term plans to 
manage these risks and making sure that other plans take account of them. 

As set out in the 25 Year Environment Plan we aim to: 

Natural flood management (NFM) approaches and/or working with natural processes can, 
in the right place, provide opportunities to manage water flow, potentially reducing the risk 
of flooding to our communities. NFM measures alone will not offer protection to areas of 
greatest risk or in the face of the most significant flood events. Good integrated flood 
management will see these incorporated alongside conventional defences.  

The evidence for Natural Flood Management interventions is growing year on year, and in 
2017 the EA published a comprehensive assessment based on a study of some 65 case 
studies which gives communities the tools to make Natural Flood Management 
interventions18. We recognise that more is needed to fully understand the effectiveness of 
these interventions at scale and for medium to large flood events. We will continue to 
support NFM approaches, strengthening the evidence base on the effectiveness, and use 
these findings to encourage increased use of natural flood management where 
appropriate, and alongside engineered defences. We want to see the principles of NFM 
integrated into a holistic approach to flood risk management and will be looking how this 
informs future funding arrangements. In support of this, by 2020 the EA will publish an 
industry standard NFM design manual to assist in selecting appropriate NFM measures. 

Beyond flood risk management, this government also recognises the additional value that 
NFM interventions can bring to improving the resilience of wildlife sites, biodiversity and 
clean water, We expect NFM to be included in options appraisals when considering 
opportunities for addressing flood risk to maximise benefits of better catchment 
management across a wide range of objectives   

As we continue to explore and refine the role of NFM schemes, we will monitor and 
evaluate their effectiveness, allowing us to improve future programmes. Historic England 
are undertaking research to use understanding of the history of catchments to inform 
natural flood management. A report is due at the end of 2018. 

There is an established network of habitat compensation programmes around England 
that continue to identify coastal habitat creation opportunities. Over the 5-year period of 
this NAP, work will continue working to maintain coherence of internationally protected 

                                            
18 Working with natural processes to reduce flood risk. URL: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/working-with-natural-processes-to-reduce-flood-risk accessed 
05/07/2018 

1. Explore greater use of natural flood management techniques where these are 
appropriate 

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/working-with-natural-processes-to-reduce-flood-risk


 

  23 

coastal habitats through a programme to restore historic habitat loss and address 
anticipated losses. For more information on the protection of coastal habitats, see chapter 
4.3 on protection of coastlines. 

2.6 Protecting soils and natural carbon stores 
The CCRA highlights the risks posed to soils from increased seasonal aridity and wetness 
as a result of climate change and risks to natural carbon stores. It describes more action 
being needed to reduce existing pressures on soils, increase uptake of soil conservation 
measures and restore degraded soils. 

2.6.1 Soils 

Healthy and fertile soils provide the foundation for farming and forestry. The quality and 
type of the soil, in part determined by underlying geology, also influences the distribution of 
plant species and provides a habitat for a wide range of organisms. We need to ensure 
healthier soils by addressing the cause of soil degradation such as erosion, compaction 
and the decline in organic matter. Addressing these issues will have a range of co-benefits 
for managing a wide range of climate and non-climate related risks and avoid future loss of 
the UK’s most fertile and carbon-rich soils. Many soil conservation actions are also cost-
effective to implement now, especially when accounting for non-market values such as 
carbon and water quality. 

Our ambition as outlined in the first NAP is that by 2030 all soils will be managed 
sustainably.  

The 25 Year Environment Plan sets out our goals: 

1. Improved management of soils 

We will be working with the industry to update guidance on crop establishment and optimal 
tillage choice to ensure that farmers choose the best practices for their soils to reduce the 
rate of loss of soil and carbon. In addition, our new environmental land management 
system will aim to deliver benefits such as improved soil quality. 

1. Improved management of soils using natural capital thinking 
2. Improved soil health 

25YEP Goal: Improving our approach to soil management: by 2030 we want all of 
England’s soils to be managed sustainably, and we will use natural capital thinking to 
develop appropriate soil metrics and management approaches. 


 

  24 

To track our progress in achieving our ambition Defra will be investing at least £200,000 to 
help develop soil health metrics and innovative soil monitoring solutions. 

2. Improved soil health 

Agricultural and forestry soils are currently protected through outcome-based cross-
compliance soils rules and the UK Forestry Standard’s Forests and Soils Guidelines. 
Funding is provided to protect soil and water through the Countryside Stewardship 
scheme. Good practice for protecting soils is also included in the ‘farming rules for water’ 
which came into force in April 2018. Soils in the wider and urban environment are 
considered in the National Planning Policy Framework 

We are developing a soil health index that will make it simpler for farmers and land 
managers to monitor the quality of their soil, using indicators such as the level of humus 
and biological activity in the soil. This will allow us to assess whether management 
practices are having a beneficial impact on soil health and greenhouse gases mitigation, 
and provides the opportunity to consider how to utilise this data to develop a picture about 
the ‘population’ of national soils and trends. 

2.6.2 Peat 

Our peat bogs and fens are important habitats that provide food and shelter for wildlife, 
help with flood management, improve water quality and play a part in climate regulation. 
UK peatlands store at least 3.2 billion tonnes of carbon. Most peat soils support 
ecosystems that are sensitive to human activities such as drainage, grazing, liming, 
burning and afforestation. This makes them susceptible to degradation. The best available 
evidence suggests that less than 20% of the UK’s peatlands are undamaged19.  

The UK Forestry Standard20 was revised in 2017 and underpins forestry incentives, 
regulations and management planning. Its Forests and Climate Change Guidelines include 
requirements that aim to protect carbon stores and peat habitats.  

We are working towards strengthening protection for our peatlands. Measures such as the 
Peatland Code21, peatland restoration through agri-environment schemes, area 
designations and targets for the reduction of peat use in horticulture will help to achieve 

                                            
19 Bain, C.G et al (2011) IUCN UK Commission of Inquiry on Peatlands. URL: http://www.iucn-uk-
peatlandprogramme.org/sites/www.iucn-uk-
peatlandprogramme.org/files/IUCN%20UK%20Commission%20of%20Inquiry%20on%20Peatlands%20Full
%20Report%20spv%20web_1.pdf  
20 The UK Forestry Standard, 2017. URL: https://www.forestry.gov.uk/pdf/FCFC001.pdf/$FILE/FCFC001.pdf  
accessed 05/07/2018 
21 Peatland Code. URL: http://www.iucn-uk-peatlandprogramme.org/peatland-code accessed 05/07/2018 

25YEP Goal: Improve soil health and restore and protect peatlands – this will include 
developing a soil health index and ending the use of peat in horticulture. 

http://www.iucn-uk-peatlandprogramme.org/sites/www.iucn-uk-peatlandprogramme.org/files/IUCN%20UK%20Commission%20of%20Inquiry%20on%20Peatlands%20Full%20Report%20spv%20web_1.pdf
http://www.iucn-uk-peatlandprogramme.org/sites/www.iucn-uk-peatlandprogramme.org/files/IUCN%20UK%20Commission%20of%20Inquiry%20on%20Peatlands%20Full%20Report%20spv%20web_1.pdf
http://www.iucn-uk-peatlandprogramme.org/sites/www.iucn-uk-peatlandprogramme.org/files/IUCN%20UK%20Commission%20of%20Inquiry%20on%20Peatlands%20Full%20Report%20spv%20web_1.pdf
http://www.iucn-uk-peatlandprogramme.org/sites/www.iucn-uk-peatlandprogramme.org/files/IUCN%20UK%20Commission%20of%20Inquiry%20on%20Peatlands%20Full%20Report%20spv%20web_1.pdf
https://www.forestry.gov.uk/pdf/FCFC001.pdf/$FILE/FCFC001.pdf
http://www.iucn-uk-peatlandprogramme.org/peatland-code


 

  25 

this ambition. A Peat Strategy will be published in late 2018 and the peatland grant 
scheme commenced in April 2018. We also aim to end peat use in horticultural products 
by 2030. 

Restore and protect peatlands 

We will create and deliver a new ambitious framework for peat restoration in England 
covering both upland and lowland peat. Where taking lowland peat soils out of production 
and restoration to semi-natural habitats is not the preferred option, we will develop new 
sustainable management measures to ensure that the topsoil is retained for as long as 
possible and greenhouse gas emissions are reduced. We will improve the representation 
of peat soils in the greenhouse gas emission inventory to enable the effectiveness of 
emission mitigation action to be tracked more accurately. 

We are funding peatland restoration. In July 2017, we launched a £10m grant scheme and 
funding was made available from April 2018 to be spent on 4 peatland restoration projects 
over 3 years. The scheme will improve the condition of 6,580 hectares of upland and 
lowland peatlands in England thereby reducing carbon emissions (by an estimated 23,000 
tonnes of carbon dioxide per year once restoration is completed) and delivering multiple 
environmental benefits. 

We will continue to work with the horticultural industry to support their transition to peat 
alternatives. However, if we do not see sufficient progress by 2020 we will explore the 
introduction of further measures. Further detail on this will be set out in the England 
Peatland Strategy. 

2.7 Forestry 
Our objective in the first NAP was to increase the resilience of the forestry sector by 
increasing the level of management in England’s woodlands and the uptake of adaptation 
good practice in woodland creation and restocking. 

Our goals in the 25 year environment plan build on this: we will increase woodland 
management and timber supplies, increase tree planting by creating new forests and 
incentivising additional planting on private land. We will promote urban tree planting 
through actions supporting Community Forests, both as part of the Northern Forest and in 
wider partnerships to bring trees and green infrastructure to towns and cities across 
England. This reflects the role of ‘the Urban Forest’ and ‘green infrastructure’ more 
generally in improving the urban environment and helping it adapt to the changing climate.  

25YEP Goal: Restore and protect peatlands – this will include ending the use of peat in 
horticulture. 


 

  26 

Our goals for this NAP are the following: 


 

1. Woodland resource is expanded and better linked to enhance its resilience at 
stand and landscape level 

The creation of new native woodland will enhance the resilience of the woodland resource 
to future climatic conditions and maintain habitat for woodland flora and fauna. Over the 
course of this NAP, we will embark on an annual planting rate of 5,000-10,000 ha of new 
woodland habitat (including new native woodland), keeping us on course to achieving 12% 
woodland cover by 2060 as set out in the 25 Year Environment Plan. Our goal of bringing 
more existing woodland into active management will also promote regeneration and 
improve the quality of the woodland habitat.  

As announced in the 25 Year Environment Plan, we will kick start the planting of a new 
Northern Forest, which will cross the country using the M62 corridor as its spine. With £5.7 
million of government funding, we will support the existing partnership of the Community 
Forests and the Woodland Trust to accelerate and further develop the Northern Forest. 
This will deliver accessible community woodland to a large swathe of England and at the 
same time contribute to meeting carbon budget commitments. We will also implement 
other policies to accelerate planting rates, including the introduction of a Domestic Carbon 
Offset Unit to strengthen carbon markets and Forestry Investment Zones to support 
woodland planting. 

2. Existing woodlands are more resilient to the impacts of climate change and pests 
and diseases 

The UK Forestry Standard (UKFS) recommends species diversification and the planting of 
more southerly provenances as adaptation measures, particularly where timber production 
is an important objective. The Forestry Commission, in conjunction with the Woodland 
Trust, has commissioned an evidence report to support appropriate action across all 
woodland types and reflecting different management objectives. The outcomes of this 
report will inform future policy development. 

Though guidance is in place, evidence indicates that there is insufficient uptake of 
adaptation measures, particularly relating to choice of planting stock, due to perceived 
impacts on levels of timber production. We are addressing this through clearer evidence, 

1. Woodland resource is expanded and better linked to enhance its resilience at stand 
and landscape level; 

2. existing woodlands are more resilient to the impacts of climate change and pests and 
diseases; 

3. adaptation is embedded within future forestry policy (post-CAP) to contribute to long 
term reductions of climate change risks; and 

4. woodlands are more resilient to natural hazards. 


 

  27 

supported by the Science and Innovation Strategy for Forestry in Great Britain, together 
with leadership from the sector from the Public Forest Estate. 

3. Adaptation is embedded within future forestry policy (post-CAP) to contribute to 
long term reductions of climate change risks 

As we exit the European Union, the successor to CAP will need to consider adaptation 
requirements in the context of the forestry sector. For example:  

• New policies that aim to accelerate the rate of woodland planting in England;  

• continuing to support resilient landscapes through targeted woodland creation; and 

• taking forward the sector’s Climate Change Action Plan which focuses on 
adaptation but also aims to protect and enhance forest carbon stocks and 
sequestration rates. 

These actions will contribute to a long-term reduction of risks through increasing the area 
of woodland and improving woodland condition and ability to adapt to the changing 
environment. 

4. Woodlands are more resilient to natural hazards 

This is about making sure that contingency planning and prevention training is delivered to 
the right people in order to ensure resilient woodlands when faced, for example, with an 
increasing threat of wildfires. 

For more information see Annex 2.  

5. The evidence base is enhanced 

All of the above must be underpinned with a strong evidence base, with any gaps 
addressed. Defra, working with the Forestry Commission, will ensure that the 
refreshed/replaced Science and Innovation Strategy for Forestry in Great Britain continues 
to support the implementation of adaptive actions across the forestry sector 

For more information see Annex 2 

2.8 Agriculture 
Agriculture has a vital role to play in managing the UK’s land and landscape, with more 
than 70% of England being managed as farmland. Farmland can make an important 
contribution to adaptation, including through support for biodiversity, mitigation of flood 
risk, and improved soil management. Changes may be needed to the crops grown, taking 
advantage of resource efficiencies, ensuring that the knowledge gained from R&D is 
transferred to changes on the ground, and taking up new technologies. Sustainable soil 
management will be critical to ensuring farm systems are resilient. While much of the 


 

  28 

planning will rightly fall to individual farm businesses, government will continue to support 
research, and will be introducing a new environmental land management scheme 
underpinned by natural capital principles. Our new Environmental Land Management 
Schemes will contribute to the delivery of the environmental outcomes outlined in the 25 
Year Environmental Plan, such as adaptation to the effects of climate change.  

Our objective in the first NAP was to increase the resilience of agriculture by effectively 
managing the impact of volatility in the occurrence and severity of rainfall events on water 
availability, flooding, soil erosion and pollution due to runoff. 

Many other policy areas will have an impact on, or be impacted by, agriculture. The 25 
Year Environment Plan outlines goals across other policy areas which are addressed 
elsewhere in this document: to tackle soils degradation, improve soils management and 
monitor soil health (see section 2.6.1); to protect and restore vulnerable peatlands (see 
section 2.6.2); and to ensure sustainable use of water resources and resilience of supply 
(see section 2.4.1) 

We have also been working towards embedding climate change adaptation into 
agriculture, horticulture and forestry research programmes, in order to improve knowledge 
of likely climate impacts and contribute to the development and uptake of climate resilient 
crops, tree and livestock species as well as relevant technologies. 

In the 25 Year Environment Plan we have committed to support farmers to turn over fields 
to meadows rich in herbs and wildflowers, plant more trees, restore habitats for 
endangered species, recover soil fertility and attract wildlife back. Alongside this we will 
ensure that food is produced sustainably and profitably. 

In working to increase resilience, government will work to ensure that the right actions are 
targeted in the right locations. Our plans will balance competing and conflicting demands 
to ensure that land is used in the best way to safeguard long-term sustainability, safety 
and productivity. 

Our new Environmental Land Management schemes will aim to deliver a range of 
environmental benefits such as mitigation and adaption to climate change. We are working 
closely with farmers, food producers and environmental experts across Britain to design a 
‘user friendly’ scheme for farmers and land managers, which reduces prescription, 
encourages scheme uptake, and could incentivise collaboration and landscape scale 
working. 

We will continue to support farmers and land managers in delivering the outcomes and to 
help them to work together to achieve benefits at landscape and catchment level.  

Agriculture is a key consumer of water, most notably during what tend to be drier months, 
when there is an increased public demand for water. We are working with farmers and 
other abstractors to ensure that abstraction licences are sustainable (see section 2.4.1) 
and that the agriculture sector has access to water and uses it efficiently.  


 

  29 

In February we published a consultation paper setting out options for supporting farming 
once we have the left the European Union. We will work closely with the devolved 
administrations on a framework that works for the whole of the UK and reflects the needs 
and individual circumstances of Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and England. As part of 
this, we will continue to engage regularly with all the devolved administrations to explore 
options on the design and appropriate extent of the forthcoming Agriculture Bill. 

The government actively promotes awareness of flood risks to farm businesses and 
encourages action to improve flood resilience – these actions are expanded on in section 
4.3. 

Government is also stimulating industry-academia collaboration, for example through the 
Agri-tech catalyst, which will help improve agricultural productivity and contribute to more 
environmentally sustainable agricultural systems. 

The Countryside Productivity scheme offers grants for farmers to invest in cutting edge 
technology and new equipment. Grants are available to help livestock, dairy, arable and 
horticulture farmers improve productivity through investing in new technology to reduce 
cost or improve product quality. 

In partnership with industry, we will encourage widespread adoption of precision 
agriculture, pioneer new approaches to crop protection and encourage more commercial 
research to improve plant breeding and agronomic techniques through schemes such as 
the ISCF Transforming Food Production programme which was launched in February 
2018. New approaches, such as vertical farming, can harness the combined power of 
robotics, photonics, artificial intelligence and smart energy management systems, as well 
as plant biotechnology. 


 

  30 

Chapter 3: Infrastructure 

3.1 Climate change risks 
Infrastructure operators provide fundamental services which ensure the proper functioning 
of our society and economy. Climate impacts on those services require careful 
management, underpinned by an evidence-based understanding of the likely implications.   

The CCRA identifies significant risks to infrastructure from flooding, rising sea levels and 
increases in the frequency and severity of extreme weather. The CCRA sets out that 
infrastructure networks near rivers will become more vulnerable to higher flows and, along 
with coastal infrastructure, could become impacted by greater levels of erosion. Increases 
in maximum wind speeds would have significant implications for many infrastructure 
networks. Changes in temperature and rainfall will place additional pressures on 
infrastructure across all sectors. Climate change combined with population growth may 
also put greater pressure on water availability and increase risk of drought. 
Interdependencies, where infrastructure providers rely on each other in order to provide 
their services, are not well understood. It is important to build a clearer picture of what the 
risks are and how these are mitigated.   

The key risks to infrastructure identified in the CCRA are: 

Risks to infrastructure 
from river, surface/ 
groundwater flooding 
and coastal flooding 
and erosion  

Interdependency risks 
to infrastructure asset 
management  

Risks to transport 
networks from 
embankment and 
bridge failure  

Risks to infrastructure 
from high winds, 
lightning, storms, and 
high waves  

The National Infrastructure Commission’s National Infrastructure Assessment is 
considering the major challenges that Britain’s infrastructure must overcome if it is to meet 
the needs of future generations. The interim assessment22 was published in 2017 and sets 
out three priorities for national infrastructure – tackling congestion, lack of capacity and 
carbon emissions. It identified that focus was required on seven key priorities including 
reducing the risks of extreme weather to make sure the UK can stand up to drought and 
flooding. 

                                            
22 Interim National Infrastructure Commission. URL: https://www.nic.org.uk/publications/congestion-capacity-
carbon-priorities-for-national-infrastructure/ accessed 05/07/2018 

Vision 

“An infrastructure network that is resilient to today’s natural hazards and prepared for 
the future changing climate 

https://www.nic.org.uk/publications/congestion-capacity-carbon-priorities-for-national-infrastructure/
https://www.nic.org.uk/publications/congestion-capacity-carbon-priorities-for-national-infrastructure/


 

  31 

To meet these priorities we need to ensure that infrastructure is located, planned, 
designed and maintained to be resilient to climate change, including increasingly extreme 
weather events. In order to reduce the risks of cascade failures which could be 
exacerbated by climate change, we need to improve our understanding and systems 
management of these interconnected and interdependent services.   

In general, infrastructure operators are private businesses, accountable directly to their 
customers, stakeholders and regulators, and as such are responsible for their own 
business continuity measures, including the provision of essential services which enable 
them, and their customers, to function. Government has a responsibility to ensure that 
there are no policy or regulatory barriers which prevent infrastructure operators from jointly 
or collectively managing interdependent risks arising from climate change. We also 
recognise that more action is needed to encourage information sharing between 
infrastructure operators to improve overall risk management.   

Different infrastructure sectors are affected differently by climate risks. Action to address 
the risks are set out on a sectoral basis below. Risks associated with the water sector are 
covered in Chapter 4 – People and the Built Environment. All infrastructure providers will 
be reporting in the third round of Adaptation Reporting. 

3.2 Energy sector 
The electricity sector has a well-developed understanding of the risk faced by flooding and 
a high level of mitigation is in place, and gas and electricity companies will again be 
completing ARP reports for the sector. Electricity network companies spent £130 million on 
flood defence work from 2010-15, with a further £100 million due to be spent on flood 
defence by networks before 2021. The Department for Business Energy and Industrial 
Strategy (BEIS) continues to monitor the network companies on their build programmes to 
make sure progress across the sector remains on track. Where defences are not yet built, 
all sites have been surveyed for suitability for temporary defences.  

Electricity network companies have continued to manage surface water flooding. Funding 
for this work is obtained by the Downstream Gas and Electricity sectors through the RIIO 
(Revenue = Incentives + Innovation + Outputs) price control. This is a ceiling on the 
amount companies can earn from charges to use the networks. Industry provides regular 
updates to BEIS, detailing their progress on addressing risks from surface water flooding. 

A cross-government and electricity network companies’ group assessed the resilience of 
electricity sub stations and the suitability of current substation flood protection guidance. 
They determined that guidance needed to be strengthened further in line with National 
Flood Resilience Review (NFRR) recommendations and this will be implemented in the 
current and next price control period. Building on the energy sector’s good understanding 
of relevant interdependent networks, BEIS will continue to work collaboratively with other 
departments to ensure further cross-sector understanding of interdependencies as part of 
resilience planning and risk management strategies.  


 

  32 

The gas sector also has a well-developed understanding of the risks posed by climate 
change. There is an inherent resilience of the gas networks due to most distribution assets 
being located underground. There could be an impact on some key above-ground assets, 
however these are expected to be localised and unlikely to lead to a loss of supply or 
result in a risk to gas supply.   

River and coastal erosion continue to be monitored around infrastructure that is 
recognised to be at risk and investment strategies are implemented where needed.  

For downstream oil, BEIS is currently investigating the benefits of further investigation into 
climate change adaptation and will discuss this with relevant stakeholders. 

For nuclear installations including operating reactors, the Office of Nuclear Regulation’s 
(ONR) Safety Assessment Principles23 underpin the regulatory oversight and scrutiny of 
licensees’ safety submissions throughout the lifecycle of the installation. The submissions 
must reflect internal and external hazards including the reasonably foreseeable effects of 
climate change over the lifetime of the facility as well as other factors such as coastal 
erosion, extreme weather and flooding. This approach is also reflected in joint guidance24 
ONR has produced with the national Environment Agencies for nuclear new build. 

High winds are a significant cause of disruption to electricity networks with the majority of 
damage and disruption to power and transport lines caused by falling trees and branches. 
CCRA recommended that greater understanding was needed on the implications of 
increased vegetation growth rates on future risks of damage from falling trees during 
storms.  

This is not a current research priority in view of the maturity of the Electricity sectors’ 
programmes to manage vegetation growth. It is expected that these arrangements reflect 
any impacts from future climate change 

The CCRA also recommended that further research is carried out to understand climate 
risks to existing and planned offshore renewable energy infrastructure. The Energy 
National Policy Statements (in particular EN-1 Overarching Energy NPS and EN-3 
Renewable Energy Infrastructure NPS) require applications for consent for new offshore 
renewable developments to take into account the potential impacts of climate change 
using the latest UK Climate Projections to ensure they have identified appropriate 
mitigation or adaptation measures. Offshore wind developers/operators, offshore 
transmission operators, turbine manufacturers, foundation fabricators, offshore 
transmission equipment manufacturers and installers consider and evaluate the impacts of 
the marine environment on the operating life of their equipment. 

                                            
23ONR Safety Assessment Principles. URL: http://www.onr.org.uk/saps/saps2014.pdf accessed 05/07/2018 
24 Joint guidance. URL:http://www.onr.org.uk/documents/2017/principles-for-flood-and-coastal-erosion-risk-
management.pdf accessed 05/07/2018 

http://www.onr.org.uk/saps/saps2014.pdf
http://www.onr.org.uk/documents/2017/principles-for-flood-and-coastal-erosion-risk-management.pdf
http://www.onr.org.uk/documents/2017/principles-for-flood-and-coastal-erosion-risk-management.pdf


 

  33 

3.3 Telecommunications sector 
The telecommunications sector considers flooding to be its most significant climate risk. 
The sector responded comprehensively to the NFRR, with all major providers surveying 
their estates and putting significant investment in both temporary and permanent 
defences.  

The Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) continues to work with the 
telecoms industry via the industry run Electronic Communications Resilience and 
Response Group which leads on resilience in the sector. They monitor the programme of 
remaining permanent defence improvements and tackle surface water flooding, which is of 
particular interest to the sector.  

Ofcom’s revised security guidance25 (published December 2017) contains explicit 
requirements for telecoms providers to ensure they meet NFRR obligations and to ensure 
all sites (not just those in scope of the NFRR) are adequately protected from flooding. 
Similar direction is also included with regard to protection from power failure. Revised 
industry guidelines on resilience will also reference flood risk. 

In relation to managing key interdependencies, the industry is also working with the energy 
sector in the context of co-ordinating power recovery in the event of a significant power 
outage as power loss is a major underlying cause of telecoms incidents. 

3.4 Transport sector 
The first NAP outlined the vulnerability of certain parts of the transport network and set out 
the Department for Transport’s (DfT) embedded measures to mitigate climate risks within 
road and rail strategies. DfT is continuing to work with the transport sector to increase 
climate resilience in the planning and design of transport infrastructure. DfT will keep 
incorporating adaptation into its major plans and strategies, thereby ensuring that 
infrastructure project management and appraisals take adaptation into account and ensure 
sustainable economic growth.  

3.4.1 Airports 

The location of most UK commercial airports, at higher elevation and on well-drained sites, 
means that the risk of flooding is reasonably low. Gatwick Airport lies in close proximity to 
river and stream networks and liaises closely with local authorities and the EA to mitigate 
and reduce its flood risk. The aviation industry has responsibility for developing and 
monitoring their own resilience strategies.  

                                            
25 Ofcom review of security guidance. URL: https://www.ofcom.org.uk/consultations-and-
statements/category-1/review-security-guidance accessed 05/07/2018 

https://www.ofcom.org.uk/consultations-and-statements/category-1/review-security-guidance
https://www.ofcom.org.uk/consultations-and-statements/category-1/review-security-guidance


 

  34 

Flood management strategies are included within larger airports26 resilience plans. Should 
an airport be severely affected by flooding, contingency measures are in place to ensure 
that services can be diverted to non-affected airports via standard air traffic control 
procedures. The UK Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) is the UK’s independent aviation 
regulator, with responsibility for economic, safety and consumer protection regulation, and 
airspace policy. CAA has responsibilities under the Civil Aviation Act 2012 to monitor 
resilience strategies at the regulated airports of London Heathrow and Gatwick. DfT liaises 
regularly with major airport operators and airlines and relevant surface access operators in 
relation to their preparedness to handle all potential weather related disruptions.  

Airport operators and air traffic control centres, as private companies, have responsibility 
to ensure their infrastructure remains resilient, and to work with the relevant national and 
local agencies to enable this. Since airports work as a network, the sector is resilient to the 
failure of one asset. Likewise, the UK’s two air traffic control centres are able to cover 
some aspects of each other’s operational functions if necessary, but there is an ongoing 
major IT programme which will enable much greater resilience. The new aviation strategy 
will consider the challenges for the wider resilience of the airport system that will need to 
be addressed by the aviation sector’s continued growth. In parallel, the government must 
ensure that growth is sustainable and is balanced with local and global environmental 
concerns. 

3.4.2 Ports 

At present around 95% of all goods entering and leaving Britain are moved by sea and the 
port sector directly contributes £1.7 billion to the UK economy. Ports are therefore of 
strategic importance to our country and we need to ensure their assets are protected and 
prepared for a changing climate. Ports are inherently susceptible to coastal flooding and 
as a result have established procedures for handling and monitoring current and future 
flood risk, including well-rehearsed flood plans. DfT has also set up ‘tidal surge’ 
workgroups across the UK which work with local resilience forums to understand and 
assess the local risk of coastal flooding and 
develop mitigating measures. Since the tidal 
surge of 2013 a number of ports have taken 
additional measures such as fitting larger lock 
gates and increasing the height of their flood 
defences to protect against the potential damage 
of future sea level rise.  

DfT has published a study on port connectivity27 
on 24 April 2018 setting out the importance of a 

                                            
26 Defined as those with over 5 million passengers per annum  
27 Transport connectivity to ports, 2018. URL: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/transport-
connectivity-to-ports-review-of-the-current-status-and-future-infrastructure-recommendations accessed 
05/07/2018 

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/transport-connectivity-to-ports-review-of-the-current-status-and-future-infrastructure-recommendations
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/transport-connectivity-to-ports-review-of-the-current-status-and-future-infrastructure-recommendations


 

  35 

successful ports industry to the economic health of the country, and makes 
recommendations that focus on freight connectivity to ports. Effective road and rail links 
are a key component of that connectivity, so the preparedness and adaptability of the road 
and rail networks to climate change could be an important operational factor for ports in 
the future. Disruption to these key access routes, either short or long term, can have an 
impact on the success of ports, but also on trade and economic growth.  

3.4.3 Rail 

The rail network is an important driver of UK economic growth, connecting our towns and 
cities with each other and enabling them to tap into large and diverse labour markets. It is 
also a mature network, much of which is over 100 years old and some of which is 
approaching 200 years old. Adverse weather, flooding, landslips and high winds can have 
substantial and far-reaching impacts on the rail network, as recent events such as those in 
South West England in 2014 and at Watford Tunnel in 2016 demonstrate. For these 
reasons, the Government places high importance on ensuring that the rail network can 
adapt to changing climate conditions, in order to safeguard its continued future operation. 

DfT has ultimate responsibility for ensuring that the rail network remains resilient to climate 
change. It relies principally on Network Rail, as the owner, operator and infrastructure 
manager of most of the UK rail network, to do this on its behalf. Government provides 
Network Rail with funding and with guidance on its strategic priorities, through the five-
yearly Periodic Review process. 

Government has announced that it will make significantly more funding available for 
investment in the Rail Network over the period 2019-24 (Control Period 6). The allocation 
of Control Period 6 funding is still being finalised, however, the Government is planning to 
increase Network Rail’s budget for renewals during this period, which is expected to 
deliver significant improvements to the resilience of the rail network. 

DfT’s High Level Output Specification for both the 2014-19 and 2019-24 periods contains 
specific requirements on Network Rail to “manage the resilience of the network to severe 
weather, taking account of the impacts of climate change, and to other potential threats”.   

In response Network Rail has now published resilience and climate change adaptation 
plans for eight core routes. These plans assess the potential impacts of climate change, 
and outline the action it will be taking to mitigate theses impacts on the route infrastructure.  
In addition, Network Rail published its Weather Resilience and Climate Change Adaptation 
Policy in 201728. 

Examples of work Network Rail is carrying out in the period 2014-2019 to support 
adaptation and improve resilience include: 

                                            
28 NR Weather Resilience and Climate Change Adaptation Policy 2017. URL: 
https://www.networkrail.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Network-Rail-Weather-Resilience-and-Climate-
Change-Adaptation-Policy.pdf accessed 05/07/2018 

https://www.networkrail.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Network-Rail-Weather-Resilience-and-Climate-Change-Adaptation-Policy.pdf
https://www.networkrail.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/Network-Rail-Weather-Resilience-and-Climate-Change-Adaptation-Policy.pdf


 

  36 

• to reduce flood risks - building pumping stations in flood-prone locations and 
installing infrastructure at higher levels when renewing infrastructure in flood prone 
areas; 

• to reduce the risk from landslides – introduce a programme aimed at identifying 
sites at risk, trialling remote condition monitoring to detect potential earthwork 
failures, and using this data to take targeted remedial action before failures occur. 
Remedial action could include stabilising the slope through improved drainage or 
re-profiling a slope adjacent to a railway. Network Rail is also funding research into 
novel slope stabilisation techniques and the scope for using new technologies to 
tackle slip-slope type failures; and 

• to reduce disruption caused by high winds – Network Rail have comprehensive 
procedures in place to manage vegetation in lineside locations, where vegetation 
can impact passenger services. Any vegetation removal is conducted in accordance 
with Network Rail’s environmental policy, which aligns with industry best practice. 
This requires Network Rail to consider surrounding wildlife and where possible, 
mitigate the impact of de-vegetation work so as to minimise the impact it may have 
on the environment. Network Rail have also established wind monitoring stations at 
key locations on the network. This enables Network Rail to monitor and prepare in 
advance of potentially dangerous weather conditions, allowing guidance to be 
disseminated to drivers so that they may limit their speeds, if necessary.  

In addition to its involvement with Network Rail, DfT encourages train operators to improve 
the resilience of their rolling stock, through the guidance the rail industry publishes on the 
specification and manufacture of new trains. The document, Key Train Requirements29, 
which is used to inform franchise specifications and train design, contains advice on how 
to ensure trains’ performance can be maintained throughout the vehicles’ lives in a wide 
range of climate conditions.  

The rail industry (including Network Rail and London Underground) have also 
implemented measures to manage the risks to passengers associated with high 
temperatures on public transport. For example, Network Rail have developed guidelines 
for the management of hot (and cold) weather events to mitigate variations in temperature, 
which are followed by all trains operating companies Network Rail also monitor rail 
temperatures so that speed restrictions can be imposed should there be a risk of rails 
moving due to temperature rises. London Underground similarly exercises various 
precautions including a system for ensuring critical station assets are in good functioning 
condition prior to hot weather (e.g. cooling systems in control rooms) and has 
progressively introduced air-conditioned rolling stock on all its sub-surface railway lines. 
DfT continues to work with infrastructure managers to extend the provisions for regulating 
temperatures at stations and on public transport across the country. 

                                            
29 Key Train Requirements. URL: https://www.rssb.co.uk/Library/improving-industry-performance/2016-08-
key-train-requirements.pdf. Accessed 05/07/2018 

https://www.rssb.co.uk/Library/improving-industry-performance/2016-08-key-train-requirements.pdf
https://www.rssb.co.uk/Library/improving-industry-performance/2016-08-key-train-requirements.pdf


 

  37 

3.4.4 Roads – strategic road network 

The economic and strategic value the Strategic Road Network (SRN) provides, makes it 
one of the most important assets in the UK as it carries nearly a third of all road traffic and 
two-thirds of heavy goods traffic. There are numerous interdependencies that exist 
between the strategic network and the wider transport and infrastructure systems. Climate 
change poses risks of severance of links or limits on the safe use of roads infrastructure. 
DfT officials work closely with Highways England (HE) on ensuring that strategic road 
network planning interacts well with other transport infrastructure developments, such as 
airports and High Speed Rail developments.  

HE are embedding resilience to climate change across business activities to maintain a fit 
for purpose SRN and increase safety. As part of ongoing work, HE is taking action to 
safeguard against flooding on the road network as set out in their climate change 
adaptation risk assessment30. Current activities include reducing flood risk to communities 
adjacent to the network; focussing on addressing all identified high priority flood risk 
locations recorded in the Drainage Data Management System. HE are in the process of 
finalising a Flooding Action Plan under their Environment Strategy. This will set out the 
approach to dealing with flood risk for the remainder of Road Period 1 (to 2020). In 
addition to this, HE are increasing drainage asset inventory and condition data coverage to 
better understand the condition of drainage assets on the SRN. HE will also ensure the 
consideration of coastal flooding and erosion risks as part of their strategy and future 
planning to the road network.  

HE has also begun a number of specific actions to mitigate flood risks at vulnerable points 
of the SRN in the first Road Investment Strategy (2015-20), including on the A66 in 
Cumbria and Junction 10 of the M6. Additionally, 37 flooding hotspots will be mitigated via 
major road schemes and over 160 flooding hotspot improvements will have been 
delivered.  

HE has identified a number of factors associated with climate change which could affect 
slope stability in their climate change risk assessment work. These factors include risks to 
increased erosion and instability at the base of embankment from flooding. In addition, 
increased precipitation is linked to increased water levels and pore pressures (pressure of 
groundwater held within soil or rock), which can lead to a greater risk of failure. Slope 
stability is well understood and regular inspections to evaluate stability are in place. A 
number of tools are in place to deal with hazard assessment on slopes. For example, the 
Design Manual for Roads and Bridges (HD22/08) sets out the standards for assessing and 
analysing the stability of earthworks such as cuttings and embankments, including any 
conditions that may contribute to future stability, such as drainage and groundwater 
conditions. Work is currently underway to update the requirements and advice document. 

                                            
30 Highways England, Climate Adaptation Risk Assessment Progress Update 2016. URL: 
(https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/596812/climate-adrep-
highways-england.pdf)   

https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/596812/climate-adrep-highways-england.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/596812/climate-adrep-highways-england.pdf


 

  38 

In addition, to guide decision making, hazard guidance notes and hazard guidance maps 
have been developed, including for slope stability. 

Current arrangements for managing risks of falling trees through winds and storms are set 
out in HE’s Asset Maintenance and Operation Requirements (AMOR) which has a specific 
section covering tree safety and states to “minimise the risk of trees or vegetation falling 
on the Area Network that could represent safety risk, obstruction or nuisance. This 
includes, but is not limited to, trafficked or pedestrian areas”. Compliance is validated by 
sample audits as specified by the service manager and a performance level of 100% is 
required.   

HE is now developing its plans for delivering the second Road Investment Strategy (2020-
25) with DfT. As part of this, HE will consider resilience to climate change across business 
activities to maintain a fit for purpose SRN and reduce its vulnerability to climate change 
events.  

3.4.5 Local roads 

Severe weather events in recent years have highlighted vulnerabilities in our highway 
network. These events demonstrate the need for action to be taken not just by HE but also 
at a local level. Local roads form 98% of our national highway network. Local highway 
authorities have a duty under the Highways Act 1980 to ensure highways, and the assets 
associated with them such as lighting and bridges, are well maintained.  

Overall, government is providing over £6 billion to highway authorities from 2015 to 2021 
for highways maintenance. Planning for the impacts of climate change, rather than 
reacting to it, is the best way to ensure the resilience of our networks and highway 
infrastructure, which in turn will help reduce costs. Climate change risks should be 
embedded in everyday work, such as planning for roads and maintaining highways. 
Resilience to extreme weather and climate change should also form part of every 
authority’s capital and maintenance programmes as well as their decision making 
processes. Guidance is provided to authorities to help them ensure they are mitigating 
risks caused by severe weather events that may be encountered. 

Since 2013 DfT has undertaken action to help in this process. This includes publishing the 
revised Asset Management Guide which highlights the importance of applying asset 
management principles to help achieve a more structured long term approach to 
maintaining networks, including considering climate change. The effects of extreme 
weather events on highway infrastructure assets should be risk assessed and ways to 
mitigate the impacts of the highest risks identified. In addition, we have also asked 
highway authorities to ensure that they have a resilient network as recommended in the 
2014 Transport Resilience Review. In October 2016 DfT published a revised Code of 


 

  39 

Practice: Well Managed Highway Infrastructure31. Climate change resilience features 
throughout the code and it asks authorities to: 

• ensure infrastructure is located, planned, designed and maintained to be resilient to 
climate change, including increasingly extreme weather events; and 

• better understand the particular vulnerabilities facing local infrastructure from 
extreme weather and long term climate change to determine actions to address the 
risks. 

In 2016 DfT introduced an incentive element into the funding allocated to local authorities 
for local highways maintenance32. This enabled local authorities to identify and use a local 
resilience network on transport infrastructure. Many local authorities are now working in 
close collaboration through highway alliances ensuring to share information and best 
practice locally on resilience and climate change adaptation which are published on a 
regularly33. In addition, DfT stays in close contact with Local Highway Authorities on a 
number of issues with regards to resilience of the local road network. For example, the 
department follows up ahead of every winter season on preparations in place to deal with 
severe weather events the country may encounter.  

3.4.6 Interdependencies – strategic roads network and local roads 

Interdependencies between the SRN and local roads are a specific issue HE have 
identified for further adaptation planning as their climate change risk assessment is being 
updated. An Infrastructure Operators’ Adaptation Forum (IOAF) working group has made 
progress on developing a tool to help identify and assess infrastructure dependencies and 
interdependencies. There is now IOAF agreement that a matrix-based approach could 
provide a practical means of identifying and mapping interdependencies, and of capturing 
supporting evidence towards identifying solutions (e.g. adaptation measures). HE is a 
member of IOAF which shares knowledge about adaptation planning activity between 
infrastructure operators. 

3.4.7 Other infrastructure services 

DfT is undertaking work as part of the NFRR to identify bridges that could potentially 
become a single point of failure for other infrastructure operators (for example by carrying 
telephone or power cables) and could be at risk in a severe flood event. This work will 
ensure that other sectors, including utility providers, can develop mitigating actions to help 
protect services. This work is continuing and is expected to be completed by summer 

                                            
31 UK Road Liaison Group, “Well Managed Highway Infrastructure” URL: 
http://www.ukroadsliaisongroup.org/en/codes/  
32Local Highways Maintenance Incentive Fund. URL: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/highways-
maintenance-funding-incentive-element  accessed 09/0718 
33 Derbyshire Council, Creating a resilient highway and transport network. URL: 
https://www.derbyshire.gov.uk/transport_roads/transport_asset_management/creating_a_resilient_highway_
and_transport_network/default.asp 

http://www.ukroadsliaisongroup.org/en/codes/
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/highways-maintenance-funding-incentive-element
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/highways-maintenance-funding-incentive-element
https://www.derbyshire.gov.uk/transport_roads/transport_asset_management/creating_a_resilient_highway_and_transport_network/default.asp
https://www.derbyshire.gov.uk/transport_roads/transport_asset_management/creating_a_resilient_highway_and_transport_network/default.asp


 

  40 

2018. DfT have identified bridges that could be vulnerable to flooding on the local highway 
network and is working with local highway authorities to ensure appropriate mitigation 
measures are adopted where feasible.  

DfT is also exploring ways new technology can help reduce the risk of damage to key 
infrastructure such as bridges and is taking forward the trials in association with both 
Cumbria County Council and the private sector. This work includes: 

• testing the use of new technology such as deploying specialist monitoring cameras 
at key bridges to remotely monitor river levels in real time. A trial is underway in 
Cumbria and the outcome will determine whether this initiative could be adopted in 
other areas of the country where there is a high risk of flooding; and 

• DfT also launched an innovative trial in December 2017 called “BridgeCat” – a 
Mobile Bridge Inspection System - that allows safe and rapid assessment of the 
prevalence of bridge scour34 inherent in the national bridge stock. In a flood event 
this system will help ensure that any bridges are assessed for damage quickly thus 
allowing the highway authority to decide on safety grounds whether it can be open 
to traffic or not. The trial is being undertaken in Cumbria during 2018. Depending on 
the success of these trials, the system could be developed for use by other highway 
authorities to provide assistance in identifying scour and structural damage. DfT 
and BEIS are also considering a trial to look at whether this system can also be 
used to identify the condition of gas pipe crossings in rivers. 

3.5 Cross-sectoral 
The Cabinet Office has established a National Infrastructure Resilience Council (NIRC) to 
bring together utilities companies to share information about the locations of their assets 
and to take a coordinated approach to flood resilience. As part of this, work to share data 
on locally significant infrastructure sites gathered for the NFRR with Local Resilience 
Forums is near completion, with a number of sectors using the Resilience Direct online 
platform. Cabinet Office continues to work with the utilities companies and other 
government departments to capture the information which remains outstanding. 

Priority actions that we commit to (detailed milestones, data-streams and metrics relating 
to these priority actions and further underpinning actions are set out in Annex 2). 


 

                                            
34 Bridge scour is the removal of sediment such as sand and gravel from around bridge abutments or piers. 
Scour, caused by swiftly moving water, particularly when a flooding event happens, can compromise the 
integrity and safety of a structure thus having to close the bridge whilst inspections of the abutment is 
undertaken. 


 

  41 

Chapter 4: People and the built environment 

4.1 Climate change risks 
The health and wellbeing of the nation are of fundamental importance and to that end 
communities and the built environment they inhabit need to be resilient to heat and cold. 
Climate change will impact areas that support our wellbeing and health, including planning, 
community development, 
emergency response, health 
and social care system, historic 
places and cultural heritage.  

The CCRA identifies flooding 
and high temperatures as 
posing the greatest risks to 
people and the built 
environment, which interact 
across communities, buildings, 
landscapes, health systems 
and individuals. Sea level rise 
could make some coastal flood 
defences in England highly 
vulnerable to failure in storm conditions. It could also make it increasingly difficult and 
costly to maintain current sea defence lines in some areas.  

Flood risks to the NHS and social care assets are likely to increase. Future projections 
indicate an increase in the number of GP surgeries, care homes, emergency service 
stations and hospitals in the flood risk zone, with the largest risk change generally shown 
for care homes. 

Vision 

“To promote the development of a healthy, equitable and resilient population, well 
placed to reduce the harmful health impacts of climate change, and able to capitalise 
on the potential health gains associated with tackling it”. 

“A health service, a public health and social care system which are resilient and 
adapting to a changing climate.” 

‘’Buildings and places (including built heritage) and the people who live and work in 
them are resilient and organisations in the built environment sector have an increased 
capacity to address the risks and make the most of the opportunities of a changing 
climate.’’ 

“Emergency services and local resilience capability take account of and are resilient to, 
a changing climate.” 


 

  42 

Higher average and higher extreme temperatures are likely to have adverse impacts on 
the UK population. There are also potential opportunities for health, wellbeing and tourism 
from warmer weather, including taking more journeys by foot. However, the benefit from 
climate warming and milder average winters is unlikely to eliminate the need for public 
health interventions for cold. With an ageing population the numbers of people vulnerable 
to both heat and cold will increase. 

Higher temperatures may lead to an increase in the number of diseases which are 
transmitted to humans through insect bites and changes in the ranges for certain diseases. 

Key risks identified in the CCRA 2017 include: 

Risks to health and 
wellbeing from high 
temperatures 

Risks to people, 
communities and 
buildings from 
flooding 

Risks to the 
viability of coastal 
communities from 
sea level rise 

Risks to health 
and social care 
delivery from 
extreme weather 

4.2 Planning 
The Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government (MHCLG) remain committed 
to the spatial planning aim set out in the first NAP- to provide a clear local planning 
framework to enable participants in the planning system to deliver sustainable new 
development. The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) sets out how Local 
Planning Authorities (LPAs) are expected to consider and address the range of impacts 
arising from climate change. Each local authority must have an up to date local plan to set 
out a vision and a framework for the future development of the area. Development should 
be steered away from areas of flood risk. The NPPF supports the use of green 
infrastructure, and is underpinned by planning guidance to help secure effective local 
implementation. 

The NPPF is designed so that local authorities are able to react to the latest climate 
change information when they update their plans. Planning authorities, such as LPAs, 
should refresh their strategic plans every 5 years. 

In March 2018 MHCLG issued a consultation paper on revisions to the NPPF. The aim is 
that there will be a greater emphasis on planning authorities taking account of climate 
change in their decisions. There is also a need to ensure that practical implementation 
occurs. The proposed changes would: 

• refer to the risk of overheating from rising temperatures and make clear that 
planning policies should support measures to ensure the future resilience of 
communities and infrastructure to climate change; 

• clarify that plans should have regard to the cumulative impacts of flood risk, rather 
than to or from individual development sites; and 

• clarify policy on the exception test that may need to be applied when considering 
development in locations at risk of flooding. 

The revised NPPF is due for publication in summer 2018. 


 

  43 

The draft revised text of the NPPF includes stronger wording on biodiversity net gain. 
Defra is working to build on proposals set out in the 25 Year Environment Plan and help 
set a clear direction of travel for industry and local government. NE is working to update 
the Defra metric used for biodiversity net gain, develop industry standards for biodiversity 
net gain and explore how new metrics can support the delivery of natural capital benefits 
alongside biodiversity net gain. The consultation on mandatory net gain implementation, 
as referred to in the 25 Year Environment Plan, will also be crucial in the identification of 
opportunities and risks that might arise through future implementation of net gain policy. 

4.3 Flood and coastal erosion risk management 
Climate change is likely to increase flood risk in England from the four main types of 
flooding - fluvial (river), coastal, surface water, and groundwater. Sea level rise and 
potential changes in storm patterns are likely to increase coastal erosion rates in many 
areas. 

Flooding and coastal erosion can cause deaths and injuries, though due to the 
effectiveness of existing response and defence arrangements, these are uncommon. 
There is emerging evidence that impacts on mental health are significant and long lasting 
and there can be significant social consequences for individuals from the disruption of 
months spent out of their homes, or of losing their homes entirely.  

There can be damage to buildings and heritage assets and disruption to transport and 
communication infrastructure (telecoms, energy, roads and rail) as well as businesses, 
schools, and hospitals. Research demonstrates that traditional building materials and 
techniques may be more resilient and recover more quickly from flooding than modern 
buildings. Historic England is undertaking research to map these risks. Flooding and 
coastal erosion cannot be entirely eliminated and many landscapes have evolved based 
on regular flood and erosion patterns.  

We will achieve this by: 

• Making sure everyone is able to access the information they need to assess any 
risk to their lives and livelihoods, health and prosperity posed by flooding and 
coastal erosion; 

• bringing the public, private, and third sectors together to work with communities and 
individuals to reduce the risk of harm – particularly those in vulnerable areas; 

• making sure that decisions on land use, including development, reflect the level of 
current and future flood risk;  

• boosting the long-term resilience of our homes, business and infrastructure; and 
• Taking action to reduce the risk of harm from flooding and coastal erosion including 

greater use of natural flood management solutions. 

Flooding and coastal erosion cannot be entirely eliminated and many landscapes have 
evolved based on regular flood and erosion patterns. Government’s objective is to manage 

25YEP Goal: to reduce the risk of harm to people, the environment and the economy 
from natural hazards including flooding and coastal erosion by taking appropriate 
action. 


 

  44 

floods and coastal erosion to save lives, better protect communities, and support economic 
growth. We need to prepare for climate change through timely action to manage flood and 
coastal risk which can help reduce costly impacts later and manage the risks to people’s 
homes and businesses across the country.  

Adaptation is integrated within all our flood and coastal erosion risk management policies 
and programmes. Our aim is to plan for early adaptation so we will be better equipped and 
the potential impact of climate change on those most affected will be less. This includes 
constantly reviewing our policies in the light of the most up-to-date evidence and building 
resilience to climate risks; minimising the damage and disruption to economic activity and 
homes from flooding; for example supporting individuals to make their properties more 
resilient to flooding. There is evidence that the cost of installing property flood resilience 
measures will pay for themselves in terms of reduced damages if there is further flooding 
and people are able to return to their homes more quickly. 

Government’s £2.6 billion six year capital investment programme to reduce flood and 
coastal erosion risk will provide over £30 billion in economic benefits. The capital projects 
supported by this funding already include a combination of engineered interventions, 
resilience measures and working with natural processes/natural flood management; and 
we have earmarked £15m to specifically encourage natural flood management projects, 
which will further expand the evidence on how these can reduce the impact of flood events 
and complement more structural hard defences for flood mitigation. 

In winter 2018, government will publish a policy statement on Flood and Coastal Erosion 
Risk Management (FCERM), setting out government’s future expectations for managing 
flood risk. This will be followed by the EA updating the national flood and coastal erosion 
risk management strategy by 2019. This will include strengthening the joint delivery of risk 
management activities across organisations.  

We have also begun to deliver our pledges under the 25 Year Environment Plan to: 

• look at current partnership arrangements ahead of a review of funding needs 
beyond 2021, seeking to attract more non-public sector investment, and make sure 
all relevant agencies are able to respond quickly and effectively to support 
communities if and when flooding occurs; 

• strengthen the relevant protections in the NPPF;  
• increase the uptake of sustainable drainage systems, especially in new 

developments; 
• improve the resilience of properties at risk of flooding and the time it takes them to 

recover should flooding occur; and 
• support an industry-owned voluntary code of practice to promote consumer and 

business confidence in measures to reduce the impact of flooding on buildings, and 
on those who live and work in them. 

4.3.1 Our approach 

We have a holistic approach to flood and coastal erosion risk management, addressing the 
aspects of prevention, protection, adaptation, response, and acceptance as set out below: 

Prevention 


 

  45 

Using land-use planning policy and working with LPAs and developers to minimise new 
building in areas at high flood and erosion risk. There are already strong safeguards in 
place to avoid inappropriate development in areas at risk of flooding whilst delivering the 
homes this country needs and Coastal Change Management Areas being increasingly 
adopted as part of the local planning system. Actions supporting prevention are covered 
under land use planning and increased flood protections in the NPPF.  

Protection 

Supporting increased protection from flooding and erosion where appropriate by investing 
in defences such as flood walls, sea defences, and embankments and in soft engineering 
which works with natural and erosion processes to manage the volume, timing and speed 
of water flowing through particular areas.  

Government has worked to improve protection through its six year investment programme, 
which is providing improved protection to 300,000 households. This programme runs from 
2015-2021 and Government is now considering funding arrangements after 2021. 

Surface water flooding presents unique challenges. Government has identified key areas 
to strengthen the current surface water management framework. It will publish a Surface 
Water Management Action Plan which includes actions for these. 

Sustainable drainage systems (SuDS), such as permeable surfaces, storage tanks and 
ponds, reduce the risk of surface water flooding. SuDS and natural flood management can 
also deliver water quality, biodiversity and amenity benefits while helping communities 
adapt to climate change. Planning policy prioritises the provision of SuDS in all new major 
developments and new developments in flood risk areas. 

MHCLG have reviewed the effectiveness of planning policy for SuDS and found that the 
majority of planning applications for new (major and minor) development includes SuDS. 
In the 25 Year Environment Plan, government committed to amending Planning Guidance 
to clarify construction and ongoing maintenance arrangements for SuDS and tighten links 
with planning guidance for water quality and biodiversity.  

The 25 Year Environment Plan also set out commitments to consider changes to the 
NPPF and Building Regulations in the longer term to encourage SuDS. Government’s 
strategic priorities and objectives for Ofwat set out how we expect water and sewerage 
companies to be challenged to develop a mix of solutions to meet current and future water 
management needs. These include managing flood risk by the adoption and maintenance 
of SuDS. 

Adaptation 

Supporting adaptation which reduces the damage to homes, infrastructure and local 
services so that costs to government, industry (including insurers), and individuals are 
reduced and recovery is quicker. This includes designing properties, infrastructure, and 
communities to withstand flooding when it happens and speed recovery where it does. 
These can be simple measures such as installing flood gates or air brick covers or more 
substantial works such as fitting a pump, having solid floors or raising electrics in buildings.   

Defra and the EA are supporting the insurance industry in the development of a flood 
resilience voluntary code of practice due to be published in late 2018/early 2019. It will 
promote and provide advice on property-level resilience measures for new and existing 


 

  46 

developments. We are also filling research gaps and supporting the industry led Property 
Flood Resilience Roundtable which is addressing the remaining gaps that prevent property 
flood resilience being normal practice for properties at high flood risk.  

Response 

We are working with partners to ensure there are robust arrangements in place to forecast 
and respond to a flooding incident. This includes warning and informing communities and 
local responders so that they are in a position to take appropriate preventive action whilst 
also having robust incident management arrangements in place in the event of a flood 
occurring. The establishment of Flood Re has also provided affordable insurance to 
households at high flood risk who would otherwise have struggled to obtain affordable 
cover.   

Acceptance 

Flood plains managed well can provide temporary flood storage areas for rivers and the 
sea at times of high flow or tide, minimising the risk elsewhere. 

Shoreline Management Plans include areas of managed realignment of the coastal-
terrestrial boundary (which may be a ‘soft’ boundary), and of no active intervention. Where 
property is affected by these management approaches – which are agreed by local 
authorities and statutory agencies including the EA, in consultation with the public – 
immediate measures may be required to manage risk locally. The approach chosen should 
reduce risk elsewhere and be more sustainable in the longer term. With improved 
information on coastal flooding and erosion risk and its long term management from the 
EA and local authorities, people should be able to buy, rent and use property at the coast 
with greater acceptance of the risk involved. 

4.3.2 Protection of coastlines 

NE have developed good practice for managing protected wildlife sites on the coast. This 
accepts the increasingly dynamic nature of habitats on our coastlines. 

A number of research projects delivered under the EA’s 2013 framework for Coastal 
Research, Development and Dissemination have improved our understanding of coastal 
flood and erosion risk and are developing tools to support coastal management (for 
example the guide to morphological modelling developed in the iCOASST project). Future 
planned projects include research focused on engagement on adaptation options with 
coastal communities, and developing a consistent and improved habitat change. We will 
carry out research utilising the forthcoming new UK climate change projections (UKCP18) 
to produce updated coastal erosion indices and better understand the impact of sea level 
rise for coastal flooding. Details of ongoing projects and outputs from the joint research 
programme are available online.35  

The EA will continue to explore how to value natural capital assets on the coast and use 
that understanding to help make choices about the best coastal management approaches 
to take, including possible natural flood and coastal management. 

                                            
35 EA, Flood and Coastal Erosion Risk Management Research and Development. URL: 
http://evidence.environment-agency.gov.uk/FCERM/en/Default/FCRM.aspx accessed 09/07/2018 

http://evidence.environment-agency.gov.uk/FCERM/en/Default/FCRM.aspx


 

  47 

4.4 Water supplies and resources 
The impacts of climate change are predicted to have a significant effect on the future of 
water supply and resources in England. Coupled with demographic changes, in particular 
a forecasted population growth in the South East of England, there will be strain on our 
water supply and our environment. Government is committed to mitigating these effects 
and ensuring a plentiful supply of water for all water users, whilst protecting our 
environment for future generations.  

In 2016 government published its roadmap36 to improving long term resilience of the water 
sector. The roadmap highlights the challenges the sector is facing from the changing 
climate and the impacts this may have. It laid out the enhanced policy framework in which 
future decisions and actions regarding long term water resilience would be taken.  

We will work towards achieving this goal by: 

• Encouraging companies and individuals to take a responsible approach for water 
saving and reducing wastage and create behaviour change; and 

• strengthening the resilience of supply whilst managing demand. 

4.4.1 Water resource management plans – encouraging companies to 
take a responsible approach 

Water companies are required by law to produce Water Resource Management Plans 
(WRMPs) every five years, setting out how they will deliver secure public water supplies 
and manage supply and demand for water in their region. In 2016 Defra strengthened the 
WRMP guidance to water companies to reflect the need for greater resilience as a result of 
the changing climate and growing population.  

The new guidance requires companies to take a longer term strategic approach to 
protecting and enhancing resilient water supplies, covering a minimum period of 25 years. 
Some companies are going beyond this and are considering scenarios into 2080. The 
extension of time frames obliges companies to consider more thoroughly what actions they 
need to take in the short term to minimise risks to water supply in the long term. The 
refreshed guidance sets out a bold expectation for water companies to properly examine 
the value of resilience with their customers and ensures greater transparency around 
levels of service. This enables customers to understand and express their views on a 
potential trade-off between securing long term resilience to drought and potential water 
use bans, versus a potential increase in bills.  

                                            
36 Creating a great place for living: Enabling resilience in the water sector URL: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/water-sector-improving-long-term-resilience accessed 
05/07/2018 

25YEP Goal: to provide ‘clean and plentiful water’ for future generations. To increase 
water supply and incentivise greater water efficiency to maintain a plentiful supply as 
demand increases and climate change impacts availability 

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/water-sector-improving-long-term-resilience


 

  48 

In addition to increasing resilience, the WRMP guidance also requires companies to 
consider other environmental impacts of their proposals. For example, options identified 
within the WRMP include consideration of carbon emissions and undergoing strategic 
environmental assessments to disincentivise high carbon schemes and reduce 
environmental impacts.  

When the next WRMP guidance is produced in 2024, it will further encourage water 
companies to improve resilience and consider water efficiency. 

4.4.2 Drought 

The goal to provide clean and plentiful water for future generations may be made more 
difficult to achieve since we are likely to see more instances of drought throughout the 
country over the next 25 years, and an increasing frequency of worse droughts. This 
poses a significant risk to public water supply, business and industry, and agriculture.  

Water companies have a statutory obligation to produce drought plans every five years 
which set out the short term operational actions a company will take during a drought 
period to maintain supplies to customers. These plans are tested annually to ensure that 
they remain fit for purpose. With the threat of drought becoming more likely these drought 
plans are an important tool for government to hold water companies to account over their 
preparedness for such situations. Additionally as part of the WRMP process water 
companies are required to plan how they will work to increase resilience against drought 
and ensure security of supply. We are working with water companies to further improve 
the level of resilience against drought and we will work with other sectors to understand 
their drought risks and how these can be mitigated. 

Summer heatwaves can lead to a spike in demand for water at the same time as 
restrictions on water use are in place. If this is preceded by or accompanied by a period of 
low rainfall drought triggers may be reached earlier. There are also issues regarding the 
mitigation of the effects of heatwave, if the heatwave coincides with a drought. For 
example, green infrastructure is an important mechanism in reducing the effect a 
heatwave has, but if the heatwave is accompanied by a drought there will be restrictions 
on how much (and potentially if any) water can be used to maintain the green 
infrastructure. During drought, the priority will be maintaining the public water supply for 
public health and critical national infrastructure.    

4.4.3 Strategic policy statement 

A new strategic policy statement37 (SPS) to Ofwat, published in September 2017 sets out 
government’s policy priorities ahead of the regulator finalising the methodology for its 2019 
price review (PR19) which instructs water companies as to what they will be able to charge 
customers from 2020 onwards. The SPS will influence over £40 billion of water company 
investment in water and wastewater services. The statement has put long term resilience 
at the front and centre of business planning.  

                                            
37 Strategic Policy Statement to Ofwat. URL: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/strategic-policy-
statement-to-ofwat-incorporating-social-and-environmental-guidance accessed 09/07/2018 

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/strategic-policy-statement-to-ofwat-incorporating-social-and-environmental-guidance
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/strategic-policy-statement-to-ofwat-incorporating-social-and-environmental-guidance


 

  49 

Ofwat’s final PR19 methodology38 reflects the priorities laid out in the SPS. Ofwat have 
challenged companies on their resilience both through targets and performance 
commitments. A clear target, which was endorsed and welcomed by Defra and the EA, 
was for companies to ensure a 15% reduction in leakage by 2025, a challenge to which 
most water companies have risen. Additionally, reducing per capita consumption is a 
common performance commitment for all companies, as is reducing customer water 
supply interruptions, which covers periods of drought. Ofwat, Defra and the EA will 
continue to push these commitments and incentivise companies to go further.  

The SPS prioritised the need for the water sector to be able to protect customers from 
climate change risks and flooding of water and wastewater infrastructure. It steered Ofwat 
to challenge water companies to make sure that they assess the resilience of their system 
and infrastructure against the full range of potential hazards and threats and take 
proportionate steps to improve resilience where required. In particular companies should 
assess the extent to which their major water treatment works and sewage treatment plants 
are appropriately resilient against extreme flood events (as described in the NFRR) and 
include provision for additional resilience where required. Government has also placed a 
new statutory duty on Ofwat to secure the long-term resilience of water undertakers’ 
supply systems and sewerage undertakers’ sewerage systems to environmental 
pressures, population growth, and changes in consumer behaviour.    

Following the NFRR water companies reported that the flood resilience of their key local 
infrastructure assets were being assessed on a risk basis and enhanced using a range of 
approaches, including temporary defences, network rezoning plans and small-scale 
adaptation measures, such as raising electrical equipment. Water company assessment of 
flood risk will continue to feature in reports submitted under the Adaptation Reporting 
Power – the Adaptation Reporting Power is discussed in more detail in chapter 7.  

4.4.4 Twin track approach – strengthening the resilience of supply 
whilst reducing demand 

The twin track approach is the idea of reducing demand, whilst also working to strengthen 
the resilience of supply in order to meet our goal of providing clean and plentiful water for 
future generations. 

We want water companies to develop and implement robust long-term plans that use this 
‘twin track’ approach to improve the resilience of water supplies when faced with a 
changing climate. The twin track approach demonstrates the importance of not only 
undertaking ambitious initiatives to reduce demand for water, but also taking bold strategic 
decisions to secure new water supplies, such as new reservoirs and water transfers. It is 
only with the combination of reducing demand coupled with increasing infrastructure that 
we can ensure a secure, long-term supply of water in a changing climate, whilst protecting 
the environment and maintaining affordability.    

The National Infrastructure Commission published its report on England's water 
infrastructure needs in April 201839. This supports government's twin track approach to 

                                            
38 Ofwat PR19 methodology. URL: https://www.ofwat.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Final-
methodology-1.pdf accessed 09/07/2018 
39 Preparing for a drier future: England’s water infrastructure needs. URL: 
https://www.nic.org.uk/publications/preparing-for-a-drier-future-englands-water-infrastructure-needs/  

https://www.ofwat.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Final-methodology-1.pdf
https://www.ofwat.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Final-methodology-1.pdf
https://www.nic.org.uk/publications/preparing-for-a-drier-future-englands-water-infrastructure-needs/


 

  50 

making water resources more resilient. Government will respond to the recommendations 
in due course as part of the response to the wider National Infrastructure Assessment due 
to be published in summer 2018. However, Defra expects water companies to take 
account of the report's findings as they finalise their WRMPs over the next few months. 

Recognising that the scale of some of the infrastructure to provide transfers and additional 
new resources will be significant, government is committed to delivering a National Policy 
Statement (NPS) for Water Resources to streamline the planning process for large water 
resource infrastructure. This will make sure that such infrastructure can be delivered when 
needed. Defra commenced the relevant parts of the Planning Act 2008 in January 2018 
and expects to lay before Parliament, and consult on, a draft NPS in autumn 2018 with the 
final document designated in summer 2019. 

Water trading is a key part of making water supplies resilient to droughts. In particular, 
transfers of water from the north and west to the south and east of the country are 
especially important as the south and east are predicted to be most impacted by drought, 
and will see the greatest increases in population. Currently, only around 4% of water 
supplies are transferred between water companies - equivalent to nearly 500 million litres 
of water each day. Water UK’s 2016 report40 on long-term water resources suggested that 
this should rise to one billion litres by 2040 to ensure resilience, providing the right 
incentives are in place. To encourage greater water trading, Ofwat have powers in 
England to intervene in negotiations between companies on bulk water supply where 
parties cannot reach an agreement. We are working with Ofwat, water companies and the 
EA to reduce barriers to trading and support the long term supply of water.  

Managing demand is a vital aspect of securing long term resilience against drought. Defra 
has demonstrated its continuing commitment to managing demand and increasing water 
efficiency in the 25 Year Environment Plan, and this ambition is supported by the NIC’s 
report into future water needs.   

We want to see individual water use fall - currently, the average per capita consumption 
(PCC) is approximately 140 litres per day41. Defra is working with the water industry to set 
an ambitious PCC target which will be announced at the end of 2018.  

Defra fully supports Ofwat’s challenge of a reduction in leakage of 15% by 2025 by all 
water companies. We have reiterated this challenge in our guidance for WRMPs, and have 
been pushing companies hard to commit to this target. We want to be more ambitious and 
continue to challenge companies to reduce their leakage further over the next 25 years. 
We want to see a year on year reduction in the volume of water lost to leakage.  

We are working with the water industry, Waterwise, Water UK, and other groups to 
investigate a variety of other tools and techniques to support the reduction in individual 
water consumption. We are evaluating the efficacy of adopting either a voluntary or 
mandatory water label on products which use water; encouraging the greater penetration 
of water meters across the country, not just in certain companies or regions; investigating 

                                            
40 Water UK, water resources long-term planning framework. URL: https://www.water.org.uk/water-
resources-long-term-planning-framework accessed 09/07/2018 
41 https://www.statista.com/statistics/321380/water-consumption-per-head-and-household-united-kingdom-
uk/  

https://www.water.org.uk/water-resources-long-term-planning-framework
https://www.water.org.uk/water-resources-long-term-planning-framework
https://www.statista.com/statistics/321380/water-consumption-per-head-and-household-united-kingdom-uk/
https://www.statista.com/statistics/321380/water-consumption-per-head-and-household-united-kingdom-uk/


 

  51 

behavioural change and the perception of the value of water; and the water efficiency of 
domestic properties.  

4.4.5 Drainage and wastewater management plans 

Water UK’s 21st Century Drainage Programme is driving work to improve the new long-
term planning of drainage and wastewater services with the development of a number of 
tools. This includes the development of a new planning framework for the production of 
water company Drainage and Wastewater Management Plans (DWMPs). DWMPs will 
help provide a more consistent basis for planning across the sector, enabling companies 
to target investment on drainage and wastewater more effectively and provide customers 
with better information about these services. The framework is being developed in 
partnership with water and sewerage companies and Defra Group. DWMPs will help water 
companies manage their assets over the long-term and ensure that they are resilient to 
climate change. DWMPs have also been recognised as helping to deliver the ambition in 
the 25 Year Environment Plan on improving surface water management and are part of a 
mix of solutions to meet current and future water management needs. A key component of 
the framework is engagement and involvement of other risk management authorities, 
facilitating a more joined up approach to future surface water drainage services. The 
framework is due to be finalised in September 2018. 

4.5 Overheating in buildings 
We want to ensure that homes and other buildings are well-insulated for winter, while not 
overheating in the summer. Achieving this aim is likely to require a number of actions, 
including changes in construction practices, in occupier behaviour and in greater use of 
green spaces, including historic parks and gardens, whose role in reducing overheating in 
urban environments is well documented.  

4.5.1 Green infrastructure 

Green Infrastructure (GI) offers multiple benefits and this is recognised in the 25 Year 
Environment Plan.  

GI plays an important connectivity role across cities, towns, coast and countryside at a 
local and landscape scale, forming an integral component of ecological networks and 
building more resilient landscapes. Multi-functional GI innovations offer a way to combat 
resilience challenges and also address stresses of urban living to improve health and 
wellbeing.   

NE will develop a set of GI standards that can be easily used by local GI planners, 
designers and managers and communities to help them deliver more good quality local GI, 

25YEP Goal: to green our towns and cities by creating green infrastructure and 
planting one million urban trees. Create more, better quality and well maintained green 
infrastructure and embed an environmental net gain principle for development, 
including housing and infrastructure. 


 

  52 

in particular for disadvantaged urban populations, where impacts of climate change can 
compound other environmental deprivation factors. We will also work to embed the 
environmental net gain principle (see section 4.2 on Planning) into development, including 
housing and infrastructure.  

Higher temperatures will increase the risk of overheating in many types of buildings 
(including homes, hospitals, care homes, schools, prisons, and offices) leading to adverse 
impacts on health and poor thermal comfort. The proportion of buildings experiencing 
overheating is very likely to increase with climate change. Occupancy patterns greatly 
influence exposure to overheating. Individuals who remain at home during the day are 
more likely to be inside at the times of highest external and internal temperatures, and 
themselves contribute to internal heat gains (e.g. from using appliances and metabolic 
heat). 

Safe upper temperature thresholds for health are difficult to establish and there is currently 
no standard method to quantify the risk and health impact of overheating in buildings. This 
poses challenges to communication of the risk to the public. There is evidence that people 
lack a basic understanding of the risks to health from indoor high temperatures, and are 
therefore less likely to take measures to safeguard their and their dependents’ wellbeing. 
The Heatwave Plan for England42 aims to reduce summer deaths and illness by raising 
public awareness and triggering actions in the NHS, public health, social care, and other 
community and voluntary organisations to support people who have health, housing or 
economic circumstances that increase their vulnerability to heat (see section 4.6).  

4.5.2 Homes 

Buildings need to be designed and built to take account of the risk of a warmer climate. To 
better understand the risk of overheating in new homes, MHCLG commissioned a piece of 
research, due to be completed in summer 2018. This is being informed by an expert 
working group consisting of CIBSE, architects, house-builders, academics and PHE. The 
research is investigating the impacts of overheating in homes on occupants both now and 
in the future.  

In the project the overheating risk in new homes in England is being quantified using 
dynamic thermal building models. The variation in the new-build housing stock is being 
modelled using eight property types, including both flats and houses, in five geographical 
settings.  

The research is also evaluating the effectiveness of overheating mitigation techniques, 
including shading and ventilation, in a sub-set of these homes. Five mitigation packages 
ranging from low to high cost are being modelled, these include different methods of 
reducing solar gains and removing excess heat. Overheating mitigation strategies are 
being assessed by their ability to both reduce excess mortality and reduce sleep 
disruption, with its related productivity impacts.  

The outputs of this research will help to inform any future policy on including climate 
adaptation in new homes to reduce overheating. Any policy will need to be considered in 

                                            
42 Heatwave Plan for England 2018. URL: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/711503/H
eatwave_plan_for_England_2018.pdf  

https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/711503/Heatwave_plan_for_England_2018.pdf
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/711503/Heatwave_plan_for_England_2018.pdf


 

  53 

the light of the Hackitt Review of Building Regulations and Fire safety following the 
Grenfell Tower fire tragedy. 

Housing policy also needs to consider addressing large-scale refurbishment of existing 
housing stock to reduce the burden of overheating, alongside decarbonising domestic 
heating. Many traditionally constructed buildings, if well maintained, will already cope well 
under a warming climate. There has been much work to determine cost-effective 
adaptation responses at the house scale, but scaling up to population-wide changes to 
housing stock is a complex issue and industry guidance is needed if maladaptation is to be 
avoided. Mitigation and adaptation measures need to be combined when promoting the 
implementation of energy efficiency and ventilation interventions. 

Occupier behaviour can also substantially reduce the risks as there are many measures 
that can be taken to keep homes thermally comfortable. Awareness raising by government 
and others, including technical experts, is also necessary to ensure the profile of 
overheating in homes continues to be maintained. 

4.5.3 Hospitals and care homes 

Currently new hospitals are more at risk of overheating during hot weather compared with 
older, traditionally built blocks, although maladaptation of older buildings can lead to a loss 
of this adaptive capacity. A study of care homes43, indicates that these may also be at risk 
from high temperatures, due to building design and management issues. The Department 
of Health and Social Care (DHSC) is working with its arm’s length bodies to develop 
measures to improve patient safety and increase resilience to heatwaves in health and 
social care buildings. Patients in hospital and care homes may be more vulnerable and 
less able to adapt because of age, reduced ability of their body to sense and react to 
changes in temperature, immobility or difficulties in making their own environmental 
adjustments and accessing fluids. 

From April 2017, the NHS has required Trusts and commissioners to submit data on the 
percentage of clinical areas covered by thermal monitoring; the number of overheating 
events in clinical areas; the presence of an organisational adaptation plan; an expectation 
of coverage of adaptation in mandatory Sustainable Development Management Plans 
(SDMP); and an expectation of coverage of adaptation in trusts' annual reports. This data 
will enable Trusts to understand, and address overheating risk. 

The first year of data collection shows there is still a need for work on improving data 
quality. Some significant outliers in reported levels of overheating suggest that not all 
Trusts are recording and reporting in the same way. The PHE/NHS England-supported 
Sustainable Development Unit (SDU) are working with NHS Improvement to identify if it is 
possible to incorporate this data into the Model Hospital to enable benchmarking. The data 
will help to inform the sector wide Adaptation Report.  

In 2017 the SDU embedded adaptation as a core module in the SDMP guidance for 
Trusts. In October 2017 the SDU launched the Sustainable Development Assessment 
Tool, to support SDMP development and adaptation is one of the 10 key strands. To 
ensure that progress is recognised as well as expected, April 2018 will see the launch of a 
national Sustainable Health and Care awards programme run by NHS Employers in 

                                            
43 Report at: https://www.jrf.org.uk/report/care-provision-fit-future-climate  

https://www.jrf.org.uk/report/care-provision-fit-future-climate


 

  54 

partnership with the SDU to recognise progress in sustainable development, with 
adaptation as one of the 10 categories. 

The health sector aims to embed adaptation into daily practice by 2023, by including it as a 
key element of SDMPs for which there has been set a requirement of 100% coverage for 
NHS providers. This will be supported by guidance from the SDU and NHS Improvement. 
This will help ensure that adaptation has a higher profile in health and care organisations 
and that this is considered as an impact on infrastructure, supply chain, staff and patients.  

PHE and DHSC will work to strengthen the evidence for impacts of climate change 
including an updated Health Effects of Climate Change in the UK report using the UK 
Climate Change Projections which will be available in late 2018. 

4.5.4 Schools 

The Department for Education (DfE) and the Education Skills Funding Agency (EFSA) 
plan to publish a revised Building Bulletin44 in late 2018, which will use the latest adaptive 
thermal comfort calculation methods to prevent summertime overheating.  

ESFA has adopted adaptive thermal comfort criteria as the basis for design of new and 
refurbished buildings to prevent summertime overheating problems. The methodology 
follows British Standards45 and the design criteria are included in the contractual 
requirements for ESFA funded capital projects. School designs must be modelled against 
the 2020 Design Summer Year (DSY)46. This design methodology ensures greater 
resilience against increased summertime temperatures due to climate change. PHE has 
also published heatwave guidance for teachers and for early years settings produced in 
consultation with DfE. 

DfE will carry out further modelling in 2018 and 2019 of school designs, building on 
previous studies on the adaptation of existing school stock, using the CIBSE 2020 and 
2050 DSY weather files and the latest adaptive thermal comfort criteria. DfE will model a 
new build baseline design, some existing building typologies47 including refurbishment 
scenarios and new modular designs. This work will enable understanding of the most 
effective adaptation measures for school buildings. 

4.5.5 Prisons 

The Ministry of Justice (MoJ) designs, constructs and maintains prisons aimed at providing 
a decent, safe and secure environment for staff and prisoners. MoJ keeps the design of 

                                            
44 Building Bulletin 2014. URL: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/building-bulletin-101-ventilation-
for-school-buildings  
45 BS EN 15251 - Indoor environmental input parameters for design and assessment of energy performance 
of buildings addressing indoor air quality, thermal environment, lighting and acoustics   
and CIBSE TM52 https://www.cibse.org/getattachment/Networks/Regions/South-Wales/South-Wales-Past-
Presentations/TM52-The-limits-of-thermal-comfort-Cardiff.pdf.aspx 
46 Design Summer Year (DSY) is one of a number of different weather data sets produced by CIBSE. It is 
used as a climate input into building simulation software and is used for overheating analysis. Technical 
briefing: http://www.cibse.org/getmedia/ce7a77e8-3f98-4b97-9dbc-
7baf0062f6c6/WeatherData_TechnicalBriefingandTesting_Final.pdf.aspx accessed 09/07/2018 
47 categorising buildings into groups based on their function 

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/building-bulletin-101-ventilation-for-school-buildings
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/building-bulletin-101-ventilation-for-school-buildings
https://www.cibse.org/getattachment/Networks/Regions/South-Wales/South-Wales-Past-Presentations/TM52-The-limits-of-thermal-comfort-Cardiff.pdf.aspx
https://www.cibse.org/getattachment/Networks/Regions/South-Wales/South-Wales-Past-Presentations/TM52-The-limits-of-thermal-comfort-Cardiff.pdf.aspx
http://www.cibse.org/getmedia/ce7a77e8-3f98-4b97-9dbc-7baf0062f6c6/WeatherData_TechnicalBriefingandTesting_Final.pdf.aspx
http://www.cibse.org/getmedia/ce7a77e8-3f98-4b97-9dbc-7baf0062f6c6/WeatherData_TechnicalBriefingandTesting_Final.pdf.aspx


 

  55 

prisons under continual review, looking to improve its provision by incorporating emerging 
best practice. This review includes identifying what can be done to mitigate the risks of 
overheating in prison buildings.  

MoJ is working with client and design advisers to incorporate Centre for Climate Change 
Scenarios, in line with UKCP09 projections, to allow designs to be future-proofed to the 
predicted changes in temperature, wind and rainfall within Prison Estate Transformation 
Programme (PETP) modelling. This aims to ensure that summertime overheating is not a 
significant problem, and that the energy used by future cooling demands is minimised 
through the design stage. PETP is also incorporating BREEAM requirements48 to ensure 
that new prisons sites are assessed for flood risks, rainfall and orientation. On the existing 
prison estate both natural (solar shading and natural cooling) and mechanical means 
(building management systems and thermostatic controls) are used to control temperature 
and guard against overheating. MoJ anticipate that a number of new features will be 
incorporated into the final designs of new prisons addressing the risk of overheating and 
lessons will be applied to the maintenance and development of its current buildings. 

4.6 Delivery of health and social care services 
More severe weather, both flooding and extreme temperatures, pose risks to the delivery 
of health and social care. Flood risks to NHS and social care assets are likely to increase 
under climate change. Future projections indicate an increase in the number of GP 
surgeries, care homes, emergency service stations and hospitals in the flood risk zone, 
with the largest change in risk generally shown for care homes.  

In addition to increased extremes of temperatures, heatwaves are likely to become more 
common. The Heatwave Plan for England, published since 2014, sets out what should 
happen before and during periods of severe heat in England. It spells out what 
preparations both individuals and organisations can make to reduce health risks and 
includes specific measures to protect at-risk groups. Local authorities have an important 
role to play in implementation of the plan. An independent evaluation of the Heatwave Plan 
for England is currently underway and is due to report in 2018/19.  

Although average temperatures are expected to increase, cold is likely to remain a 
significant public health problem. There are currently between 35,800 and 49,700 cold-
related deaths per year. Hard to heat homes are the major determinant of the burden of 
cold-related mortality and morbidity. The effect of climate change on cold-related mortality 
and morbidity is beneficial, but projections suggest that the total number of cold-related 
deaths per year is unlikely to decline significantly due to the ageing population, increasing 
the number of vulnerable people at risk.  

Guidance for managing the risks from cold weather exists through the Cold Weather Plan 
for England49 and associated public and professional facing resources. An independent 
evaluation of the Cold Weather Plan for England was published by the Policy Innovation 
Research Unit in 2015.  

                                            
48A sustainability assessment method for master planning projects, infrastructure and buildings. 
49 Cold Weather Plan for England. URL: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/cold-weather-plan-cwp-
for-england accessed 09/07/2018 

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/cold-weather-plan-cwp-for-england
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/cold-weather-plan-cwp-for-england


 

  56 

Building on these two plans PHE, DHSC, NHS England and the Local Government 
Association (LGA) will develop a single adverse weather and health plan (including cold 
and hot weather, drought, flooding and thunderstorm asthma) by 2022. This will act on the 
recommendations of the independent evaluations and stakeholder feedback. Potential 
approaches include bringing together and improving existing guidance in order to inform 
action across the health system and local communities, reduce health risks associated 
with adverse weather, address the CCRA health risks, and bring consistency and 
coherence of approach to the impacts of adverse weather on health. 

PHE and DHSC will continue to undertake research to understand the health 
consequences of climate change more comprehensively and the health interventions 
which are effective at minimising preventable harm. The evidence base for health impacts 
of climate change will be strengthened through publication by 2023 of a UK focused report 
(‘Health Effects of Climate Change in the UK’) based on the upcoming revised UK Climate 
Projections (UKCP18) which will be launched in late 2018.   

PHE and DHSC will also review and update relevant climate change and health research 
strategies by 2020 to ensure CCRA research priorities, including air quality and vector-
borne pathogens are addressed, as well as supporting risk management where the CCRA 
has specified that more action is needed (e.g. cold and hot weather and flooding).  

The National Study of Flooding and Health, owned by PHE, is generating new evidence on 
the-medium term mental health impacts associated with flooding. The results will enhance 
our understanding of the health costs of flooding and inform flood preparedness, response 
and recovery practices. 

4.7 Emergency services, local responders and 
community resilience 
An increase in the severity and frequency of extreme weather conditions across the UK 
will have an impact on emergency services, local responders and communities who may 
need to amend the plans they currently have in place to ensure preparedness for future 
‘reasonable worst case scenarios’. 

The Civil Contingencies Act (CCA) 200450 provides a framework for responder agencies, 
as categorised under the Act, to deliver appropriate emergency planning, response and 
recovery. Responsibilities for coordination within and between Local Resilience Forums 
(LRFs) is clearly set out in Emergency Preparedness (practical framework for civil 
protection taken from the CCA 2004) 51.  

The responsibilities set out in the Emergency Planning Guidance are regularly tested by 
LRFs and their constituent responder organisations through a schedule of testing and 
exercising in order to validate capability and provide assurances.  

                                            
50Civil Contingencies Act. URL: https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2004/36/contents accessed 09/07/2018 
51Emergency Preparedness Guidance. URL: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emergency-
preparedness accessed 09/07/2018  

https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2004/36/contents
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emergency-preparedness
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/emergency-preparedness


 

  57 

The Communities Prepared National Group (CPNG), co-ordinated and sponsored by the 
Cabinet Office, supports the development and local implementation of community 
resilience policy across England. This is outlined in the Community Resilience Framework 
for Practitioners52. It does this by: 

• providing a forum for local managers and government to share good practice and 
lessons learned in community engagement and capability building across the 
country; 

• advising government on policy and projects relating to community resilience; and 
• identifying opportunities for co-ordination of community resilience related work. 

The CPNG is refreshing the framework to enable more strategic local delivery, and a more 
coordinated approach nationally.  

The Cabinet Office supports consistent risk assessments, planning and preparedness 
activities by providing the local level with guidance on how to approach risk assessment 
and information about national risks. This approach encourages consideration of 
reasonable worst case scenarios that the UK might face whilst preserving local autonomy 
in planning and preparing according to the local context. 

Local Risk Management Guidance is developed by the Cabinet Office to assist LRFs with 
risk management, such as by identifying reasonable worst case scenarios and conducting 
contextually-specific local risk assessments. National level assessments are also made 
available to LRFs through the (classified) National Risk Assessment, which provides 
comprehensive detail on potential scenarios over the next five years and their 
consequences, and encourages consistency in understanding and approach. The Cabinet 
Office reviews and updates the National Risk Assessment every two years to take account 
of the latest evidence and expertise. 

Long-term the CPNG aims to increase the number of strategies for community resilience 
at LRF level and enable greater coordination and collaboration amongst practitioners 
across the country. This is particularly important when considering emergency planning for 
floods at strategic planning and planning application stages. This will ensure that there is 
greater awareness of preparedness measures being taken locally and that all those 
involved in the preparedness and response to, and recovery from, an extreme weather 
event are working closely together. 

                                            
52 Community Resilience Framework for Practitioners. URL: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/community-resilience-framework-for-practitioners accessed 
09/07/2018 

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/community-resilience-framework-for-practitioners


 

  58 

Chapter 5: Business and industry 

5.1 Climate change risks 
Climate change will present risks to businesses (for instance from flooding and extreme 
weather events such as drought which damage assets and disrupt business operations) 
and provide opportunities through changes in demand for existing and new products and 
services.  

Business operations depend on the resilience to climate change of a range of related 
services and activities such as local infrastructure including energy, transportation and 
telecoms; supply chains and distribution channels; and impacts on staff. Particularly for 
small businesses, these can be as damaging as the direct impacts of severe weather.  

Through their international supply chains, distribution networks and global markets, UK 
businesses are exposed to the risks of extreme weather around the world. Climate change 
is expected to increase the risk of weather-related disruptions, particularly for supply 
chains and distribution networks that involve more vulnerable countries. 

The increased risk of drought is likely to disrupt businesses, particularly those who run 
water intensive businesses, and may lead to disruption of production and services, not 
least when diminishing supplies need to be prioritised elsewhere, including for public 
health and safety. Water intensive businesses may need to consider locations which are 
less water stressed to mitigate their risk.  

Key risks identified in the CCRA 2017 include: 

Risks to business sites from 
flooding 

(This is covered in Chapter 
4: People and the built 
environment) 

Risks to business from loss 
of coastal locations and 
infrastructure 

(This is covered in Chapter 
4: People and the built 
environment) 

Risks to business from 
reduced employee 
productivity due to 
infrastructure disruption and 
higher temperatures in 
working environments 

As explained in the box above, most risks identified by the CCRA on businesses are dealt 
with in other chapters of the NAP. The Business and industry chapter will focus on the 
following three priority areas: 

Vision 

“UK businesses are resilient to extreme weather and prepared for future risks and 
opportunities from climate change” 


 

  59 

• Loss in productivity; 
• supply chains; and  
• access to capital and risks and opportunities associated with changing demand for 

goods and services. 

5.2 Loss in productivity 
The CCRA2017 identified a potential risk to productivity from disruption caused by higher 
temperatures or infrastructure disruption which are attributable to climate change, although 
there is scant evidence on the relationship between temperature and productivity. 
CCRA2017 therefore outlines a need for further research to understand better the key 
interdependencies between business and infrastructure; the types of employment at 
greatest risk; and the effectiveness of planned or autonomous adaptation. Collecting 
business continuity information on productivity and extreme weather is critical to 
understanding this risk better. 

On infrastructure disruption, we propose that as a first step this information is collected 
from infrastructure operators and their regulators under the third cycle of adaptation 
reporting. Please refer to chapter 7 for more information on the Adaptation Reporting 
Power. 

On risks to business from reduced employee productivity, due to higher temperatures in 
working environments, government takes the impact of heatwaves very seriously. We 
have acknowledged the risk identified in the Climate Change Risk Assessment and are 
working to ensure the appropriate departments, including BEIS, MHCLG and DHSC, take 
this commitment forward. 

5.3 Supply chains 
Food supply is one of the 13 Critical National Infrastructure sectors53. Defra produces an 
annual Sector Resilience plan54 and is currently carrying out a review of the UK Food 
Security Assessment (last fully updated in 2010), due to complete later this year with a 
view to publication in 2019. Climate change will be considered and highlighted as a risk 
(and possible opportunity) throughout the review. 

Although the assessment has not yet been completed, the UK’s openness to trade 
combined with a robust domestic production sector has brought a very impressive diversity 
to UK food supply, and this will continue after we leave the EU. The UK imports food from 
over 180 countries and this openness ensures that UK food supply is very resilient to 

                                            
53 Centre for the Protection of National Infrastructure, Critical National Infrastructure. URL: 
https://www.cpni.gov.uk/critical-national-infrastructure-0   
54 Cabinet Office, Sector resilience plans, 15 January 2014. URL: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/sector-resilience-plans  

https://www.cpni.gov.uk/critical-national-infrastructure-0
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/sector-resilience-plans


 

  60 

supply interruptions from specific countries and also from disruption to domestic UK 
production. In particular retailers and large food service operators are able to switch 
sources of supply rapidly if required (as demonstrated during a range of crises including 
severe weather, transport disruption and Industrial Action). Even where the volume of 
trade is relatively small with certain countries, the indicator highlights the potential to 
import in the event of shortfalls domestically or in other trading partners. 

5.4 Access to capital and risks and opportunities 
associated with changing demand for goods and 
services 

5.4.1 Non-financial reporting 

Implementing the 25 Year Environment Plan, Defra will work with the Council for 
Sustainable Business (CSB), which will act as a sounding board, challenger, critic, 
innovator and advisor to the Secretary of State, Ministers and Defra policy teams. The 
Council will work with business leaders to:  

• identify environmental innovation and entrepreneurialism that will advance 25 Year 
Environment Plan ambition and goals;  

• strengthen the financial case for sustainable business; 
• advise on the development of the right regulatory frameworks, fiscal policies and 

support structures to achieve these ambitions  

Work will extend across all ten of the 25 Year Environment Plan goals.  

The 25 Year Environment Plan sets out some of the areas on which the CSB could act 
and provide advice, including: 

• actions by government to create the right conditions for private sector innovation 
and investment in environmental goods; 

• developing and articulating the business case for natural capital reporting, 
addressing risks and opportunities in operations and supply chains; 

• positioning the UK as a world leader in natural capital knowledge-based services 
and goods; 

• the development of new natural capital markets – like the creation of new revenue 
streams to make natural capital assets investable; and 

• cultivating and acting on consumer environmental trends. 

25YEP Goal: to ensure that all policies, programmes and investment decisions take 
into account the possible extent of climate change this century 


 

  61 

This will build on the Green Finance Taskforce to further explore opportunities for the 
financial sector to fulfil opportunities in natural capital and environmental protection. 

It is important to note that the Non-Financial Reporting Directive was transposed into UK 
regulations in December 2016. These regulations require large public interest entities to 
report on environmental matters (including the impact of the company’s business on the 
environment) and a description of the principal risks in this area. The non-financial 
information statement is to be included within the strategic report which is filed at 
Companies House as part of a company’s annual report. The first reports, including this 
statement, are now being filed (for financial years starting 1 January 2017) and will form an 
important part of our evidence base. With respect to the further reporting on climate 
adaption, please refer to chapter 7 on the Adaptation Reporting Power.  

5.4.2 Green Finance 

Green finance, defined as the mobilisation of private investment in environmental and 
sustainable projects and infrastructure, is essential to meeting the UK’s domestic and 
international climate change commitments.  

Government has endorsed the recommendations of the Taskforce on Climate-related 
Financial Disclosures (TCFD) and encouraged all listed-companies to implement them. 
Over 250 businesses worldwide have endorsed/backed these recommendations, including 
eight of the ten largest asset managers and twenty of the largest banks. Many companies 
in the UK have also committed to implementing the TCFD recommendations, and this 
increase in climate-related financial disclosures could further build the evidence base in 
this area, particularly from the financial sector. 

BEIS and HMT convened the Green Finance Taskforce, bringing together leading experts 
from the financial sector, academia and civil society to provide recommendations to 
support the delivery of our strategic objectives in green finance: 

• Help deliver the investment needed to meet the UK’s Industrial Strategy and Clean 
Growth Strategy; 

• further consolidate the UK’s leadership in financing international green and 
sustainable investment; and 

• maximise the opportunities to be had for UK businesses in this rapidly growing 
area. 

The UK is widely recognised as the world’s leading global financial centre, and also leads 
the world in green finance, with nearly 80 green bonds already listed on the London Stock 
Exchange raising more than US$24bn55. The Taskforce was convened to build on these 
strengths. 

                                            
55 As of May 2017. Source: London Stock Exchange Group 


 

  62 

The Taskforce published its Report at the end of March 2018, outlining a set of wide-
ranging and ambitious recommendations for Government and the private sector56. These 
were formulated in consultation with over 140 organisations and are grouped in to 10 key 
themes: 

1. Relaunch UK green finance activities through a new unified brand; 

2. improve climate risk management with advanced data and analytics; 

3. implement the recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-Related Financial 
Disclosures (TCFD); 

4. drive demand and supply for green lending products; 

5. boost investment into innovative clean technology; 

6. clarify investor roles and responsibilities; 

7. issue a sovereign green bond; 

8. build a green and resilient infrastructure pipeline 

9. foster inclusive prosperity by supporting local actors; and 

10. integrate resilience into the green finance agenda. 

Green finance is about both clean growth and resilience; in addition to maximising the 
opportunity presented by the global transition to a low-carbon economy, the UK must also 
be resilient to the physical threats of climate change. The Taskforce highlighted resilience 
throughout the report and considered it explicitly in Theme 10. 

The report was well received across the financial services sector, and Sir Roger Gifford 
the chair of the Taskforce commented that the report marked a ‘significant starting point for 
truly propelling green finance onto the national agenda’.  

Government is now considering the Taskforce’s recommendations and will respond in due 
course.  

5.4.3 Greening government commitments 

In addition to this, the government continues delivering its ambitious Greening 
Government Commitments57. These commitments require departments to report 

                                            
56 ‘Accelerating Green Finance: Green Finance Taskforce Report’, 28th March 2018, 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/accelerating-green-finance-green-finance-taskforce-report 
57 HMG, Greening Government Commitments, 14 December 2016. URL: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/greening-government-commitments  

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/accelerating-green-finance-green-finance-taskforce-report
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/greening-government-commitments


 

  63 

transparently each year on the actions they are taking to address climate change 
adaptation on their estates and in their operations. Their compliance is reported in the 
Annual Report on the Greening Government Commitments. HMT’s Sustainability 
Reporting Guidance for Public Sector Annual Reports58 also requires organisations to 
provide a general statement giving assurance that action has been taken to ensure that 
policies with long term implications are robust in the face of changing weather, extreme 
events and sea level rises from climate change.  

5.4.4 Climate adaptation standards 

Government has engaged with the British Standards Institution and key stakeholders to 
consider the possibility of developing a standard in climate adaptation and business 
resilience. A standardised approach to long term decision making in adaptation will have 
relevance for the management of risks in the natural environment, built environment, 
business and infrastructure. Government will continue engaging in discussions with the 
British Standards Institute and different stakeholders on this issue. Among other things, we 
will consider Adaptation Pathways for businesses.  

Government has also commissioned the British Standards Institution to develop the 
world’s first green and sustainable finance management standards 

                                            
58 HMT, Public sector annual reports: sustainability reporting guidance 2017 to 2018, 31 October 2017. URL: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/public-sector-annual-reports-sustainability-reporting-guidance-
2017-to-2018  

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/public-sector-annual-reports-sustainability-reporting-guidance-2017-to-2018
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/public-sector-annual-reports-sustainability-reporting-guidance-2017-to-2018


 

  64 

Chapter 6: Local government 

6.1 Climate change risks 
Local government plays a major role in shaping local places by taking decisions and 
providing guidance, through the local democratic process, on the urban landscape, the 
built environment, green and blue natural spaces, and public health. 

Many of the risks identified in CCRA2017 and set out in chapters 2-5 of this NAP and 
many of the impacts arising from climate change are relevant to the responsibilities and 
functioning of local government. Many of the impacts arising from climate change will 
affect their communities, infrastructure and assets, and the provision of services. Impacts 
are likely to vary from location to location. Insufficient local decision-making on how 
infrastructure funding is prioritised is a concern - this can be a barrier to an effective 
response to increased flood risk. And at a rural level higher temperatures, droughts and 
heavy rainfall aggravate the ongoing degradation of agricultural, forest and pasture 
ecosystems. This could have a negative effect on food security. Food supply is discussed 
in more detail in Chapter 5: Business and Industry. 

Local government as community leaders, working with a wide range of infrastructure and 
other local delivery partners, are at the forefront of local action to protect communities and 
businesses and safeguard growth from risks posed by severe weather events and a 
changing climate. They recognise the need to take adaptation action to minimise climate 
change risks to services they provide and are already taking actions. Local councils 
already have a range of duties and reporting requirements on flood risk management, 
planning, emergency planning, and biodiversity which negates the need for further 
adaptation reporting. They are involved in significant investment, service delivery, 
procurement and business continuity activities, and in relation to climate impacts and 
extreme weather, are central to long term planning, infrastructure management, 
emergency response and recovery work. Involving local government in national climate 
change strategy from an early stage will be valuable in supplying local granular insight to 
national policy, and central government climate expertise to local government. 

There is a need for, and statutory obligations on, councils, to prepare for and minimise the 
longer term impacts of climate change. This is reinforced by expectations for community 
resilience and business continuity by residents and businesses. Local government can 
also play a valuable role in raising the public profile of climate change mitigation and 
adaptation, as a central and long-term government priority. 

There are a wide range of legislative and policy drivers to enable local action on climate 
change. Local government has obligations that contribute to resilience, although not all 
local authorities will have the same responsibilities in an area. These include flood risk 

Vision 

“Local Government plays a central role in leading and supporting local places to 
become more resilient to a range of future risks and to be prepared for the 
opportunities from a changing climate” 


 

  65 

management, under the Flood and Water Management Act 2010, and commitments to 
prepare and plan for emergencies under the Civil Contingencies Act 2004. Local Planning 
Authorities (LPAs) are also required under the Planning Act 2008 to adopt proactive 
strategies to mitigate and adapt to climate change. They need to take full account of flood 
risk; coastal change; and water supply and demand considerations. There are also funding 
requirements to consider adaptation as part of criteria for the Local Growth Fund. 

6.2 Local delivery of the 25 year environment plan 
Mitigating and adapting to climate change is one of 10 goals of the 25 Year Environment 
Plan. Defra is committed to improving partnership working at a local level with local 
authorities, Local Enterprise Partnerships, Local Nature Partnerships, Defra Group bodies 
and other key local decision makers to help deliver the Plan’s goals.  

Many organisations and partnerships pursue their own plans, across different areas and 
boundaries. In places there is good coordination between them, but in others there are 
opportunities for joining up and integrating environmental work. Activity within an area 
could be better coordinated and aligned if all the relevant delivery organisations came 
together to create a single plan.  

Defra intend to facilitate this coordination through the development of 14 local natural 
capital plans. These plans will be developed from existing Defra Group Area Integrated 
Plans, which are joint statements between the EA, NE and the Forestry Commission – the 
bodies that coordinate Defra’s activity in an area. Local natural capital plans will go beyond 
the Defra focus of Area Integrated Plans to include all relevant delivery in the area, 
ensuring greater coordination and integration of activities that impact on the environment. 
These plans will be created by bringing together key local partnerships and organisations 
whose actions impact on the environment to prioritise local environmental opportunities 
and issues and identify actions to address these. Stakeholder engagement will begin in 
autumn 2018 to flesh out what a local natural capital plan will look like. 

Under this natural capital approach, local authorities’ existing climate change adaptation 
work will be more closely aligned with other strands of delivery in the area, exploiting 
synergies where they exist. This will enable local organisations, such as local government, 
to tie climate change adaptation in with economic and social policy in the area. For 
instance, building green infrastructure into local plans could have positive socio economic 
impacts on areas such as public health and urban flood risk, as well as potentially 
providing climate change adaptation benefits. 

As part of implementing the 25 Year Environment Plan, Defra will work with partners to 
develop metrics to assess progress against all the goals set out in the Plan 

6.3 Raising awareness, building capability and making 
the case for action. 
Government works with local government networks, including the Local Adaptation 
Advisory Panel (LAAP), to identify opportunities and address priority risks. Over the period 
covered by the first NAP the LAAP and Climate Local played a significant role in 
promoting, leading, and coordinating work with local authorities on climate change 


 

  66 

adaptation. One of the key outputs has been the development and rollout of a Business 
Case for Climate Ready Councils for managing the impacts of severe weather and a 
changing climate. This was produced and published jointly by the LAAP and Climate 
Ready Support Service in 2015.  

Building on this the LAAP is now working on a project to demonstrate the extent of climate 
change adaptation across local authorities. This will help identify what would constitute 
model adaptation action across the range of responsibilities of a local authority in England. 
It will have examples of where this is happening. The LAAP will consider how this can be 
disseminated and implemented. The project will clarify: 

• the role and obligations of local government in addressing climate change risks and 
the minimum activities that local authorities can be expected to undertake; 

• what further actions or good practice on climate adaptation local government should 
be considering to bring them up to good status; and  

• the development and improvement of current coordination and networks to better 
support the integration of climate change adaptation across local government’s 
activities and programmes.  

The LAAP is working to promote climate adaptation and best practice, including the 
current business case and further tools developed over the course of this NAP. This 
includes working with other organisations such as the Local Government Association 
(LGA) and the Association of Directors of Environment, Economy, Planning and 
Transport (ADEPT) to review progress and promote capacity building through targeted 
engagement with particular LG sectors on climate change adaptation that local 
government is making. 

In doing this the LAAP will explore with partners how to stimulate further cooperation on 
climate change adaptation across local government. This includes the potential for an 
informal network of local authorities to drive, inspire and support local government action 
to improve resilience of their communities and services to climate change impacts. 

6.4 Local authorities, including mayors, cities and city 
regions 
There are risks of severe weather events that are common to local authorities of all sizes, 
for example, managing surface water flooding, and heatwaves. In terms of enhancing and 
protecting the local environment there can also be some common aims for all authorities, 
such as the environmental landscape, built environment and green natural spaces. Town 
and parish authorities do not have the resources of city or county authorities, and may 
adapt at a different rate to their larger counterparts. They may, however, be able to 
influence larger local authorities to address climate change as a strategic priority. 

6.4.1 Mayoral combined authorities (MCAs) 

These provide a new scale of governance for local government in seven areas. They bring 
new powers and budgets (such as the Transforming Cities Fund) to bear across politically 
cohesive, functional economic geographies. The MCAs are potentially valuable partners in 
driving locally led and informed adaption plans in their areas. Many of them have already 
made environmental goals central to their plans, and Mayors provide high profile figures 
that can help champion this agenda. For example: 


 

  67 

• Mayor Andy Burnham and the Greater Manchester Combined Authority launched a 
Green Summit in March 2018; have established a £15m low carbon fund; are 
exploring a possible European Regional Environment fund59 and will produce a 
Natural Capital Investment Plan; 

• Mayor Andy Street and the West Midlands Combined Authority published a 2014-
2019 environment strategy addressing climate change resilience, sustainable 
infrastructure and raising environmental awareness; and 

• Mayor Steve Rotheram is championing a Mersey tidal barrage hydropower scheme, 
while Liverpool City Region Combined Authority and Local Enterprise Partnership 
launched the report: '' Building Climate Resilience: Good Practice Case Studies in 
Liverpool City Region'' in September 2017. 

6.4.2 The core cities group and London 

The Core Cities Climate Resilience and Adaptation Working Group provides a crucial 
platform for sharing and support between cities on climate adaptation areas. This aims to 
meet and, where possible, go beyond the commitments to action set out in the Core Cities 
Commitment in the first NAP. London sets out a robust range of adaptation policies and 
proposals in the London Environment Strategy, which was published in May 2018, with 
additional work done to embed adaptation into transport, health inequalities, planning, 
housing, and other mayoral strategies. London is taking a sector-based approach to 
adaptation, building on the wealth of valuable evidence to help sectors understand their 
risks and opportunities, to develop plans to address them, and to monitor sector progress 
in adapting. The Core Cities Group and London undertake a range of activities to promote 
climate change adaptation, raise awareness and foster leadership.  

These include: 

• Being active participants in a range of national and international commitments60 
which demonstrate awareness, commitment and leadership. These commitments 
need to be monitored and progress on climate adaptation communicated more 
widely; 

• all English members and London make disclosures reporting their environmental 
impact under the Carbon Disclosure Project. Bristol and Greater Manchester are 
signatories to the Under2Mou initiative61 and participate in the Rockefeller 100 
Resilient Cities campaign; and 

• wider work to promote sustainability, providing platforms and activity around climate 
adaptation issues. Examples are Bristol’s Green Capital initiative and Manchester 
City Council’s climate change agency, which was launched in September 2015.   

In 2018 Defra will set up a formalised working group with the Core Cities Group to develop 
the work on air quality and climate change resilience. This will commit to effectively 
promote adaptation in cities, work to progress action and disseminate best practice and 
accelerate action between the Core Cities Group, London and other city region areas more 
widely, and look to deliver a programme of actions. 

                                            
59 Greater Manchester Combined Autority, Multi-million pound fund to make Greater Manchester a greener 
city-region, 14/06/2017. URL: https://www.greatermanchester-ca.gov.uk/news/article/151/multi-
million_pound_fund_to_make_greater_manchester_a_greener_city-region  
60 Includes Mayors Adapt, Compact of Mayors, and Covenant of Mayors.  
61 Under2Mou initiative. URL: http://climateinitiativesplatform.org/index.php/Under_2_MOU  

https://www.greatermanchester-ca.gov.uk/news/article/151/multi-million_pound_fund_to_make_greater_manchester_a_greener_city-region
https://www.greatermanchester-ca.gov.uk/news/article/151/multi-million_pound_fund_to_make_greater_manchester_a_greener_city-region
http://climateinitiativesplatform.org/index.php/Under_2_MOU


 

  68 

6.4.3 Cities commitment 

The first NAP Cities Commitment set out an agreement between the Core Cities Group, 
London Councils and the Greater London Authority to work together on climate change 
adaptation. Progress in the key areas of that commitment is shown below. 

Embedding climate risk management in the built environment: 

• Core Cities Group members are developing spatial plans. Devolution and Cities 
Deals have meant a strengthening and continuation of that process. Greater 
Manchester Combined Authority consulted on its GM Spatial Framework62 
between October 2016 and January 2017. A second version of the plan, which aims 
to make the most of Greater Manchester’s brownfield sites and reduce the impact 
on greenbelt, is being developed;  

• Core Cities Group members are actively developing standards around sustainable 
development, especially Sustainable Drainage Systems; and   

• ongoing local work to understand and promote property level protection includes 
Liverpool City Council seeing a number of installations on the back of local 
development. Under the Flood Resilient Community Pathfinder initiative Liverpool 
has enhanced property-level flood protection and energy efficiency upgrades to 
residents of the Woodlands Estate.  

Strengthen the climate resilience of infrastructure: 

• Core Cities Group work with infrastructure providers and the emergency planning 
process via the established Local Resilience Forum (LRF) and civil contingencies 
process. Cities which have experienced recent severe fluvial and surface water 
flooding are providing information to government on the response and recovery 
process; 

• With the ongoing process of engagement on the National Flood Resilience Review, 
which the Core Cities Group initiated with the government, there is potential to 
engage in a wider dialogue on some of the emerging and future risks. To support 
this Core Cities Group are undertaking a flood resilient evidence baselining 
process. This will try to understand what studies, reports and information is held 
and where, and to what extent this looks at future flood risk in a changed climate.   

Address and build resilience to the health and wellbeing impacts of climate change: 
• Core Cities undertake considerable work on flood resilience with at risk 

communities. There are emerging practices around severe weather and winter 
warmth as well as a considerable amount of work via emergency planning and 
community flood risk resilience work. Core Cities recognise climate change issues 
with heatwaves, or overheating in buildings, and will need to respond to the former, 
as a category 1/first line responder as required by the Civil Contingencies Act 2004. 
LRFs will consider risks via the risk assessment process they do. Further 
information on community response to emergencies, including severe weather 
events, is in section 4.7 of the People and Built Environment chapter. 

                                            
62 Greater Manchester Combined Authority, Draft Greater Manchester Spatial Framework, 2016. URL: 
https://www.greatermanchester-ca.gov.uk/downloads/20018/greater_manchester_spatial_framework 


 

https://www.greatermanchester-ca.gov.uk/downloads/20018/greater_manchester_spatial_framework


 

  69 

Address climate impacts on Business and Services: 

• A wider programme of work is underway around business resilience. Leeds City 
Council continues to grow its Leeds Alert system, which allows West Yorkshire 
Police and Leeds City Council to send out emergency alert messages on 
emergencies and disruptive events to registered businesses. There is a specific 
severe weather group contact list for alerts currently being established; 

• Greater Manchester Combined Authority is working with its LRF to prepare 
businesses and is adapting its existing guide for small business ‘Weathering the 
Storm’63 to its purposes and trialling direct SME resilience; 

• Newcastle City Council is using a €100,000 Technical Assistance Grant from the 
European Investment Bank to undertake a climate risk and vulnerability assessment 
for two Accelerated Development Zone sites. 

Development of Business Case work: 

The “Business Case for Climate Ready Councils for managing the impacts of severe 
weather and a changing climate” was published in 2015. Since then there has been 
collaborative work to develop a business case. The Core Cities Group has been 
considering how to understand and communicate the economic impacts of climate change. 
There has been a proposal to focus work on high level risk assessment of strategic 
development/investment sites, but this will need agreement by Core Cities members and 
how it is resourced.   

In 2017 Greater Manchester Combined Authority was selected as an ‘urban pioneer’ to 
test certain issues and approaches around natural capital accounting and ecosystem 
services as part of the 25 Year Environment Plan. This provides an opportunity to work to 
understand, develop and share some economic value information on the climate resilience 
services provided by natural assets.   

Leeds City Council developed a vulnerability mapping tool under the first NAP Cities 
Commitment. It prioritised which mapping layers would be most useful and it is making use 
of some of them to plan its health work. The methodology gave Leeds a better idea of its 
mapping resources and how they could be used to plan for climate change adaptation and 
severe weather. The tool was disseminated throughout the Core Cities Group. 

EU Work: 

In 2015, the European Commission merged two Covenant of Mayors initiatives on climate 
change adaptation (Mayors Adapt) and mitigation to promote an integrated approach to 
climate and energy action. From 2017 onwards adaptation was entirely integrated into the 
Covenant of Mayors for Climate and Energy. This aims to increase support for local 
activities, provide a platform for greater engagement and networking by cities, and raise 
public awareness about adaptation and mitigation and the measures needed. There are 36 
UK cities signed up to Mayors Adapt. They have utilised the expertise and opportunities 
that this, and other, initiatives have provided, but there is uncertainty as to what similar 
support may be available after EU Exit.  

                                            

63 Claps and Greater Manchester Resilience Forum, Weathering the Storm, 2017. URL: 
http://media.claspinfo.org/sites/default/files/Weathering%20the%20Storm%20Manchester%20Final%202508
2017.pdf  

http://media.claspinfo.org/sites/default/files/Weathering%20the%20Storm%20Manchester%20Final%2025082017.pdf
http://media.claspinfo.org/sites/default/files/Weathering%20the%20Storm%20Manchester%20Final%2025082017.pdf


 

  70 

Chapter 7: Adaptation reporting 
This section sets out the government’s strategy for implementing the third round of climate 
change adaptation reporting.   

It is presented to Parliament pursuant to Section 65 of the Climate Change Act 2008 

7.1 Background 
The Adaptation Reporting Power (ARP) was introduced under the Climate Change Act 
2008. The ARP helps ensure that ‘persons or bodies with a function of a public nature’ and 
‘statutory undertakers’ (reporting organisations) are taking action to adapt to climate 
change by reporting on how they are addressing current and future climate impacts. These 
reports also provide vital intelligence on the resilience of key sections of society.    

Since the Act entered into force the adaptation reporting process has been through two 
cycles. First, in 2009, when the Secretary of State laid before Parliament a strategy for 
exercising the statutory power. The strategy focused on major infrastructure providers from 
the energy, transport and water sectors and 91 organisations were directed to report. A 
number of other organisations were invited to submit voluntary reports. Statutory guidance 
was published to guide reporting organisations on the content of their submissions and a 
formal evaluation of reports was carried out. In total, 105 organisations took part. 

The second cycle of adaptation reporting started in 2013, when the government laid before 
Parliament its second strategy. This strategy set out a voluntary, light touch and flexible 
approach to reporting. This, contrary to the first cycle of reporting, was a ‘bottom-up’ 
approach to reporting and no formal guidance was offered to reporting organisations. In 
total, 86 organisations took part. 

This chapter sets out government’s strategy for the third cycle of reporting. It was finalised 
following the consideration of responses to a public consultation held on the proposals 
from February – March 2018. The consultation asked for views on the voluntary and 
mandatory nature of reporting, the principles and objectives for future reporting and the 
scope of the reporting exercise. The responses to our consultation endorsed the proposed 
approach to the third round strategy for the Adaptation Reporting Power. The majority of 
respondents supported the continuation of voluntary reporting and there was 
overwhelming support for the principles and objectives for reporting, the sectorial or 
organisational template approach, timing and other circumstances in which the reporting 
power should be used. 


 

  71 

7.2 The approach to the third cycle of adaptation 
reporting 
A key consideration for the operation of reporting was whether there was a case for using 
the Climate Change Act’s statutory power to direct organisations to report.    

Government acknowledges that the majority of respondents to the consultation favoured 
the continuation of voluntary reporting, including the vast majority of reporting 
organisations. We consider that a voluntary reporting process is the most constructive and 
collaborative approach for engaging reporting organisations and would allow the greatest 
flexibility and innovation in approaches to address climate risk and enable efforts to 
increase resilience.    

Government will not issue directions under the third round of the ARP, but we will invite 
reporting on a voluntary basis, in line with the 2008 Climate Change Act. 

7.3 Objectives and principles for the third cycle of 
adaptation reporting 
The ARP was introduced to help reporting organisations take appropriate action to adapt 
to the current and future climate impacts. Our experience from the first two cycles of 
adaptation reporting suggests it is important that expectations for reporting to be clear, 
both for reporting organisations, government and the Adaptation Sub-Committee.    

Our evaluation of previous reporting cycles found that reporting presented a number of 
benefits to organisations. It supported organisations to take appropriate action to address 
climate risks, directly, through engaging organisations in the process and raising the profile 
of climate resilience work; and indirectly, through raising awareness, building capacity, 
ensuring risks are identified, assessed and properly managed thereby reducing 
vulnerability and also by making examples of good practice publicly available.  

In order to clarify expectations and ambitions for reporting, we consider the primary 
objective for reporting in the third round is to support the ongoing integration of climate 
change risk management into the work of reporting organisations.   

A secondary objective for reporting is that reports contribute to government understanding 
of the level of preparedness of key sectors to climate change, at a sectoral and national 
level, and feed into the ASC’s reports to Parliament. 

Government recognises that with such a diverse range of reporting organisations with 
different regulatory frameworks and businesses process (some of which embed the 
consideration and management of climate risks), it is crucial to avoid a one size fits all 
approach. Government also recognises that reports from the previous cycles of reporting 
did not provide sufficient information to assess resilience efforts in a given sector and that 


 

  72 

the consistency of reporting must improve. The principles which will guide our approach to 
facilitating reporting in the third round will be: 

• proportionate, risk-based and streamlined to minimise burdens or duplication; and 

• built on previous rounds of reporting to improve report quality and participation. 

7.4 Establishing report content 
In order to achieve the objectives and adhere to the principles of reporting we will develop 
reporting templates in line with the requirements set out in the Climate Change Act, which 
says that adaptation reports should contain: 

• an assessment of the current and future risks to that organisation presented by 
climate change; and 

• a programme of measures to address the risks, including policies and practices that 
are already being implemented. 

Feedback from reporting organisations indicated a need for a clearer indication from 
government on the information which should be provided in ARP reports, as well as 
recognition of sectorial differences, regulatory cycles and degree of maturity on climate 
risk management.   

We will collaborate with organisations using a sectoral grouping (or individual 
organisations where there is no sectoral grouping), to agree content for reporting. This 
approach is effectively a hybrid between the top-down directed approach of the first round 
and the bottom-up flexible approach in the second round. This approach will better reflect 
the differences between organisations across and within sectors, the different business 
and regulatory pressures and the diversity of approaches and experiences on climate 
change risk management across all reporting organisations. 

We expect that templates will give a clearer indication of the information which reports 
would include and will allow for a more consistent method for reporting risk assessments 
and logging actions to allow for effective monitoring over successive reporting 
cycles. Government is also mindful of the need to improve report content and quality in the 
third round and we will work with the ASC to ensure expectations on the information and 
detail needed is clearly articulated. We will also ensure ARP reports respond to the risks 
set out in the CCRA (see section 7.7), as well as ensuring that the reporting organisation’s 
commentary on addressing organisational or asset level risks continues – this will 
effectively build on previous rounds of reporting to ensure we have a clear time series of 
effort made by reporting organisations to address risks which they face. 


 

  73 

7.5 Criteria for identifying organisations in scope 
A very large number of organisations are theoretically eligible under the adaptation 
reporting power. This is because the Act refers to eligible organisations as being either 
statutory undertakers (defined in the Town and Country Planning Act) or organisations 
which perform functions of a public nature. Government is committed to using the reporting 
power in a proportionate, risk based and efficient way. Not all potentially eligible 
organisations (of whom there are many thousands) will be asked to report. We will 
therefore apply the following criteria to ensure reporting in the third round is beneficial and 
adds value to organisations and government: 

• identifying those organisations that are vulnerable to the projected impacts of 
climate change as according to the CCRA64;  

• preventing duplication by identifying organisations which are not already subject to 
other reporting requirements, or are not already covered by an existing voluntary 
agreement which cover management of climate risks; and 

• targeting reporting organisations proportionately e.g. some of the sectors 
highlighted as vulnerable to climate change may be formed of many much smaller 
organisations. Government believes that including such organisations as reporting 
authorities would be disproportionate. Where appropriate, government will invite 
umbrella organisations to report on behalf of members. Determining proportionality 
must occur on case by case basis. Government has not defined a specific threshold 
for proportionality. The voluntary approach means that there is scope for discussion 
with government to ensure that the reporting process is proportionate and 
beneficial. 

7.6 Organisations in scope 
In applying the criteria above, the list of reporting organisations presented in our 
consultation was largely endorsed. We will therefore invite the following, with slight 
modifications explained below, to report in the third cycle of adaptation reporting: 

• Transport organisations covering: strategic road, rail infrastructure, strategic 
airports, commercial ports and lighthouses authorities. 

Following feedback from British Ports Association and Major Ports’ Group to update 
the list of commercial ports, we will make changes to the list of participating ports to 
reflect those of national importance in relation to imports. 

• Water companies (those serving over 50,000 billed premises). 

                                            
64 The UK Climate Change Risk Assessment, 2017. URL: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/uk-
climate-change-risk-assessment-2017 


 

  74 

This will include all the water companies which participated in previous cycles of 
adaptation reporting. 

• Energy sector: electricity transmission and distribution, gas transportation and 
energy generators. 

Following feedback from Energy UK we will work with them to agree detailed scope 
of generator participation, in view of the changes to the generation fleet and the 
regulatory framework within which it operates (e.g. Industrial Emissions Directive 
and coal closure). 

We will also continue discussions with the oil sector on their likely participation. 

• Public bodies covering environment, marine, fisheries and health. 

This will include all the public bodies which participated in previous cycles of 
adaptation reporting. 

• Data centres and telecommunications. 

This will include the data centre trade body Tech UK and the grouping of 
telecommunications companies in the Electronic Communications Resilience and 
Response Group. 

• Regulators for water, energy, communications and finance.  

This will include regulators OFWAT, OFGEM, OFCOM and the Prudential 
Regulation Authority. 

We will also invite the Financial Conduct Authority, the Financial Reporting Council 
and The Pensions Regulator to each produce a report on how they are 
incorporating the consideration of short and long term climate impacts into the 
operation of their objectives, statutory duties and powers. We will not invite the 
Pension Protection Fund as they will be reporting in line with the recommendations 
of the Taskforce on Climate-related Financial Disclosures. 

• Heritage environment organisations. 

This will include inviting National Trust, English Heritage, and Historic England to 
report. 

In view of the ongoing discussions with reporting organisations on their involvement, we 
will publish a list of participating organisations by the end of 2018. 


 

  75 

7.7 Coverage of CCRA risks 
In determining the content of reports with reporting organisations we will ensure reports 
support our understanding of how risks from the CCRA17 and in some cases CCRA12 are 
being managed. The following table sets out areas of risk we will ask reporting 
organisations to cover in their reports. 

Reporting sectors CCRA risk areas addressed: 

Transport 
organisations 

Cascade failures due to interdependencies; risks from 
flooding; heat; slope and embankment failure; risks to 
bridges from high river flows and bank erosion; risk from 
high winds and lightning; risks to productivity due to 
infrastructure disruption. 

Water companies Cascade failures due to interdependencies; risks from 
flooding; risks to public water supplies from drought and low 
river flows; risks to productivity due to infrastructure 
disruption. 

Energy sector Cascade failures due to interdependencies; risks from 
flooding; risks to pipelines from high river flows and bank 
erosion; risks from high winds and lightning; risks to 
offshore infrastructure from storms and high waves; risks to 
productivity due to infrastructure disruption. 

Data centres and 
telecommunications 

Cascade failures due to interdependencies; risks from 
flooding; risks from high winds and lightning; risks to 
productivity due to infrastructure disruption. 

Regulators Risks from climate change as they affect the operation of 
statutory duties/powers, responsibilities and objectives.   

Public bodies Will depend on duties, responsibilities and objectives of 
each public body and will address range of risks facing 
species and habitats, agriculture, forestry, soils, aquifers, 
marine species, fisheries and marine heritage, health and 
wellbeing, coastal communities. 

Heritage 
environment 

Risks to culturally valued structures and the wider historic 
environment 


 

  76 

7.8 Additional circumstances in which the Power can be 
used 
As required by Section 65 of the Climate Change Act 2008, the Secretary of State must 
outline the circumstances in which directions to report might be given that are not indicated 
within this document. This section outlines the circumstances which may result in requests 
to report being given to other organisations. These circumstances are: 

• where a future event exposes vulnerability; 

• where evidence is obtained of bodies’ poor performance to reduce vulnerability to 
climate change; 

• where a new body is created that fulfils the criteria for reporting; or, 

• where an existing body’s role changes so that it fits these criteria. 

7.9 ARP timeline and next steps 
Actions Timescale 

Publish list of participating reporting organisations End 2018 

Reporting proposals for sectors and organisations, setting out the 
scope of report, deadlines agreed and invitations submitted 

End 2018  


 

Reporting organisations prepare reports and submit to agreed 
deadlines 

2019 – 2021 

Draft reports submitted to the Secretary of State Up to end 2021 

Concerns surrounding commercial confidentiality submitted to the 
Secretary of State, with alternative reports for publication which take 
into account commercial and confidentiality proposals 

Timescales will 
vary 


 

Secretary of State notifies reporting organisations of commercial 
confidentiality decisions based on objections received under section 63 
(7) of the Climate Change Act 2008  

Within 3 months 
of receipt 


 

Reporting organisation takes on board comments and submits final 
report to the Secretary of State 

Within 3 months 


 

Final reports published by the Secretary of State in accordance with 
section 63(6), and/or by the organisation themselves 

Timescales will 
vary 


 

Reports’ findings feed into ASC’s ongoing work to assess progress on 
adaptation 

2019-2021 


  

  77 

List of acronyms 
ARP: Adaptation Reporting Power 

ASC: Adaptation Sub-Committee 

BEIS: Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy 

BREEAM: Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method 

CAA: Civil Aviation Authority 

CBI: Confederation of British Industry 

CCRA: Climate Change Risk Assessment 

Cefas: Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science 

CIBSE: Chartered Institution of Buildings Services Engineers 

Defra: Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs 

DfT: Department for Transport 

DHSC: Department of Health and Social Care 

EA: Environment Agency 

FC: Forestry Commission 

FCERM: Flood and Coastal Erosion Risk Management 

GLA: Greater London Authority 

HA: Highways Agency 

LAAP: Local Adaptation Advisory Panel 

LGA: Local Government Association 

LRF: Local Resilience Forum 

MCCIP: Marine Climate Change Impacts Partnership 

MHCLG: Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government 

MOHCCP: Met Office Hadley Centre Climate Programme 

NE: Natural England 


 

  78 

NERC: Natural Environment Research Council 

NFRR: National Flood Resilience Review 

NHS: National Health Service 

NPPF: National Planning Policy Framework 

NPS: National Policy Statement 

OFGEM: Office of Gas and Electricity Markets 

OFWAT: Office of Water Services 

PHE: Public Health England 

UKCP18: UK Climate Projections 2018 


   

  79 

Annex 1: CCRA 2 risks by urgency category 
More action needed Research priority Sustain current action Watching brief 
Ne1: Risks to species and 
habitats from changing 
climate space 

Ne3: Changes in suitability 
of land for agriculture and 
forests 

Ne9: Risks to agriculture, 
forestry, landscapes & 
wildlife from pests/patho-
gens/invasive species 

Ne14: Risks & 
opportunities from 
changes in landscape 
character 

Ne2: Opportunities from new 
species colonisations 

Ne7: Risks to freshwater 
species from high water 
temperatures 

Ne10: Extreme 
weather/wildfire risks to 
farming, forestry, wildlife & 
heritage 

In7: Low/high river flow 
risks to hydroelectric 
generation 

Ne4: Risks to soils from 
increased seasonal aridity 
and wetness 

Ne13: Ocean acidification 
& higher water temperature 
risks for marine species, 
fisheries & marine heritage 

Ne11: Saltwater intrusion 
risks to aquifers, farmland 
& habitats 

In8: Subsidence risks to 
buried/surface 
infrastructure 

Ne5: Risks to natural carbon 
stores & carbon 
sequestration 

In5: Risks to bridges & 
pipelines for high river 
flows/erosion 

In13: Extreme heat risks to 
rail, road, ICT & energy 
infrastructure 

In10: Risks to electricity 
generation from drought 
& low flows 

Ne6: Risks to agriculture & 
wildlife from water scarcity & 
flooding 

In11: Risks to energy, 
transport & ICT from high 
winds & lightning 

In14:Benefits for 
infrastructure from reduced 
extreme cold events 

PB3: Opportunities for 
increased outdoor 
activity in warmer 
weather 

Ne8: Risks of land 
management practices 
exacerbating flood risk 

In12: Risks to shore 
infrastructure from storms 
and high waves 

PB13: Risks to health from 
poor water quality 

PB12: Risks of food-
borne disease cases and 
outbreaks 

Ne12: Risks to habitats & 
heritage in the coastal zone 
from sea level roses; loss of 
natural flood protection 

PB2: Risks to passengers 
from high temperatures on 
public transport 

PB14: Risk of household 
water supply interruptions 

Bu4: Risks to business 
from reduced access to 
capital 

In1: Risks of cascading 
infrastructure failures across 
interdependent networks 

PB6: Risks to viability of 
coastal communities from 
sea level rise 

Bu3: Risks to business 
operations from water 
scarcity 

Bu7: Business 
risks/opportunities from 
changing demand for 
goods & services 

In2: Risks to infrastructure 
from river, 
surface/groundwater flooding 

PB7: Risks to building 
fabric from moisture, wind 
& driving rain 

Bu5: Risks to business 
from disruption to supply 
chains 

It7: Opportunities from 
changes in international 
trade routes 

In3: Risks to infrastructure 
from coastal flooding & 
erosion 

PB8: Risks to culturally 
valued structures & historic 
environment 


  

In4: Risks of sewer flooding 
due to heavy rainfall 

PB10: Risks to health from 
changes in air quality 

In6: Risks to transport 
networks from embankment 
failure 

PB11: Risks to health from 
vector-borne pathogens 

In9: Risks to public water 
supplies from drought & low 
river flows 

Bu2: Risks to businesses 
from loss of coastal 
locations & infrastructure 

PB1: Risks to public health 
and wellbeing from high 
temperatures 

Bu5: Employee productivity 
impacts in heatwaves & 
from severe weather 
infrastructure disruption 

PB4: Potential benefits to 
health and wellbeing from 
reduced cold 

It2: Imported food safety 
risks 

PB5: Risks to people, 
communities & buildings 
from flooding 

It3: Long-term changes in 
global food production 


 

  80 

More action needed Research priority Sustain current action Watching brief 
PB9: Risks to health & social 
care delivery from extreme 
weather 

It5: Risks to the UK from 
international violent conflict 

Bu1: Risks to business sites 
from flooding 

It6: Risks to international 
law & governance 

It1: Weather-related shocks 
to global food production and 
trade 


 

It4: Risks from climate-
related international human 
displacement 


   

   1 

Annex 2: Detailed actions log 
Objective CCRA 

risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and metrics Owner 

Chapter 2: Natural Environment 

“The natural environment, with diverse and healthy ecosystems, is resilient to climate change, able to accommodate change, and valued 
for the adaptation services it provides.” 

Section 2.1 – Climate Change Risks: overarching evidence 

The evidence base 
on issues affecting 
natural capital, with 
relevance to 
climate change 
adaptation, is 
further developed 


   




NE1  

Updating the Climate Change Adaptation Manual 
and developing, reviewing and communicating the 
evidence base necessary to support climate change 
adaptation, publishing datasets, reports and papers 
on a rolling basis. 

2023 and 
ongoing 

Publication of datasets and reports 


 

Number of datasets published 
annually  


 

Natural 
England 

Maintaining the Long-Term Monitoring Network and 
supporting other national monitoring schemes, 
assessing how best to evaluate the effectiveness of 
adaptation as well as monitor impacts of climate 
change. 

ongoing  Natural 
England 

Putting in place regular and transparent reporting of 
progress against a set of metrics for goals in the 25 
Year Environment Plan, including annual progress 

Annual 
publications 


 

Publication of 25 YEP progress 
reports 

Defra 




   2 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and metrics Owner 

and outcome indicator assessments and periodic 
more comprehensive assessments  

Working with academic and other partners to 
develop candidate indicators and evidence 
summaries for tracking progress with adaptation 
actions, including habitat condition and extent. 

ongoing Ad-hoc reports and scientific 
publications 

Natural 
England, in 
partnership 
with 
universities 
and research 
organisations 

Reports and papers on lessons learnt for delivering 
climate change adaptation through Environmental 
Stewardship and Countryside Stewardship will be 
published. 

By 2020  Natural 
England;  

Defra 

Section 2.2 – building ecological resilience on land and in our rivers and lakes 

1. Protect and 
improve our 
protected sites and 
our other areas of 
important wildlife 
habitat to enhance 
resilience to climate 
change and 
progress our long-
term ambition to 
restore 75% of our 
protected sites to 


 NE1   

Continue to target our agri-environment schemes 
and work with major landowners to secure 
improvements in site condition. 

Ongoing Condition of SSSIs (including 
European sites) 

Area of protected sites in 
favourable or recovering condition 


 

Natural 
England and 
Forestry 
Commission 
working with 
landowners 
and managers 

Work with local delivery partners to make progress 
with implementing Site Improvement Plans (SIPs) 
for European Sites and the associated climate 
change theme plan. 

Ongoing  Natural 
England 




   3 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and metrics Owner 

favourable 
condition. Trial approaches to incorporating climate change 

adaptation into the designation of protected sites 
and assessment of favourable condition. 

Ongoing  Number of sites with climate 
adaptation actions in place 

Natural 
England 

Continue to assess the climate change vulnerability 
of all NE managed National Nature Reserves and 
include appropriate responses in site management 
plans. Assessments to date to be reviewed and any 
adjustments made if necessary. 

The process for 
assessing 
vulnerability to 
climate change 
reviewed and 
reported by 
2020 

Where 
appropriate, 
climate change 
adaptation 
responses to be 
incorporated 
into all site 
management 
plans by 2023 

NNR vulnerability assessments 
completed and incorporated into 
management plans.  

Natural 
England 

2. Restore 
degraded 
ecosystems, for 
example by 
restoring ecological 
and hydrological 
functions and 
expand and 



NE1   

Develop and start to implement a Nature Recovery 
Network, linking habitat restoration and creation to 
improved access, flood protection and water quality, 
ensuring its design is based on evidence of what 
works for climate change adaptation.  

By 2023 
Reports on the status of habitats of 
European Importance 

Extent of selected coastal, peatland 
and other wetland ecosystems 
under restoration management. 
Proportion of habitats of European 
Importance in favourable or 
recovering condition. 

Defra; 
Environment 
Agency; 
Forestry 
Commission; 
Natural 
England 




   4 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and metrics Owner 

connect high 
quality wildlife-rich 
habitat, to 
contribute to our 
longer term 
ambition to restore 
or create 500,000 
ha of wildlife-rich 
habitat. 


  

Continue to target our current agri-environment 
schemes and maintain effective partnerships to 
expand and connect high quality habitats. 
[Regularly] review the evidence base to ensure our 
delivery approach delivers resilience in the context 
of climate change. 

Ongoing Priority habitat inventory 

Inventories of landscape scale and 
ecosystem restoration projects 

Proportion of habitats of European 
importance in favourable or 
recovering condition 

Defra;  

EA;  

Forestry 
Commission; 

Natural 
England 

Continue to facilitate open habitat restoration by 
granting unconditional felling licences for the 
removal of woodland planted on former wildlife-rich 
habitat of exceptional biodiversity interest such as 
heathland, ensuring appropriate levels of re-
planting to support Government’s ambition to 
increase woodland cover from 10% to 12% by 
2060. 

 Forestry Commission open habitat 
data 

Area of local sites or priority habitat 
under positive management 

Area of priority habitat and area 
under positive management 

Area licensed for unconditional 
felling to create priority open 
habitat, on and off the Public Forest 
Estate 

Natural 
England; 

Forestry 
Commission 

Promote the restoration and management of 
ancient and native woodland 

 Forestry Commission data on 
woodland with sustainable 
management in place and progress 
in restoring plantations on Ancient 
Woodland Sites 

Natural 
England; 

Forestry 
Commission 




   5 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and metrics Owner 

Proportion of ancient and native 
woodland under management and 
annual area of PAWS restoration, 
on and off the public forest estate 

Introduce a new Environmental Land Management 
scheme which will deliver environmental outcomes 
including mitigation of and adaptation to the effects 
of climate change (see agriculture section below) 

Designed and 
implementation 
begun by 2022 

 Defra 

3. Reducing pressures from spreading diseases and non-native invasive species 

For further information on actions in this section, please see section 2.3 

4. Take action for 
species and 
habitats at 
particular risk  


 NE1  

Keep species vulnerability to climate change under 
review to identify species at particular risk and 
ensure that the reintroductions code of practice 
takes climate change into account 

Ongoing  Natural 
England 

Establish and maintain a working group with major 
landowners such as CLA, RSPB and National 
Trust, to ensure that climate change is addressed in 
conservation and environmental land management 

  Natural 
England 

Section 2.2 building ecological resilience at sea 

1. Increase and 
improve our 


 

NE13 

Introduce a sustainable fisheries policy as we leave 
the Common Fisheries Policy and prepare marine 
plans that include policies for climate adaptation. 

  Defra; MMO 




   6 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and metrics Owner 

management of the 
seas  


   


The preparation of ten new Marine Plans for the 
whole of the English marine area will include 
horizon scanning to evaluate the potential longer 
term risks and opportunities from climate change.  

2021  MMO 

Continue to establish Marine Conservation Zones to 
contribute to an ecologically coherent network of 
Marine Protected Areas 

  Defra 

Continue to work to create a Blue Belt around the 
UK’s 14 Overseas Territories, subject to local 
support and environmental need, supported by £20 
million of funding between 2016 and 2020. 

£20million of 
funding up to 
2020 

 FCO 

2. Ensure 
productive and 
extensive seafloor 
habitats which can 
support healthy, 
sustainable 
ecosystems 


       

Continue to support the Marine Climate Change 
Impacts partnership 

  Defra 

Continue to collaborate with selected marine 
sectors through the “climate smart” working 
initiative to develop adaptive capacity 

  MCCIP 

Improve understanding of and responses to climate 
change impacts on water-borne pathogens and 
harmful algal blooms 

  MCCIP 
working with 
EA, CEFAS 
and the FSA 




   7 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and metrics Owner 

 Continue to support ocean acidification research in 
order to provide a robust baseline assessment 
which can be used to examine long-term changes 

  Defra 

3. Recover and 
sustain fish stocks 
at levels which can 
produce their 
maximum 
sustainable yield 

 Bring forward the new Fisheries Bill which will 
ensure sustainable use of fish stocks, a healthy 
marine environment and a prosperous fishing 
industry 

By 2021  Defra 

Seafish will publish a climate change adaptation 
report describing the steps industry (fisheries and 
aquaculture) are taking to respond to climate 
change, focussing on risks and opportunities 
associated with climate change in the UK 
aquaculture sector 

By 2023 Publication of the climate change 
adaptation report 

Seafish 

Continue to produce annual climate change 
updates for the wild-capture fishing industry 

Ongoing  Seafish 

Section 2.3 – enhancing biosecurity: increasing resilience to diseases and invasive non-native species 

1. Manage existing 
plant and animal 
diseases and lower 
the risk of new 
ones 

NE9 Use the Public Health England invasive vector 
surveillance programme to develop and update our 
understanding of the status, distribution and 
abundance of potential vector species 

Ongoing Monitor changes to status, 
distribution and abundance of 
potential vector species 

PHE; APHA; 
Defra 

Enhance the cross-government contingency plan 
for dealing with invasive mosquitoes to cover other 
veterinary and medically important insect vectors 

Ongoing Continue to monitor the spread and 
establishment of invasive species 

PHE; APHA; 
Defra 




   8 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and metrics Owner 

2. Tackle invasive 
non-native species 


     NE9       


Work with partners to raise awareness of invasive 
non-native species and the need for strong 
biosecurity  

  Defra 

Maintain an alert system to detect high priority 
invasive non-native species and implement 
contingency plans to rapidly eradicate them where 
feasible 

  Defra 

Implement a programme of invasive non-native 
species surveillance and risk analysis across Great 
Britain 

Ongoing Species surveillance data 

Number of new arrivals of invasive 
species 

Non-native 
species 
information 
portal project, 
supported by 
Defra; EA; NE; 
FC and JNCC 

Carry out risk analysis of invasive non-native 
species in Great Britain 

 Risk evaluation and prioritisation of 
species 

Number of risk analyses 
undertaken 

GB non-native 
species 
Secretariat 

Continue to develop and implement pathway action 
plans to reduce the risk from all high priority 
pathways of invasive species introduction into 
England 

Ongoing Pathway Action Plans 

Number of plans agreed and 
actions implemented 

GB non-native 
species 
Secretariat, 
supported by 
Defra 




   9 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and metrics Owner 

Continue to raise awareness of invasive non-native 
species and the need for biosecurity, including the 
Check, Clean, Dry and Be Plant Wise campaigns 

Ongoing? Improved awareness of invasive 
non-native species and biosecurity 
measures 

GB non-native 
species 
Secretariat, 
supported by 
Defra 

Compile and analyse species data so that we can 
track trends in species distributions 

 NNSIP database – change in 
number and extent of invasive non-
native species established in Great 
Britain 

Non-native 
Species 
Information 
Portal project, 
supported by 
Defra, EA, NE, 
FC and JNCC 

Take action to eradicate high priority invasive non-
native species 

 Effective eradication campaigns 
have been implemented against 
high priority species’ 

APHA, EA, 
FC, NE, MMO, 
GB non-native 
species 
Secretariat 

Establish and implement contingency plans for high 
priority new arrivals 

 Number of high quality contingency 
plans 

Number of high priority new arrivals 
eradicated 

Defra, APHA, 
EA, FC, NE, 
MMO, GB 
non-native 
species 
Secretariat 




   10 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and metrics Owner 

Implement management plans for priority 
established species where eradication is not 
feasible 

 Number of management plans in 
place and actions implemented 

APHA, EA, 
NE, FC, MMO 

Develop the evidence base on invasive species 
pathway prioritisation, pathway action planning and 
rapid responses 

  GB non-native 
species 
Secretariat 

Strengthen the evidence base on climate change 
and increased risk of invasive species incursions or 
establishment, identifying priority “sleeper species”. 

  Non-native 
Species 
Information 
Portal project 
supported by 
GB non-native 
species 
Secretariat 

Section 2.4 – water availability and quality 

1. To reform our 
approach to water 
abstraction 


  

NE1; NE4; 


NE6     

Reducing the damaging abstraction of water from 
rivers and groundwater. Implement the abstraction 
plan. 

By 2021 Proportion of water bodies with 
enough water to support 
environmental standards should be 
90% for surface water bodies and 
77% for groundwater bodies 

Environment Agency to track a 
suite of metrics in the Sustainable 
Abstraction Dash Board, reporting 
quarterly. 

Defra; 
Environment 
Agency 




   11 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and metrics Owner 

 Work with abstractors and existing local groups, 
such as catchment partnerships, in catchments 
facing the greatest challenges. Produce updated 
abstraction licensing strategies that capture agreed 
solutions to environmental issues and set out 
approaches to help abstractors access the water 
they need. 

10 abstraction 
licensing 
strategies 
updated by 
2021 

 Environment 
agency 

Supporting OFWAT’s ambitions on leakage, 
minimising the amount of water lost through 
leakage year on year.  

Water 
companies 
expected to 
reduce leakage 
by at least an 
average of 15% 
by 2025 

 Defra 

OFWAT 

Use River Basin Management Plans and work with 
catchment partnerships to improve resilience to 
future pressures from climate change. 

  Environment 
Agency 

2. Improve water 
quality, reverse the 
deterioration of 
groundwater, and 
reduce emissions 
of harmful 
substances.  


    

Implement the Site Improvement Plans (SIPs), 
including actions arising from the climate change 
theme plan we have developed for Natura 2000 
sites. 

  Environment 
Agency 

Smarter targeting of fertiliser type and application in 
order to reduce the potential for negative impact of 
agriculture on waterways 

  Defra 




   12 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and metrics Owner 

  Explore the potential for new innovative and 
sustainable fertilisers, such as bio-stimulants, to 
improve nutrient use efficiency 

Review levels of 
take up over the 
next five years 

Data from the British Fertiliser 
Practice Survey 

Defra working 
with industry in 
the agricultural 
sector 

Implement the Site Improvement Plans (SIPs), 
including actions arising from the climate change 
theme plan we have developed for Natura 2000 
sites. 

  Environment 
Agency 

Section 2.5 – natural flood management and protection of coastal habitats 

1. Explore greater 
use of natural flood 
management 
techniques where 
these are 
appropriate 


  

NE6; NE11 


  

Monitor the effectiveness of our current natural 
flood management projects and schemes and use 
the learning from this to further explore and refine 
the role of Natural Flood Management schemes 

Ongoing  Defra 

Continue to assess the sustainability of managing 
protected freshwater habitats in light of sea level 
rise and storm surge events 

  Defra;  

Environment 
Agency 

Ensure updated Shoreline Management Plans 
incorporate the latest evidence on coastal habitat 
loss and sea level rise (from UKCP18), as well as 
the latest mechanisms to inform management 
approaches 

  Environment 
Agency 




   13 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and metrics Owner 

Publish an industry standard NFM design manual to 
assist practitioner in selecting appropriate NFM 
measures.   

By 2020  Environment 
Agency 

Undertake research to use understanding of the 
history of catchments to inform natural flood 
management. 

A report is due 
in 2019 

 Historic 
England 

Section 2.6 – protecting soils and natural carbon stores 

1. To improve our 
approach to soil 
management: by 
2030 we want all of 
England’s soils to 
be managed 
sustainably 

NE4 Incentivise good soil management practices that 
enhance soil’s ability to deliver environmental 
benefits through future environmental land 
management schemes to ensure soils are healthy 
and productive 

 A soil health index will be utilised at 
farm level to assess whether 
management practices are having a 
beneficial impact on soil health 

Defra 

2. To improve soil 
health 

NE4 Support research and monitoring to give us a 
clearer picture of how soil health supports our wider 
environment goals 

Ongoing Defra will invest at least £200,000 
to help develop soil health metrics 
and test them on farms across the 
country 

Defra 

3. To restore and 
protect our 
peatlands 

NE1; NE5 


 

Publish an England Peat Strategy 2018  Defra 

Develop new sustainable management measures to 
ensure that the topsoil is retained for as long as 

  Defra 




   14 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and metrics Owner 


        

possible and greenhouse gas emissions are 
reduced where peat cannot be restored 

Maintain and expand current peatland restoration 
programmes in semi-natural habitat 

 Condition and emissions Natural 
England 

Support and develop the evidence base for the 
sustainable management of agricultural peatlands 

  Defra; 

Natural 
England 

Improve the representation of peat soils in the 
greenhouse gas emission inventory to enable the 
effectiveness of emission mitigation action to be 
tracked more accurately 

  BEIS 

Continue to work with the horticultural industry to 
transition to peat alternatives. 

Review in 2020 
and consider 
need for further 
measure 

 Defra 

Section 2.7 – Forestry 

1. Woodland 
resource is 
expanded and 
better linked to 
enhance its 
resilience at stand 


 NE1  

Plant 5,000-10,000 hectares of new woodland 
habitat (including new native woodland priority 
habitat) per year in England, helping to enhance 
landscape resilience, taking opportunities to 
establish a better adapted woodland resource and 
contributing to the Nature Recovery Network 

Up to 38,000 
hectares by 
2023 

Annual new planting statistics 

Landscape resilience indicator 

Woodland creation Forestry 
Statistics 

Defra;  

Forestry 
Commission 




   15 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and metrics Owner 

and landscape 
level 


 

Woodland planted through support 
from RDP-funded grant schemes 
reporting in FCE’s CPI reports 
quarterly 

FC indicator of all woodland 
planting funded by government 
(progress indicator for 11 million 
tree commitment) 

Support the planting of the Northern Forest using 
the M62 corridor as its spine working with the 
existing partnership of the Community Forests and 
the Woodland Trust 

  Defra 

Pilot Forestry Investment Zones and put a domestic 
carbon offset unit in place to attract private finance 
to woodland creation to accelerate the rate of 
planting 

Domestic 
carbon offset 
unit in place by 
2021 

Number of Forestry Investment 
Zones established by 2023 (FC 
management data) 

Defra; 

Forestry 
Commission 

2. Existing 
woodlands are 
more resilient to the 
impacts of climate 
change and pests 
and diseases 


     

Continue to support and advocate bringing a 
greater proportion of woodland area into 
management to improve its condition and provide 
opportunities for adaptive actions to be 
implemented 

Ongoing Percentage of woodland in 
management (FCE CPIs,) and 
management activity (NFI metric, 
reported every five years) 

Forestry 
Commission 

Begin to implement the Action Plan set out in the 
2018 Tree Health Resilience Strategy 

2019  Defra 




   16 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and metrics Owner 

Support the sector in taking forward its Climate 
Change Action Plan, helping to enhance woodland 
resilience 

Publication in 
2018; review in 
2023 

Sector Climate Change Action plan 
to be published summer 2018 
looking out five years. 

British Woodland Survey likely to 
continue to be main metric for 
reporting progress in uptake of 
adaptation measures 

Forestry 
Commission 

Public Forest Estate within England will improve its 
nursery infrastructure and build expertise required 
for the successful establishment of ‘emerging 
species’ for UK forestry 

2018 Forest Enterprise England 
management information provided 
to ASC as adaptation progress 
indicator 

Forest 
Enterprise 
England 

3. Adaptation is 
embedded within 
future forestry 
policy (post-CAP) 
to contribute long-
term 


    

Develop new policies to accelerate the rate of 
woodland planting in England and increase the 
level of management, ensuring resilience of those 
woodlands through adherence to the UKFS’s Forest 
and Climate Change Guidelines 

Ongoing Progress data on woodland 
planting 

FC management data on ‘pipeline’ 
planting proposals to be published 
from 2018 

Forestry 
Commission; 

Defra 

Consider how to better integrate forestry and 
farming to enhance farm resilience and productivity 
as new policies and incentives are developed 
following the UK’s departure from the EU 

Ongoing  Defra 

Complete the review of forestry genetics and native 
species in the context of climate change and 
publish a policy paper 

Review in 2018; 
policy paper in 
2019 

 Forestry 
Commission 




   17 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and metrics Owner 

4. Woodlands are 
more resilient to 
natural hazards 


  

NE10 


  

Further develop approaches to contingency 
planning and embed across the forestry sector 

2020-2023 Annual wildfire statistics collected 
by FRS and collated by FCE 

Forestry 
Commission 

Provide wildfire prevention training to Fire and 
Rescue Services and Land Managers using the UK 
Forestry Standard’s Practice Guide Building Wildfire 
Resilience into Forest Management Planning 

2023 Number of trainees by 2023 Forestry 
Commission 

Working with research partners, develop a 
forestland wildfire risk and fuel map at the 
landscape scale level 

2020 - 2023  Forestry 
Commission 

Enhance wildfire prediction systems to improve 
preparedness in advance of wildfire incidents on 
forestland 

2020-2023  Forestry 
Commission 

5. Evidence base 
enhanced 

NE1;  Ensure that the refreshed/replaced Science and 
Innovation Strategy for Forestry in Great Britain 
continues to support the implementation of adaptive 
actions across the forestry sector 

2020  Defra; 

Forestry 
Commission 

Section 2.8 - agriculture 

Introduce a new 
environmental land 
management 

NE1; NE8 Through a reformed agricultural and land 
management policy we will incentivise methods of 
farming which reduce flood risk  

  Defra 




   18 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and metrics Owner 

system which will 
aim to deliver 
environmental 
benefits such as 
mitigation and 
adaption to climate 
change. 


 

Reduce and manage the risks to coastal habitats 
due to agriculture. 

  Defra 


 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 

addressed 

Key actions and milestones Timing Monitoring and Metrics Owner 

Chapter 3: Infrastructure  

“An infrastructure network that is resilient to today’s natural hazards and prepared for the future changing climate 

Section 3.2 - Energy 
Ongoing work to 
further cross sector 
understanding of 
energy 
interdependencies 
as part of resilience 
planning and risk 
management 
strategies 

IN1 Next steps being considered for the Infrastructure, 
Resilience and Security Working Group (IRSWG). 
This sub group of the National Security Council 
tasked to produce a tested methodology by which 
HMG can identify cross-sector interdependencies.  

Ongoing The group has reviewed a 
number of models to ascertain 
whether these could be utilised for 
the purposes of the group. A 
number of key issues need to be 
clarified before this programme of 
work can begin - namely the high 
level of data input required by the 
models and security challenges 
due to the sensitivity of CNI data - 
and this is being worked through.  

BEIS 




   19 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 

addressed 

Key actions and milestones Timing Monitoring and Metrics Owner 


 

Increase the 
resilience of energy 
infrastructure from 
all forms of flooding 


  

IN 2-4 


 

Electricity network companies to spend a further 
£100 million flood defence before 2021. 

All substations 
completed by 
2023. 

550 of 589 significant substations 
deemed at risk and in the current 
scope should be resilient to floods 
(93%) with permanent defences in 
place to meet Engineering 
Technical Report 138 by 2021.   


 

BEIS monitor build programmes 
to ensure progress across the 
sector remains on track 


 

BEIS 


 

Update and implementation of guidance for 
electricity sub stations against flood risks. Revised 
design guidelines (ETR138) state that primary 
substations with over 10,000 connections should be 
defended against 1/1000-year flood events.  


 

Ongoing 


  


Ongoing work to address surface water flooding 
across electricity networks 


 

Ongoing 


 

Section 3.3 - Transport 




   20 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 

addressed 

Key actions and milestones Timing Monitoring and Metrics Owner 

Increase the 
resilience of 
transport 
infrastructure from 
all forms of flooding 


      

IN 2-4 


   

Network Rail will continue to address flood risk 
across its network by: 


 

ongoing monitoring of adverse weather through 
visual and thermal imaging  


 

building pumping stations in flood-prone locations  


 

building in measures to address flood risk in new 
lines installing equipment at higher levels to avoid 
flooding 

Control Period 6 
(CP6) funding is 
still being 
finalised, 
therefore key 
dates cannot be 
confirmed. The 
control period will 
run from 2019 – 
2024. 

NR report on performance on a 
quarterly basis. This includes a 
running performance of each 
operator and the punctuality of its 
services. These are summarised 
in annual reports each year, 
allowing for yearly comparisons.  


 

DfT works closely with NR to 
identify and mitigate against risks 
on the network that could affect 
services, and to oversee 
improvements in infrastructure to 
reduce the possibility of delays 
due to climate change in the 
future. 



Df T 


In view of the commercial nature of ports and the 
need to ensure the viability of their business, DfT 
will continue to liaise with the ports by feeding 
important and relevant climate risk information and 
evidence through groups such as the tidal surge 
workgroups. 

Ongoing  DfT 

Flood risk will be assessed by Airports with over 
five million passengers per year through their 
annual resilience plans.  

Annually Monitored by the Civil Aviation 
Authority with oversight from DfT. 

CAA and 


Df T 


Highways England (HE) will improve resilience to 
flooding and reducing flood risk to communities 
adjacent to the network by addressing all identified 
high priority flood risk locations recorded in the 
Drainage Data Management System 

2020-2025 


    

This will be monitored by the 
Office of Rail and Road (ORR) 
against any agreed metrics as 
part of RIS2.  

DfT; 
Highways 
England 


  

   21 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 

addressed 

Key actions and milestones Timing Monitoring and Metrics Owner 

HE will produce a new Flood Risk Strategy 


 

Planned for 
publication in 
2019 


  

HE will increase drainage asset inventory and 
condition data coverage to better understand the 
condition of drainage assets on the strategic road 
network 


 

2020-2025 


  


As part the second Road Investment Strategy 
(RIS2), the Government will consider more options 
to safeguard the English strategic road network 
against climate risks 


 

2020-2025 


  


Increased 
resilience to the 
transport network 
through measures 
to reduce failures to 
embankments and 
slopes caused by 
heavy rainfall 
events 

IN 6 


  

Highways England undertakes programme of 
regular inspections to evaluate and manage slope 
stability 


 

Ongoing 


 

This will be monitored as needed 
by the Office of Rail and Road 
(ORR), with policy oversight from 


Df T 




Df T  

Design Manual for Roads and Bridges (HD22/08), 
which sets out the standards for assessing and 
analysing the stability of earthworks is being 
updated to account for future climate change 


 

Completion 
anticipated by 
March 2020   


 

Office for Road and Rail monitors 
the roads being fit for purpose 
which would include climate 
change risks if necessary, with 
policy oversight from DfT 



Df T  

The active programme of knowledge improvement 
and strategic monitoring activities by HE are 
planned to continue through RIS 2.  


 

This is alongside trialling and implementing the use 
of smarter monitoring techniques. 

 As part of this risks and 
procedures will continue to be 
monitored and assessed against 
Key Performance Indicators which 
are described in the Highways 
England Operations Metrics 
Manual (OMM) covering the 
period 2015/16 to 2019/20. 


 


   22 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 

addressed 

Key actions and milestones Timing Monitoring and Metrics Owner 

Local highway authorities follow similar methods to 
Highways England in order to monitor the stability 
of slopes for which fall under their responsibility.  


 

Ongoing 


 

DfT will continue to work closely 
with local highway authorities. It 
will be for local highway 
authorities to ensure they 
regularly undertake slope 
stabilisation monitoring as part of 
their highways maintenance 
service inspections.  

DfT and 
Local 
Highway 
Authorities 


 

DfT in association with Lancashire County Council 
and a private sector company are trialling a new 
method of monitoring of a number of slopes within 
Lancashire County Council using LIDAR technology 


 

This trial has just 
commenced and 
will last 12 
months until May 
2019 


 

DfT in association with Lancashire 
County Council are aiming as part 
of the trial to monitor 19 sites in 
total. It is expected the results 
could to help local authorities to 
undertake more efficient and 
effective monitoring of vulnerable 
sites on the local road network. 


 

Private 
Sector (with 
oversight 
from DfT 


and 

Lancashire 
Council) 


 

Network rail will continue to comprehensively 
manage its assets against geotechnical faults as 
part of its Asset Management Excellence Model 
(AMEM), this will include: 
Ongoing identification of sites vulnerable to 
landslips with use of Light Detection and Ranging 
surveys, in-place motion sensors, CCTV and 
ground investigations; 


 

Slope stabilisation management via drainage, or 
steel rods, soil nails or slope re-profiling. 


 

Service continuity management by rerouting 
services which are likely to be affected by 
embankment failure (via CCTV monitoring) 

Control Period 6 
(CP6) funding is 
still being 
finalised, 
therefore key 
dates cannot be 
confirmed. The 
control period will 
run from 2019 – 
2024. 

NR report on performance to on a 
quarterly basis. This includes a 
running performance of each 
operator and the punctuality of its 
services. These are summarised 
in annual reports each year, 
allowing for yearly comparisons.  


 

DfT works closely with NR to 
identify and mitigate against risks 
on the network that could affect 
services, and to oversee 
improvements in infrastructure to 
reduce the possibility of delays 

DfT; 
Network 
Rail 




   23 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 

addressed 

Key actions and milestones Timing Monitoring and Metrics Owner 


 

Ongoing engagement with academia to research 
possible slope stabilisation techniques, in addition 
to modelling the response of slopes under different 
meteorological conditions 


 

due to climate change in the 
future. 


 

   24 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 

addressed 

Key actions and milestones Timing Monitoring and Metrics Owner 

Transport 
interdependencies 


 

Completion of 
national database 
of bridges critical 
for essential 
services 


  

IN 1; IN 5 


 

As part of the DfT response to the National Flood 
Resilience Review, it will: 


 

continue to work with Local Authorities to identify 
effective measures to assess and address flooding 
risks;  


 

test the use of new technology such as specialist 
monitoring cameras that are being installed at key 
bridges to get real time images and to remotely 
monitor river levels. 


 

This work is 
continuing and is 
expected to be 
completed by 
summer 2018.  


 

DfT use data from various 
datasets to identify potential 
bridge and other structures that 
could be vulnerable to failure in 
certain resilience scenarios.  


 

DfT is now in the process of 
refining this to identify the most 
high risk sites. Information will be 
shared with highway authorities to 
ensure appropriate mitigation and 
contingency measures are put in 
place as part of their of their 
ongoing resilience plans. 


  Df T 


Use innovative techniques (BridgeCat) that allows 
safe and rapid assessment of the prevalence of 
bridge scour inherent in the national bridge stock.  


 

DfT considering with BEIS implementation of a trial 
into whether this system can be used to identify the 
condition of gas pipe crossings in rivers. 
Identify bridges that could potentially be a single 
point of failure for other infrastructure operators and 
could be at risk in a severe flood event  


 

This work is 
continuing and is 
expected to be 
completed by 
summer 2018.  


  

BridgeCat is currently going 
through a series of initial tests 
prior to 12 months of deployment 
across Cumbria County Council 
highway network in winter 
2018/19. This will allow results of 
the system to be compared with 
those from traditional bridge 
inspections in order to gauge 
whether the system could replace 
any or all of the traditional 
inspections.  


 

The BridgeCat trial will last until 
March 2019 and use of it across 

DfT in 
association 
with 
Cumbria 
County 
Council and 
Private 
Sector 




   25 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 

addressed 

Key actions and milestones Timing Monitoring and Metrics Owner 

other sectors will also be 
considered. 

IN 5 Network Rail’s Safety, Technical and Engineering 
(STE) Horizon Scanning Group will continue to 
identify, assess and manage external risks to 
Network Rail throughout their regional Strategic 
Business Plans for Control Period 6. 

Control Period 6 
(CP6) funding is 
still being 
finalised, 
therefore key 
dates cannot be 
confirmed The 
control period will 
run from 2019 – 
2024. 

NR report on performance to on a 
quarterly basis. This includes a 
running performance of each 
operator and the punctuality of its 
services. These are summarised 
in annual reports each year, 
allowing for yearly comparisons.  


 

DfT works closely with NR to 
identify and mitigate against risks 
on the network that could affect 
services, and to oversee 
improvements in infrastructure to 
reduce the possibility of delays 
due to climate change in the 
future. 


  


Section 3.4 - Telecommunications 
Increase the 
resilience of 
telecommunication
s infrastructure 
from all forms of 
flooding 

IN 2-4 Telecommunications sector to implement remaining 
programme of installation of permanent flood 
defences. 


  

Ongoing 


      

DCMS monitors via regular 
engagement with Electronic 
Communications Resilience and 
Response Group (EC-RRG), 
industry run group which leads on 
resilience and emergency 
response.   

DCMS; 
Telecoms 

Revised Ofcom security guidance includes specific 
flood risk requirements. Revised industry resilience 
guidelines will also reference flood and other 
climate related risks.  


 

Ofcom guidance 
published Dec 
2017. Industry’s 
own resilience 
guidelines to be 

 Ofcom; 
Telecoms 




   26 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 

addressed 

Key actions and milestones Timing Monitoring and Metrics Owner 

published by 
summer 2018. 


 

Section 3.5 – Cross-sectoral 

Enhance 
arrangements for 
information sharing 
between local 
infrastructure 
operators and 
improve 
understanding of 
critical risks arising 
from 
interdependencies 

IN 1 Help ensure local arrangements are in place to 
share data effectively on locally significant 
infrastructure sites with Local Resilience Forums 


 

Ongoing Biennial survey of all local 
responders and Local Resilience 
Forums in England and Wales, 
which includes specific questions 
on data sharing on locally 
significant infrastructure 


 

The number of local responders 
that have a specific procedure in 
place to share data on locally 
significant infrastructure 


CO  


   27 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and Metrics Owner 

Chapter 4: People and Built Environment 
“To promote the development of a healthy, equitable and resilient population, well placed to reduce the harmful health impacts of climate change, and 

able to capitalise on the potential health gains associated with tackling it”. 

“A health service, a public health and social care system which are resilient and adapting to a changing climate.” 

‘’Buildings and places (including built heritage) and the people who live and work in them are resilient and organisations in the built environment sector 
have an increased capacity to address the risks and make the most of the opportunities of a changing climate.’’ 

“Emergency services and local resilience capability take account of and are resilient to, a changing climate.” 

Section 4.2 - Planning 

Embed 
environmental net 
gain for 
development, 
including housing 
and infrastructure 


 

PB6, NE1 
Strengthen planning policy to embed the principle of 
net gain for biodiversity. Consult on making net gain 
for biodiversity mandatory. 

Ongoing 


 

Explore the current evidence base 
around change in land use and 
impact on biodiversity. Consider 
the future monitoring and 
evaluation of strengthened net 
gain for biodiversity policies 

Defra, 

Natural 
England 

NE1 Consider how net gain for biodiversity could be 
expanded to include wider natural capital benefits. Ongoing National changes in habitat cover 

(relating to development).  

NB. No confirmed method for 
analysing this agreed yet. 

Defra 

Natural 
England 

Section 4.3 – Flood and coastal erosion risk management 
PB5, PB6 Publish a government policy statement on Flood 

and Coastal Erosion Risk Management (FCERM), Winter 2018  
Defra; 




   28 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and Metrics Owner 

Manage floods and 
coastal erosion to 
save lives, better 
protect 
communities and 
support economic 
growth 


    

PB5, PB6 


 PB6 




PB6   PB5      PB5   

setting out government’s future expectations for 
managing flood risk and coastal erosion.  

Update the national flood and coastal erosion risk 
management strategy with the aim of strengthening 
joint delivery across organisations. 

By 2019  
Environment 
Agency 

Refresh of Shoreline Management Plans 
By 2019 

Progress against Shoreline 
Management Plan objectives is 
monitored annually and used in 
our reporting to Government on 
FCRM activity more broadly under 
s18 of the Floods and Water 
Management Act.  

Environment 
Agency 

Update the National Coastal Erosion Risk Map and 
ensure this remains freely available as open data 
online. 


 

Updated map published Environment 

Agency 

Review current funding arrangements ahead of 
determining funding needs beyond 2021, seeking to 
attract more non-public sector investment. This 
includes working with others to consider long term 
investment needs and funding options after 2021. 

 Monitored via investment 
programme data collected by 
Environment Agency 

Defra; 

Environment 
Agency, HM 
Treasury and 
National 
Infrastructure 
Commission 

Delivery of the recently published surface water 
management action plan. Progress on 
implementation of this plan will be monitored by the 
Inter Ministerial Group on flooding.   

  Defra;  

MHCLG 




   29 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and Metrics Owner 

PB8 Undertake mapping of heritage at risk from coastal 
erosion   Historic 

England; 

DCMS 

Enable households 
and businesses to 
increase their 
resilience to 
flooding 


 

PB5, PB6 Work to ensure that national planning policy are 
effective in managing the risks and impacts of 
flooding and coastal erosion. [This includes 
strengthening flood protections in the National 
Planning Policy Framework to ensure that new 
development is flood resilient and does not increase 
flood risk.] 

Ongoing  Defra; 

MHCLG 

PB5 Continue to support the industry-led Property Flood 
Resilience Roundtable, including supporting an 
industry-owned voluntary code of practice to 
promote consumer and business confidence in 
measures to reduce the impact of flooding on 
buildings, and on those who live and work in them. 

Ongoing The Chair of the Roundtable will 
publish an annual report each 
year with the outputs from the 
task groups. 

Defra 

PB8 Historic England Appleby Heritage Action Zone. 
Flood resilience and recovery in historic and 
traditionally constructed buildings. 

Due for 
completion 2022 

 Historic 
England 

Section 4.4 – Water Supplies and Resources 

Provide a ‘clean 
and plentiful water’ 

PB14 
Produce effective guidance for Water Resource 
Management Plan 24 which further encourages 
water companies to improve resilience and consider 
water efficiency.  


  

Defra; 
Environment 
Agency 




   30 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and Metrics Owner 

for future 
generations. 

Develop a culture 
of responsibility to 
water 
management/ 
usage, both 
organisationally 
and individually 

PB14 Work towards setting a target for Per Capita 
Consumption (PCC) with Water UK and water 
companies.  

By the end of 
2018. 


 

 Defra; Water 


UK  

PB14 Work towards setting challenging and ambitious 
goals to reduce leakage 

This will go 
beyond the 
current target of 
15% by 2025, 
over the next 25 
years.  

 Defra 


 

PB14 Increase the penetration of water meters in 
households.  

Over the next 25 
years.  

 Water 
companies  

PB14 Promote the use of an effective water label to allow 
customers to gauge the water efficiency of water 
using products.  

  Defra, Other 
Government 
Departments, 
Water UK  

PB14 Investigate alternative methods to reduce personal 
water consumption, including behaviour change. 

  Defra, 
Waterwise, 
Water UK, 
water 
companies 
and other 
groups.  

PB14 Work with water companies to increase the volume 
of water transfers. 

Over the next 25 
years. 

 Defra, 
Environment 
Agency, water 
companies  

IN14 Publish the National Policy Statement for Water 
Resources to accelerate the development of large 
water resource infrastructure by streamlining the 
planning process.  

2019   Defra  




   31 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and Metrics Owner 

Section 4.5 – Overheating in buildings 
Deliver more, better 
quality and well 
maintained local 
Green 
Infrastructure that 
provides the 
multiple benefits 
local communities 
need and want, in 
particular for urban 
disadvantaged 
populations  

PB3 Our towns and cities will be greened by the creation 
of Green Infrastructure and planting of one million 
urban trees and create more, better quality and well 
maintained green infrastructure.  

  Defra and 
others (Natural 
England, 
Forestry 
Commission)  

PB1, PB5, 


PB7 


A set of Green Infrastructure standards will be 
developed to help local GI planners, designers, 
managers and communities deliver good quality GI. 
This includes: 

- Undertaking an Evidence Review and consulting 
stakeholders; 

- Developing a draft Model Framework of GI 
Standards; 

- Test draft Framework through pilots; 
- Producing guidance on planning and delivering 

Green Infrastructure, including applying the 
Framework of GI Standards; 

- Launching mainstreaming and support to Local 
authorities, developers and others monitoring 
and evaluation.  

By 2023 


 

Uptake of standards 


   


Number of Local Plans, GI 
Strategies and development s 
using the Framework of GI 
Standards  

Natural 
England, 
Defra, Forestry 
Commission, 
MHCLG 


 

Adapting health 
systems to protect 
people against the 
impacts of climate 
change  

PB1 We will work to ensure that all clinical areas in NHS 
Trusts have appropriate thermal monitoring in 
place.  


 

By 2023 


 

 NHS 
Sustainable 
Development 
Unit,  NHS 
Improvement, 
DHSC  

PB1, PB9 We will work to ensure that all NHS Trusts have in 
place an adaptation plan, either stand alone or as 
part of their Sustainable Development Management 
Plan.  

By 2023 


 

 NHS 
Sustainable 
Development 
Unit, NHS 
Improvement, 
DHSC  




   32 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and Metrics Owner 

PB9 All NHS providers will be encouraged to use the 
Sustainable Development Assessment Tool to self-
assess progress on Adaptation. The tool will 
support high quality adaptation plans, either stand 
alone or embedded into Sustainable Development 
Management Plans.  

  NHS 
Sustainable 
Development 
Unit, NHS 
Improvement, 
DHSC  

PB9 We will ensure that all NHS trusts are reporting 
consistently on risk assessment for overheating 
events.  

By 2023 


 

 NHS 
Sustainable 
Development 
Unit, NHS 
Improvement, 
DHSC  

PB9 Adaptation measures, particularly thermal 
monitoring and numbers of risk assessments for 
overheating events, will be incorporated into the 
Model Hospital to allow benchmarking of 
performance.  

  NHS 
Sustainable 
Development 
Unit, NHS 
Improvement 

PB9 The NHS SDU will informally review the coverage 
of adaptation in mandatory provider trust and 
commissioners sustainability reports.  

Annually 


 

 NHS 
Sustainable 
Development 
Unit 

PB9 System wide performance will be reported annually 
in the Healthcheck report, alongside other metrics 
of sustainable development and social value in 
health and care. The Healthcheck report is 
published on behalf of the National Cross System 
Group for Sustainable Health and Care.   

The Healthcheck 
report is compiled 
annually by the 
SDU.   

The Healthcheck report will 
demonstrate: 

• % NHS providers to have an 
adaptation plan (stand alone 
or as part of SDMP) 

• % of clinical areas in NHS 
trusts covered for thermal 
monitoring 



NHS 

Sustainable 
Development 
Unit, National 
Cross System 
Group for 
Sustainable 
Health and 
Care.  




   33 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and Metrics Owner 

• % of NHS providers reporting 
on adaptation in their annual 
reports 

• Number of overheating risk 
assessments undertaken in 
NHS trust clinical areas 
(required when temperatures 
exceed 26C)   

PB9 Best practice in adaptation will be sought and 
recognised annually through the Sustainable Health 
and Care Awards- Adaptation category 

  NHS 
Sustainable 
Development 
Unit. 


 

   Research and advice on avoiding 
maladaptation of older properties 
including heritage assets 

Historic 
England 


 

Section 4.6 – Delivery of health and social care services 
Protecting people 
from the impacts of 
heat and cold 



PB4   

PB1, PB3 


     

PB1, PB9 

We will tackle issues relating to excessively cold 
homes and seek to reduce the effects of cold 
weather on people’s health.  

  MHCLG, 
BEIS, DHSC  

We will take measures to minimise overheating in 
homes, and other buildings including hospitals, care 
homes, schools, prisons and offices. We will 
complete research into overheating in new homes 
(flats and houses) to determine the extent of the 
current risk of overheating and whether it will 
worsen in the future.  

Overheating 
research to be 
completed by the 
end of 2018 


 

Research will evaluate the 
effectiveness of overheating 
mitigation techniques, e.g. 
shading and ventilation. 


 

MHCLG, 
DHSC, SDU. 
NHSE, CQC, 
PHE, MoJ, 
DfE. 


 

We will develop a single adverse weather and 
health plan, bringing together and improving existing 
guidance. This will aim to mainstream action within 
the health system and local communities, reduce 
health risks associated with adverse weather and 

B2022 


 

 DHSC, PHE, 
SDU, NHSE, 
Local 




   34 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and Metrics Owner 


    PB1 


address the health risks identified in the second 
CCRA.  

Government 
Association 


 

We will continue to undertake research to 
understand more comprehensively the health 
consequences of hot weather and the health 
interventions available to minimise preventable 
harm.  

Ongoing    

DHSC, PHE  

PB9 We will update the evidence base on the health 
impacts of climate change through the production of 
an UK focused report (‘Health Effects of Climate 
Change in the UK’) based on the latest Climate 
Change Projections, following publication of 
UKCP18.  

2023   

DHSC, PHE  


 

Section 4.7 – Emergency services, local responders and community resilience 

Ensuring that 
emergency and 
local services are 
best prepared for 
extreme weather 
events. 

PB1, PB5 


   


PB1, PB5 

Cabinet Office will continue to communicate with 
emergency services, local responders and 
communities so that they understand the risk of 
extreme weather conditions across the UK and 
develop appropriate plans.  

Ongoing  Cabinet Office 

The Communities Prepared National Group will 
support the development and local implementation 
of community resilience policy across England, 
sharing good practice and lessons learned in 
community engagement and capability-building 
across the country and identifying opportunities for 
co-ordination of community resilience-related work. 

Ongoing 


 

 Cabinet Office, 
CPNG 


  

   35 


 

Objective CCRA 
risk(s) 
addressed 

Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and metrics Owner 

Chapter 5: Business and industry 
“UK businesses are resilient to extreme weather and prepared for future risks and opportunities from climate change” 

Section 5.2 – Loss in productivity 
Increase our 
understanding of 
impacts to business 
from productivity 
losses arising from 
climate change 

BU1 Information will be collected through the third cycle 
of adaptation reporting, from infrastructure 
operators and their regulators on the scale of 
interruptions impacting on productivity. 

2019 - 2021 ARP sector reports Defra 

Section 5.3 – Supply Chain 
A food supply chain 
which is resilient to 
the effects of a 
changing climate 

 Review and publication of the updated UK Food 
Security Assessment 

2018-2019  Defra 

Section 5.4 - Access to capital and risks and opportunities associated with changing demand for goods and services 
Increase 
understanding of 
risks associated 
with reduced 
access to capital 
and to changing 
demand for 
adaptation goods 


 

BU4 Government will consider the recommendations of 
the Green Finance Taskforce and respond in due 
course. 

Ongoing  BEIS, HMT, 
Defra 

Government will continue delivering the ambitious 
Greening Government Commitments 

Ongoing Data from annual GGC reports Government 

Government will continue engaging with BSI on the 
consideration of a need of a potential new standard 
on adaptation for businesses. 

Ongoing  Defra 


 


   36 

Objective Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and Metrics Owner 

Chapter 6: Local Government 
NB. We have not identified actions and progress for the Local Government sector with the relevant 56 risks set out in the Climate Change Risk 

Assessment, as per other sectors. Local authorities cover a large number of areas in the provision of their services, which are cross cutting, and it 
would be logistically difficult to make the links. 


 

Planning for and implementing 
climate change adaptation at local 
government level, and addressing 
relevant priority climate change 
risks affecting the sector, with 
government and local government 
working together.  

This will embed into activities 
undertaken by local authorities in 
the course of fully discharging their 
duties so that they can support and 
protect local communities.  

In line with the 25 Year Environment Plan, Defra will 
facilitate partnership working by developing 14 local 
natural capital plans from existing Area Integrated 
Plans. Local natural capital plans will be co-
designed and delivered by organisations in the area 
whose actions already impact upon the 
environment. This will rely on the organisations 
identifying shared priorities and coordinating activity 
to address them.   

Commencing 
summer 2018.  

We will develop a set of 
performance metrics to make sure 
we are delivering on the goal of 
mitigating and adapting to climate 
change. This will be part of a 
national picture on delivering on 
the 25 Year Environment Plan.   


 

Defra 

The government, informed by advice from local 
government delivery partners, will ensure that, 
where a case is made, government legislation, 
policy and programmes are joined up to continue to 
enable and support councils to build resilience to 
the impacts of climate change through: 

• undertaking over the remainder of 2018 a 
scoping exercise of both gaps and opportunities 
for wider join up, evolution of the policy and the 
legislative landscape to support local and local 
government delivery; 

• developing a prioritised set of policy or 
legislative focus areas and map these to 
existing areas, such as planned consultations;  

• developing, where needed, new interventions to 
influence, or shape, and how and by who these 
will be progressed; and  

• agreeing a deliverable programme of work 
linked, as appropriate, to wider key groups and 
networks, including outside the Local 
Government sector.  

Ongoing 


      


Spring 2019 


 

Investigation of other city 
reporting mechanisms (Carbon 
Disclosure Project/Compact) and 
international or national 
standards. There are valid and 
local reporting and evaluation 
frameworks, for example Leeds 
City Council monitors progress 
against climate change adaptation 
actions through its environment 
programme board.  

Joint working to understand an 
efficient, effective and more 
consistent approach to monitoring 
and how this could operate within 
cities and the Local Government 
sector more widely. 

Defra, Local 
Adaptation 
Advisory 
Panel, Local 
Government 
Association 
(LGA), 
Association 
of Directors 


Of 

Environment, 
Economy, 
Planning and 
Transport 
(ADEPT), 
Core Cities. 


 


   37 

Objective Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and Metrics Owner 
The LAAP, working with relevant sector experts will 
respond to key government consultations and lobby 
national government through joint letters to ensure 
that the case is made that government legislation, 
policies and programmes are joined up to continue 
to enable and support councils to build resilience to 
the impacts of climate change.  

Ongoing  Local 
Adaptation 
Advisory 
Panel, Defra, 
LGA, 
ADEPT, 
Core Cities. 


 

The LAAP will support improved resilience on 
adaptation amongst local authorities by providing 
easy to implement basic guidance for local 
authorities that clearly outlines the key priorities and 
minimum requirements for improved resilience in 
key sectors. This will be disseminated through the 
LAAP’s networks; through meetings/ conferences, 
and using other sector specific networks’ channels.  

Ongoing  Local 
Adaptation 
Advisory 
Panel, Defra, 
LGA, 
ADEPT, 
Core Cities. 


 

Following the development of the Business Case 
for Local Authorities in NAP1, the Local Adaptation 
Advisory Panel will: 

• finalise an approach to demonstrating the level 
of implementation of climate change adaptation 
principles across local authorities; 

• develop, with government and others, an 
agreed process of roll out of the approach 
alongside appropriate processes of 
assessment/progress reporting for the sector; 
and  

• continue its strong collaborative approach on 
adaptation between central and local 
government and its partners to share best 
practice and accelerate delivery.   


 

By 2019 


  

 Local 
Adaptation 
Advisory 
Panel, Defra, 
LGA, 
ADEPT, 
Core Cities.  


       


   38 

Objective Key actions and progress milestones Timing Monitoring and Metrics Owner 
To ensure that climate change 
adaptation is implemented most 
effectively at city level, including 
through partnership working. 

The Core Cities group in partnership with Defra, will 
influence adaptation ambitions and delivery at local 
level through its current Low Carbon Energy and 
Resilience (LCER) policy hub through:  

• formalising a joint Core Cities group/Defra 
working group/compact to collaborate on air 
quality and promoting adaptation in cities;  


 

the Core Cities Climate Resilience and Adaptation 
Working Group delivering an agreed annual set of 
adaptation priorities and key actions across and 
within specific individual core cities; and 


 

Core Cities group reporting delivery and 
performance on adaptation to the LCER Policy Hub 
and the Core Cities group/Defra working 
group/compact, and, more widely, supporting 
sharing and acceleration of local adaptation best 
practice and progress reporting.  

The working 
group will be set 
up in summer 
2018 

Terms of Reference will be 
agreed, and a programme for 
deliverables will be implemented 

Core Cities 
Group, 
Defra, 
Greater 
London 
Authority 


 

