

untitled


Low Carbon Transport
Innovation Strategy
May 2007


Low Carbon Transport
Innovation Strategy
May 2007


The Department for Transport has actively considered the needs of blind and partially sighted people in
accessing this document. The text will be made available in full on the Department’s web site in accordance
with the W3C’s Web Accessibility Initiative’s criteria. The text may be freely downloaded and translated by
individuals or organisations for conversion into other accessible formats. If you have other needs in this
regard please contact the Department.
Department for Transport
Great Minster House
76 Marsham Street
London SW1P 4DR
Telephone 020 7944 8300
Web site www.dft.gov.uk
� Crown copyright, 

Copyright in the typographical arrangement rests with the Crown.
This publication, excluding logos, may be reproduced free of charge in any format or medium for
non-commercial research, private study or for internal circulation within an organisation. This is subject to it
being reproduced accurately and not used in a misleading context. The material must be acknowledged as
Crown copyright and the title of the publication specified.
For any other use of this material please apply for a Core Click-Use Licence at www.opsi.gov.uk/click-use/
index.htm, or by writing to Office of Public Sector Information, St Clements House, 2–16 Colegate, Norwich
NR3 1BQ, Fax 01603 723000, or e-mail licensing@cabinet-office.x.gsi.gov.uk.
To order further copies of this publication contact:
DfT Publications
Publications Centre
PO Box 236
Wetherby
West Yorkshire
LS23 7NB
Tel: 0870 1226 236
Fax: 0870 1226 237
E-mail: dft@capita.co.uk
or online via www.publications.dft.gov.uk.
Printed in Great Britain in January 2007 on paper containing at least 75% recycled pulp.
May 2007
Product Code : 78INE02829


Contents
Contents iii
Foreword 1
Executive summary 3
Low carbon technologies and the road sector 4
Low carbon technologies and the aviation sector 7
Low carbon technologies and the rail sector 9
Low carbon technologies and the shipping sector 10
Key conclusions and next steps 11
Chapter 1: Introduction 12
Chapter 2: The need for a Low Carbon Transport Innovation Strategy 14
Transport, energy & carbon emissions 14
Scope of the strategy 17
Chapter 3: Low carbon innovation and the transport sector 19
The ‘‘innovation chain’’ 19
The role for Government in innovation 20
Factors impacting on innovation for lower carbon transport 21
Government position 24
Chapter 4: Low Carbon Technologies and the Road Sector 27
Carbon emissions from the road sector 27
Existing Government policies 29
Key technologies for a lower carbon road sector 30
Securing cost-effective carbon savings from existing and closer to market technologies 34
European level actions 38
Domestic level actions 39
Light duty vehicles, HGV’s and Buses 41
Intelligent transport systems 42
Further from market and longer term technologies 42
Carbon impacts of longer term options 43

iii
Infrastructure issues 44
Policy mix for further from market options 45
Chapter 5: Low Carbon Technologies and the Aviation Sector 48
Carbon emissions from the aviation sector 48
Government position on aviation’s climate impacts 49
Air-traffic management options for reducing emissions 50
Improving the fuel economy of the current aviation fleet 51
Improving the fuel economy and emissions performance of future aircraft 51
Longer-term options for re-designing aircraft to optimise fuel efficiency 55
The scope for powering aircraft from renewable or alternative fuels 56
Further work on more radical lower carbon options for aviation 57
Conclusion 57
Chapter 6: Low Carbon Technologies and the Rail Sector 59
Introduction 59
Electrification 59
Industry regulation: ORR’s sustainable development consultation 60
Rail franchise incentives 60
Design of new rolling stock 60
Regenerative braking 61
Further technical and operational measures to reduce carbon emissions 61
Chapter 7: Low Carbon Technologies and the Shipping Sector 65
Emissions from shipping 65
Shipping’s contribution to the UK economy 66
AEA/MAST report 66
Improved journey management and incremental changes to existing shipping technology 66
Other technological options for improving the fuel economy and emissions performance
of future ships 67
Encouraging the adoption of low carbon technology in the shipping sector 68
Chapter 8: Government funding for Research, Development & Demonstration of
low carbon transport technologies 69
Main existing funding sources 69
Future new funding sources 72
Improving the coherence and co-ordination of R,D&D actitivies 74
Chapter 9: Potential importance of a low carbon electricity mix 76
Chapter 10: Uncertainty, technology development and next steps 80
Next steps 82
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

iv
Foreword
Secretary of State for Transport
There is no doubt that the challenge of tackling carbon emissions from the transport sector is
a huge one. We all enjoy travelling for leisure purposes and we depend on an effective
transport system to deliver the wide range of goods and services on which our prosperity
and well-being as a society relies. And as our economy and our population has grown, so
has our demand for travel.
Despite the scale of the challenge, we are committed as a Government to addressing climate
change both internationally and domestically, and the transport sector must play its part in
that process. The Government is developing a wide range of relevant policies in this area. We
are investing record sums in our public transport systems and have recently published
proposals for a modernised national framework for bus services. We are supporting zero
carbon options such as walking and cycling and are putting in place a substantial
programme to promote changes towards more sustainable patterns of travel behaviour using
a range of measures collectively known as smarter choices. These include workplace, school
and personalised travel planning, travel awareness campaigns, car clubs, car sharing and
measures to reduce the need to travel such as video-conferencing.
These approaches undoubtedly have significant potential to reduce the carbon footprint of
our travel. Equally there is no doubt that new technology will play a major role in the
transition to a lower carbon transport system. Development of the Low Carbon Transport
Innovation Strategy, a commitment that arose out of the Government’s 2006 Energy Review,
is a reflection of that.

1

The Strategy, which we are publishing alongside the Government’s Energy White Paper, sets
out a comprehensive approach to incentivising new technology development in the transport
sector, building on the findings of recent work such as the Stern Review. It highlights the
wide range of technologies which can contribute to carbon reduction in each of the major
transport modes, road, aviation, rail and shipping – and the major new steps that we are
taking to stimulate the research, development and demonstration projects which can make
these technologies a reality. It draws out the links between a future low carbon transport
system and a future low carbon energy system.
With the right policies and approach, the UK can gain both environmental and economic
benefits from leading the way in the development of a lower carbon transport system. We
have many companies which are already, or can become, world leaders in the field of lower
carbon transport. Our strategy aims to set a framework in which those companies can
develop the lower carbon technologies of tomorrow with confidence, and allow the UK to
benefit from the growing global market for these technologies which will surely emerge over
the coming decades.
Rt Hon Douglas Alexander, MP
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

2

Executive summary

 The Government announced in the Energy Review last year that it would develop a
Low Carbon Transport Innovation Strategy (LCTIS). Development of the strategy
reflects the critical role that new technology will play in delivering carbon reductions
in the transport sector over the long term.

 The LCTIS, which is being published at the same time as the Government’s Energy
White Paper, sets out an overall framework through which the Government will
encourage innovation and technology development in lower carbon transport
technologies. It also contains specific chapters on the road, aviation, rail and
maritime sectors - setting out in detail the technologies that can contribute to lower
carbon transport and the steps the Government is taking to encourage them.

 The Government’s approach to low carbon transport innovation recognises that
there are a range of market failures and barriers to entry which can impede the
development and commercialisation of new technologies in this area. These include
the early stage of development of many relevant technologies, limited demand from
consumers for lower carbon options, a still evolving regulatory environment and the
capital intensive nature of much transport equipment and infrastructure. High capital
costs also mean that replacement rates in the transport sector are often slow,
manufacturers can be risk averse and the costs and risks of moving from the
demonstration phase to full commercialisation for new technologies are high.

 These conditions justify a range of interventions by Government to help stimulate the
development of lower carbon transport technologies at all stages in the innovation
chain and for all major modes of transport. Consistent with the Stern Review’s
recommendations on developing new technologies to address climate change our
approach will involve:
& In dialogue with our EU and international trading partners, considering a range of
mechanisms which provide a carbon price signal to all major transport modes
which are significant emitters of carbon.
& The utilisation of other market based or regulatory approaches to encourage the
deployment of lower carbon transport technologies. These may take a wide range
of forms including taxation incentives, measures to support lower carbon public
procurement or minimum standards regulations.

3

& Support for research, development and demonstration projects in a wide range
of lower carbon transport technologies across all major transport modes.
& Providing consumers and travellers with better information about the carbon
impacts of their choices and the lower carbon options available to them.
We believe that this fourfold approach represents a coherent overall framework for
action, which we will continue to develop and refine over time as we are committed
to making the UK an attractive environment for developing and deploying lower
carbon transport technologies.
Low carbon technologies and the road sector

 The road sector is the largest source of carbon emissions from transport in the UK. It
is also the transport sector with probably the greatest potential to reduce carbon
emissions in the coming decades. In developing the LCTIS the Government therefore
asked E4tech to examine how the innovation system was functioning for some of the
key technologies central to carbon reduction in the road sector.

 E4tech’s study A Review of the UK Innovation System for Low Carbon Road
Transport Technologies is being published alongside the Government’s strategy (and
is available in full at www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/scienceresearch/technology/ ). Their work
highlights a range of existing or nearer market technologies that have, in
combination, the potential to make a significant contribution to carbon reduction in
the road transport sector in the near-medium term - as well as a number of
technologies with longer term potential to deliver very large scale carbon reductions.

 Those technologies with the clearest potential to contribute in the near future
include:
& continued incremental improvements to petrol and diesel engines
& a range of new and emerging lightweight materials,
& nearer market hybrid petrol-electric or diesel-electric vehicles,
& first generation biofuels (bioethanol made from sugar or starch crops and biodiesel
made from oil crops and wastes)

 Those technology options which may become very significant over longer timescales

are:

& ‘‘plug-in’’ hybrids which can be re-charged from the electricity grid
& fully electric vehicles
& second generation biofuels, manufactured from a wide range of biomass sources
& hydrogen powered vehicles and fuel cells.
The key attraction of these latter technologies is the possibility they offer of
delivering very substantial carbon reductions from road transport over the longer
term – including potentially achieving the almost total de-carbonisation of road
transport. However in general they are not yet ready to be applied to mass markets
in the road sector, either because costs are prohibitively high and/or significant
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

4

technological progress is required to bring down costs and overcome performance
issues likely to be important to consumers.

 E4tech’s work suggests that for all technologies, clear and long term policy signals
supporting lower carbon road transport are needed to drive all stages of the
innovation cycle. This includes a recognition that a range of technology options are
likely to be required in order to deliver large scale emissions reductions over time.
Their work also suggests some important differences between the support needed
for innovation in technologies nearer and further from market, and thus some
differences in the nature of the policy responses that are most appropriate from
Government. In particular, E4tech suggest that, for nearer market technologies, the
most effective intervention from Governments would be a strengthening of policies
supporting market deployment of lower carbon vehicles. This may involve further
regulatory or taxation measures, as well as the use of public procurement to help the
creation of niche markets. For riskier and further from market options, while
deployment signals remain essential in providing a stimulus for technology
development, there is in addition a stronger case for Government providing targetted
financial support for industry and academic led, research, development and
demonstration activities.

 The Government supports the broad conclusions of E4tech’s work. We are working
at both the European and domestic level to develop new measures and policies
aimed at strengthening current and future demand for lower carbon vehicles.

 At the European level, the European Commission has recently issued a commu-
nication which sets out its intention to replace the current CO2 voluntary agreements
between the Commission and automotive manufacturers (which expire in 2008/9)
with a new legislative framework to deliver average new car fuel efficiency of 130
grammes of CO2 per kilometre (gCO2/km) by 
 The Communication proposes an
overall target of 120g CO2/km by 2012 with the additional 10g CO2/km to be
delivered through a range of other measures.

 The Government welcomes the Commission’s intention to bring forward a legislative
framework and supports a move to demanding mandatory fuel efficiency targets.
Subject to understanding how the targets will be implemented and subsequent
impact assessment, the Government is supportive of the Commission’s proposals.
However it is our view that the proposals should also set out a longer term strategy
for improving vehicle fuel efficiency. The Government announced in Budget 2007
that its longer term objective is that average new car emissions be reduced to 100
grammes of carbon dioxide per kilometre.

 The Government is also continuing to act to strengthen policies at the domestic
level:
& We are incentivising the purchase of lower carbon vehicles through the graduated
vehicle excise duty regime. Further strengthening of these incentives, including
reduced rates for the most fuel efficient vehicles and higher rates for the most
polluting, were made in Budget 

& We are providing new funding of an initial £20m to develop a programme aimed at
reducing the barriers faced by companies in moving from prototype demonstra-
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

5

tions of lower carbon technologies to full commercialisation. This programme will
provide financial support for public procurement of fleet demonstrations of lower
carbon vehicles (and where appropriate supporting infrastructure). The programme
will seek to build on the model of contractual forward commitments in which
commitments to purchase vehicles are linked to the achievement of pre-
determined cost and performance criteria. The Government will consult on the
detailed operation of this new programme later in 2007 – with a view to supporting
the first fleet procurements/demonstrations in 

& We launched a new communications campaign covering eco-driving and
purchasing earlier this year. This highlights to consumers that they can contribute
to tackling climate change without compromising on the type of car they drive –
both by driving in a more fuel efficient way and by purchasing a lower carbon
vehicle within a given class.
& We are supporting biofuels through the development of the Renewable Transport
Fuel Obligation (RTFO). We launched a consultation in February of this year
covering both the detailed implementation of the RTFO over the period 2008/9 to
2010/11 and issues relating to the future evolution of the RTFO after its initial
phase. Details of the consultation can be found at www.dft.gov.uk/roads/rtfo

 As set out in the Stern Review, we also consider that Governments have a clear role
to play in supporting research, development & demonstration activities to bring
forward lower carbon vehicles. The UK automotive sector remains a significant part
of the UK economy and expanding our expertise in lower carbon vehicles is likely to
be central to the future competitiveness of that sector. In conjunction with the
Technology Strategy Board (TSB), DfT and EPSRC will therefore help finance and
develop a new Low Carbon Vehicle Innovation Platform providing critical coordina-
tion and up to £30million of support from 2008/09 onwards. The Innovation Platform
will bring together key stakeholders in the UK automotive sector and provide new
funding for UK industry led demonstration and collaborative R&D projects – focussed
on nearer and further from market technologies where the UK has or can develop
world leading expertise. We will review the Innovation Platform after its first year of
operation with the strong intention of extending the programme to run over a number
of years.

 Separately, the Government is also setting up the Energy Technologies Institute (ETI)
with a minimum budget of around £600m over the next decade. The ETI will
significantly expand the scale of basic and applied R&D into lower carbon
technology development taking place in the UK – including options relevant to lower
carbon transport and road vehicles. In order to strengthen ETI’s activities in the
transport area still further, from 2008 onwards, the Department for Transport will
contribute an additional £5m per annum of new money to ETI expenditure on lower
carbon transport technologies – supporting a wide variety of technology develop-
ment relevant to the road sector and other transport modes.

 In these ways the Government aims to ensure that the UK automotive sector and
research base will maintain and develop its strong position in a range of technologies
likely to be critical to lower carbon transportation in future decades. Reflecting the
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

6

importance of the road sector to transport carbon emissions, the Government has
asked Professor Julia King, Vice-Chancellor of Aston University and former Director
of Advanced Engineering at Rolls Royce plc, working with Sir Nicholas Stern, to lead
a review to examine the vehicle and fuel technologies which over the next 25 years
could help to decarbonise road transport. This review will feed into the work of the
Energy Technologies Institute.
Low carbon technologies and the aviation sector

 Globally, carbon dioxide emissions from aviation are responsible for around 
6% of
total greenhouse gas emissions. However, aircraft are also responsible for other
climate effects, for example, high-altitude emissions of nitrogen oxides (NOx), which
can lead to the production of ozone, and for the formation of contrails – they are also
believed to contribute to the formation of cirrus clouds. While scientific knowledge in
this area continues to evolve and remains uncertain the total climate change impact
of all aviation emissions is presently estimated to be at least two (and possibly four)
times greater than the effects of carbon dioxide alone. Emissions from the aviation
sector are also forecast to grow significantly over time. Taking account of both these
factors means that aviation could in future represent a significant proportion of total
UK greenhouse gas emissions – particularly if efforts to reduce emissions in other
sectors are more successful.

 Aviation is by its very nature an international industry and the Government believes
that for action to be most effective in this area it should be taken at an international
level. Consequently, the Government’s preferred policy approach for addressing the
climate impacts of aviation is through a well-designed emissions trading scheme.
The UK has taken a lead in arguing for the early introduction of aviation in the EU
ETS. In the last year much work has been done to progress the debate
internationally, and last December the European Commission published its legislative
proposal to include aviation in the EU ETS. The UK welcomed the publication of the
Commission’s proposal and will continue to lead the debate in Europe on aviation’s
incorporation into the EU ETS with the aim of ensuring a robust and environmentally
efficient scheme is introduced as soon as possible.

 That said, the Government has made clear that our focus on the EU ETS does not
preclude consideration of additional measures to ensure that aviation plays its part in
meeting the challenge of climate change. In December of last year we announced
that levels of Air Passenger Duty (APD) would be doubled with effect from 1 February
of this year. The Government is committed to addressing the climate impacts of
aviation through carbon pricing and related regulatory or fiscal measures. Through
carbon price signals of this kind, the aviation industry will be appropriately
incentivised to pursue cost effective approaches to emissions reduction and to the
development of new technology to reduce emissions.

 There is some potential to reduce emissions from aviation through improved air
traffic management. Internationally, the largest gains in this area are likely to arise
from more direct routing of aeroplanes and through greater utilisation of measures
such as Continuous Descent Approach. Overall, these and other measures have the
potential to offer modest improvements to the fuel economy of aviation - potentially
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

7

reducing average carbon emissions on a per passenger km basis by around 6-12%
over the long term.

 Larger gains are achievable from improving the fuel economy of the aviation fleet.
New aircraft are more fuel efficient than existing older aeroplanes which are still in
operation. Historically the aviation industry claims that it has delivered around a 70%
improvement in fuel efficiency over the past 40 years. Improvement continues to this
day with the newest models developed by both Airbus (the A380) and Boeing (the
787) estimated to be up to around 20% more fuel efficient per passenger km than
the current typical average.

 It is clear that further improvements in the fuel efficiency of aircraft can be achieved
over time. The Advisory Council for Aeronautics Research in Europe (ACARE) has set
a series of ambitious goals for reducing the environmental impact of aviation. These
include reducing carbon dioxide emissions from new aircraft by 50% per passenger
km (to be achieved from a combination or more efficient aircraft engines, operations
and air traffic management measures), reducing nitrous oxide (NOx) emissions by
80% and noise by 50%, all by 2020 (relative to a 2000 base).

 The ACARE goals are demanding and large scale research and development funding
is being made available to support the development of greener aircraft, both
domestically and at European level. Some of the key measures are as follows:
& In the UK, the National Aerospace Technology Strategy (NATS) is a major
partnership between industry, Government and academia to address UK
competitiveness in aerospace technology. The aerospace industry bids NATS
projects into the DTI led Technology Programme for support. Through this process
the Government is providing around £45m per year of civil aviation development
funding from the Department of Trade & Industry (DTI), Regional Development
Agencies (RDAs) and the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council
(EPSRC) - to be matched by a similar amount from industry.
& Many of the programmes in NATS have a direct bearing on environmental issues –
most notable amongst these are the Environmentally Friendly Engine (EFE)
Technology Validation Programme and the Integrated Wing Aerospace Technology
Validation Programme (IWATVP). The 5 year, £95m EFE programme is led by Rolls-
Royce, involves a consortium of five UK aerospace companies and six universities.
The Integrated Wing programme includes technologies focussed on wing
optimisation, flow control and noise reduction, new materials design and
manufacturing and advanced fuel and landing gear systems. Phase 1 of this
programme is a £34m programme (with £17m from Government) in which there are
a total of 17 industrial and academic partners. The lead industrial partner is Airbus.
& Through the next EU Framework Programme, FP7, which commences this year
and will run until 2013, further substantial funding of over J4 billion is available for
transport research with about half for collaborative research in aeronautics and air
transport. The Commission is also proposing a ‘‘Clean Sky’’ Joint Technology
Initiative on more environmentally friendly aeroplane technology as a public private
partnership between the Commission and the industry with about J800m of EU
funding from the transport programme. ‘‘Clean Sky’’ is a large technology research
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

8

programme seeking step changes in the reduction of fuel consumption, emissions
and noise of future aircraft. Industry will invest an additional J850m representing
around 50% of the Clean Sky programme. Clean Sky aims to assess and validate a
range of technological approaches with the potential to deliver step changes in
component, system and engine technologies, leading to the earlier introduction of
new, greener products that will accelerate the reduction of emissions from aviation
and increase the competitiveness of European industry.

 Achieving in full the stated ACARE goals is unlikely to be delivered solely through
incremental evolution of current technology approaches to aeroplane design and
operation. More radical aeroplane designs may need to be considered. One such
design is the ‘‘SAX-40’’. This concept was developed as part of the Silent Aircraft
Initiative (SAI) – a £
3m three year collaboration between Cambridge University, the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boeing, Rolls-Royce and Nasa – and was
unveiled last year at the Royal Aeronautical Society. The SAX-40 design involves a
‘‘blended wing’’ concept in which the fuselage and wings are blended together in a
manner comparable to that used in stealth military aircraft. The design team estimate
the aircraft could deliver fuel efficiency improvement of around 25% over today’s
most efficient aircraft – and with some further potential for reductions beyond that as
the design was developed as much with noise reduction in mind as reduced fuel
consumption.

 Biofuels (such as kerosene manufactured from biomass using the Fischer Tropsch
process) and hydrogen produced from renewable sources could also be potentially
used in commercial aircraft. The aviation industry has announced plans to trial the
use of biofuels in aircraft in the near future. There are considerable commercial and
technical challenges to be overcome before hydrogen fuelled aircraft could be a
reality.

 The Government will also continue to support relevant domestic academic and
industry work in this area. One such initiative, recently launched, is OMEGA
(Opportunities for Meeting the Environmental Challenges of Growth in Aviation). The
OMEGA project is being supported by £5m of Government funding and is being led
by Manchester Metropolitan University while bringing together a wide range of
leading UK academic and industrial expertise in the environmental impacts of
aviation and opportunities for mitigation of those impacts. OMEGA will consider a
2050 time horizon and support a range of initial research projects focussed on long
term and more radical options for addressing the environmental impacts of aviation.
Drawing on the UK’s considerable academic and industrial expertise in a wide range
of aviation issues, OMEGA aims to place the UK at the forefront of both policy and
technological work in this area.
Low carbon technologies and the rail sector

 Rail’s carbon emissions are relatively low, being responsible for around 1% of total
UK carbon emissions. But as with all modes, rail needs to play its part in improving
its energy efficiency and carbon emissions profile.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

9


 Trains and rail infrastructure are long lived assets. So getting technology right at the
outset - or building in sufficient flexibility to adapt to developments, for example in
traction technology - is important. The DfT is currently leading the Intercity Express
Programme (IEP) which sets out to deliver a best overall value solution for train
replacement and demand growth on key long distance routes. For both environ-
mental and cost reasons, a key objective will be to ensure that the new high speed
train is as fuel efficient as possible. Following on from IEP, the Government will
expect all future train procurement exercises to place considerable emphasis on
reducing carbon and other environmental impacts.

 Looking ahead, the Government is committed to working with the rail industry to
support and facilitate the introduction of more energy efficient technologies and
operational practices. Avenues being explored include optimising the rail network for
energy efficiency, trialling hybrid trains combining diesel and battery power,
considering the longer term role that hydrogen fuel cells could play and identifying
techniques for reducing train mass. The Government’s long term rail framework
document will be published in summer 2007 and will say more about improving all
aspects of rail’s environmental performance.
Low carbon technologies and the shipping sector

 Shipping is a very fuel efficient method of moving bulk freight and remains
comfortably the most low carbon method currently available for long distance
movement of freight on a per tonne basis. Fuel makes up a relatively high proportion
of international shipping costs and marine diesel engines are already efficient.
Internationally, there has thus far been only a limited policy or commercial focus on
technological options for reducing the carbon footprint of shipping.

 However, while highly efficient, shipping is a not insignificant source of carbon
emissions at a global level – estimated to account for around 
8-
5% of worldwide
carbon emissions – and movement of goods by ship continues to grow. There is
therefore a good case for examining the technological options available for further
reducing carbon emissions from shipping over time. With this in mind, the
Government commissioned AEA Energy & Environment and Newcastle University to
advise on the technology options available in this area and their likely viability. Their
report is being published alongside the LCTIS (and is available at www.dft.gov.uk/
pgr/scienceresearch/technology/).

 The study highlights that there are a range of options for further reducing the carbon
impacts of shipping – of which the most promising are incremental improvements to
existing marine engines, improved fleet management techniques, biofuels and using
kites or skysails as a means to supplement the existing propulsions systems of
commercial shipping.

 In order to stimulate interest in the development of more fuel efficient and lower
carbon ships, the Government considers that, over time, carbon pricing approaches
or related regulations should be extended to the shipping sector as well as other
modes of international transport. As with aviation, the shipping industry is an
international one and any approach to carbon pricing or other relevant regulations
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

10
needs to be developed at an international level to be effective. The UK Government
has already put a discussion paper to the International Maritime Organisation (IMO)
on emissions trading and the possibilities of extending it to the shipping sector. We
will continue to work with the IMO and other relevant international organisations to
progress discussions on options for incentivising carbon emissions reductions in the
shipping sector. We will also work within the EU Framework Programme and
domestically to examine the case for additional R,D&D into technologies for lower
carbon shipping.
Key conclusions and next steps

 Our strategy for stimulating new lower carbon transport technologies has highlighted
the important role that Government can play at all stages of the innovation cycle
from basic research through to product commercialisation. Consistent with the
conclusions of the recent Stern Review, we are adopting an approach which
combines the use of carbon pricing mechanisms and supporting regulation in the
transport sector with additional Government support for research, development and
demonstration projects (R,D&D). In particular we are significantly expanding our
support for low carbon R,D&D through the creation of the Energy Technologies
Institute, a new Innovation Platform for UK automotive R&D and a new programme of
support for public procurement of lower carbon vehicles. At a European level
support for relevant R,D&D is also being increased through Framework Programme 7
and we will work to ensure that UK companies and academic groups are active
participants in international collaborative projects in these areas.

 Work on the strategy has also highlighted strong links between lower carbon energy
generation and potential lower carbon transport systems of the future. The carbon
savings offered by a transport system based around hydrogen fuels or electrically
powered transportation would be very largely dependent on the energy source used
to make the hydrogen or generate the electricity. Further de-carbonisation of the
UK’s energy mix would increase the scope for a hydrogen or electricity based
transport sector to offer very substantial carbon savings. The impacts on total UK
electricity demand could also be substantial.

 Finally, policy making in this area must be mindful of the considerable uncertainty
surrounding the pace and nature of technological developments which can
contribute to lower carbon transport. These uncertainties suggest that the
Government should as far as possible adopt a technology neutral approach to
deployment incentives for new technologies while supporting R&D into a broad
range of technological options with the potential to deliver carbon reductions over
time. Support for innovation should also be placed within a broader mix of policies
for incentivising emissions reduction in the transport sector – including non-
technology based approaches. The Government will continue to develop and refine
its policies in these areas over time with the objective of providing a commercially
attractive environment for innovation and low carbon transport technology devel-
opment in the UK.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

11
Chapter 1
Introduction

1 The Government announced in the Energy Review1, published in July last year, that it
would develop a Low Carbon Transport Innovation Strategy (LCTIS). Development of
the strategy reflects the important role that new technology will play in delivering
carbon reductions in the transport sector over the long term.

2 In developing this strategy the Government has sought to examine the innovation
processes affecting the development of new lower carbon transport technologies, to
set out a coherent overall policy framework in this area, and to discuss the steps the
Government is taking to help to accelerate the emergence of lower carbon transport
technologies in the UK.

3 The strategy is presented in three main parts. The first part (sections 2-3) considers
the importance of low carbon technology innovation in the transport sector and the
overall basis for Government intervention to encourage innovation. The case for
developing the LCTIS is discussed – as are the factors which may constrain or
impact on successful low carbon innovation in transport. Building on the Stern
Review, and other relevant work in this area, this section presents an overall
framework through which Government will assess and develop its policies for
promoting low carbon technological innovation in the transport sector.

4 The second part of the document (sections 4-7) considers, for each of the major
transport modes, the current position in relation to low carbon technology
development. Key current and future technologies for each mode are considered,
alongside details of a range of actions which the Government is taking to help to
stimulate further innovation or accelerate technological development. The largest
discussion in this part of the strategy is of the position in the road sector – reflecting
the fact that this sector is the largest source of carbon emissions from transport in
the UK. In this section we discuss supporting analysis by E4tech on the key
technological and policy issues impacting on low carbon innovation for road
vehicles. Subsequent sections of the strategy present detailed discussion of the
position on low carbon technology development in the aviation, rail and shipping
sectors.

5 The third part of the strategy (sections 8-10) considers a range of cross cutting
issues impacting on low carbon technological innovation in the transport sector. In
1 See http://www.dti.gov.uk/energy/review/page
html

12
particular this section of the strategy sets out the full range of existing Government
interventions supporting research, development and demonstration (R,D&D) of low
carbon transport technologies. It presents a range of actions the Government will
take to expand support over time and to bring greater coherence to the
Government’s approach in this area. This section of the document also discusses
the relationship between de-carbonisation of the electricity mix and the achievement
of very large scale long term reductions in emissions from the transport sector, as
well as considering the impact of technological uncertainty on the development of
Government policies in this area.
INTRODUCTION 1

13
Chapter 2
The need for a Low Carbon Transport
Innovation Strategy
Transport, energy & carbon emissions

1 Effective transport systems are an important part of our lives and essential to the
health of the UK economy. Our objective in Government is that people and goods
can be transported quickly, safely and with as little impact on the environment as
possible. The recent Eddington Transport study, published in December of last year,
highlighted the importance of an efficient transport infrastructure in sustaining the
UK’s productivity and competitiveness


2 However transport is a major energy user and currently the large majority of our
transportation needs are met by a fossil fuel, oil. The combustion of oil gives rise to
emissions of carbon dioxide, the greenhouse gas responsible for the majority of
human induced climate change.

3 In 2005, the latest year for which figures are available, carbon dioxide emissions
from the domestic transport sector in the UK were 
2 MtC - approximately 23% of
total UK carbon emissions - when calculated on a by source basis
 This is below the
average for OECD countries reflecting the UK’s high population density, urbanisation
and an extensive public transport network
 The pie chart below shows the
breakdown of emissions by the major transport modes on this basis

1 The Eddington Transport Study is available at http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/independent_reviews/eddington_transport_study/eddingto-
n_index.cfm
2 Carbon dioxide emissions from transport can also be shown on an end user basis– a method which includes a share of emissions from
combustion of fossil fuels at power stations and other fuel processing industries. The full emissions inventory by source and by end user is
available on the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs website in Table 5 at: http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/statistics/
globatmos/gagccukem.htm
3 Cutting Transport CO2 emissions: What Progress? OECD (2007)
4 This and the following pie chart exclude 
1MtC of emissions from other mobile sources and transport machinery.

14

4 However these figures are an understatement of total carbon emissions from the UK
transport sector as they exclude emissions from international aviation and shipping.
There is no international agreement through the Kyoto Protocol on how to assign
emissions between countries for international aviation and shipping. Including figures
based on sales of aviation and marine fuels for international journeys departing from the
UK gives a higher figure for total transport carbon emissions of 
3MtC in 2005 –
approximately 28% of total UK carbon emissions (including international emissions). A
breakdown of the major emissions on this basis is shown in the pie cart below:

5 Even these figures are likely to be an understatement of the full climate impact of UK
related transportation. As noted in section 5, while the scientific evidence remains
complex, there are strong grounds for considering that the full climate impact of
aviation emissions at high altitudes is greater than that attributable to carbon dioxide
emissions alone. Additionally, as discussed in more detail in section 7, rough
estimates of UK carbon emissions from international shipping based on the UK’s
share of global GDP or international trade would suggest figures around 3-4 MtC
higher than those based on sales of marine fuels in the UK – reflecting the fact that
the UK is not a major refuelling hub for international cargo ships. In summary, carbon
emissions from transport represent a significant proportion of total UK carbon
emissions which, depending upon the method of calculation, are between around a
quarter and a third of total UK emissions.
THE NEED FOR A LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY 2

15

6 Carbon emissions from transport are also rising – over the last decade transport has
been the fastest growing source of carbon emissions, both in the UK and many other
countries. This reflects the impact of increased personal mobility and a growing
economy on the demand for goods and services. While forward projections, which
are inevitably uncertain, suggest that carbon emissions from domestic transport may
begin to plateau out in the following decades, if emissions from international aviation
and shipping are included then the overall trend on a business as usual basis
remains upwards.

7 The Government has not set individual carbon reduction targets for different sectors
of the economy – as we consider that emissions reduction efforts should be first
focussed on the areas in which they are most cost effective. Nonetheless transport
policies in the Government’s existing climate change programme are expected to
deliver around 
8MtC of savings in 2010 compared to a business as usual scenario.
The Stern Review suggested that in the short term many transport abatement
policies may not be cost-effective, but that action is nevertheless required to contain
emissions and to bring forward technologies which can deliver more cost-effective
carbon reduction in the future


8 In the longer run, if lower carbon technologies can be effectively commercialised and
their costs reduced, modelling analysis suggests that in a carbon constrained world
by 2050 it may be cost effective for domestic transport to abate carbon emissions by
around 40-60% relative to 1990 though the least-cost emissions trajectory may be
somewhat later than for other sectors, as the graph below shows. This is based on
scenario modelling using the MARKAL-MACRO model and is not a forecast of
emissions trajectories for transport or other sectors.

9 There are a wide range of technologies which have the potential to reduce the
carbon impacts of transportation. Many of these are already being developed within
5 See Annex 7c of the Stern Review for further discussion http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/independent_reviews/stern_review_economic-
s_climate_change/stern_review_report.cfm.
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

16
competitive private sector transport markets. However, many are still at the
development or demonstration phase. Some are commercially available but have not
achieved significant market penetration. Accelerating the development and deploy-
ment of these technologies will play a very important role in reducing the carbon
impacts of transport over time.
Scope of the strategy

10 The Low Carbon Transport Innovation Strategy considers, for each major
transportation mode, the potential of new lower carbon transport technologies to
deliver carbon reductions over time. For each mode it examines the current state of
technology development and the innovation framework supporting technology
development, with a particular focus on research, development and demonstration
activities (R,D&D). It sets out the existing policies that the Government has put in
place to incentivise carbon reduction and support relevant R,D&D, as well as new
measures that will be developed over the coming years.

11 The strategy is therefore technology focussed - reflecting the important role that we
expect new technology will play in this area. That said, it is important to stress that
the strategy is not a reappraisal of all the Government’s policies bearing on the
climate impacts of transport. For example, while it is not the focus of this document,
the Government fully recognises that carbon reduction in the transport sector can
also be achieved in a variety of other ways which include:
- encouraging modal shift to lower carbon forms of transport
- encouraging zero carbon options such as walking & cycling
- changed behaviour (eg greater use of car sharing)
- reducing the need to travel – eg through telecommuting
The Government has put in place a substantial programme to promote changes
towards more sustainable patterns of travel behaviour. These include encourage-
ment for cycling and walking, workplace, school and personalised travel
planning, travel awareness campaigns and marketing, car clubs, car sharing and
measures to reduce the need to travel such as video-conferencing. Further detail
on these measures is contained in the transport chapter of the Energy White
Paper


12 Additionally, the Government also recognises the important role public transport has
to play in reducing emissions from transport and is putting record amounts of
investment into public transport to give people a real alternative to using their car. As
a result, the UK now has the fastest growing railway in Europe and the highest
number of rail passengers in 40 years. The government also recently published
proposals for a modernised national framework for bus services. Re-energising bus
use is important for giving people choice and enabling them to make lower-carbon
transport choices. Local and central Government are spending over £
5 billion a
year to provide bus services, up from £1bn in 1996/

6 See also the smarter choices section of the Department for Transport website: http://www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/sustainable/smarterchoices/
THE NEED FOR A LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY 2

17

13 Much can be achieved from such approaches but it is clear that new technology will
need to play a very important role if large reductions in carbon emissions from
transport are to be achieved over the longer term. The Government’s aim is that
lower carbon transport technologies will be deployed in the UK – and that the UK will
benefit from the growing global market for these technologies over the coming
decades.
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

18
Chapter 3
Low carbon innovation and the
transport sector
The ‘‘innovation chain’’

1 The process of innovation and technology development is often described in terms
of a ‘‘chain’’ in which new ideas and technologies pass through a range of phases
from early research & development to ultimate commercialisation – as illustrated
below1:

2 A brief discussion of what is meant by the different stages of technological maturity
shown in the diagram is useful at this stage.
& Basic and applied R&D includes both ‘‘blue skies’’ science and engineering/
application focussed research
& Demonstration includes early prototypes and is intended to take us to the point
where fully functional working devices are utilised, but only in single units or small
numbers, and still financed largely through R&D related grants or corporate
research programmes.
1 Source Carbon Trust.

19
& Pre-commercial is intended to capture a fairly broad stage of development, one
where a small number of units of previously demonstration stage technologies are
sold in niche markets for the first time.
& Supported commercial is the stage where, given generic support measures or
regulatory incentives provided by Government, technologies are rolled out in
substantial numbers by commercially oriented companies
& Commercial technologies can compete un-supported, within the broad regulatory
framework set by Governments.

3 The above diagram and categorisations are helpful in illustrating how a range of
actors impact on the technology development process and how Government policies
and regulations can impact on all phases of the innovation chain. That said, it also
represents in many senses a simplified picture – as in reality there will be feedback
loops and iterations between the stages. Many technologies and innovations will also
fail at some stage in the chain, either because of systemic barriers preventing their
progression or because they are simply out-competed by more technologically
viable or commercially attractive alternatives.

4 Moreover, the actual nature of an innovation system will depend significantly on the
technologies and markets in question. For example, some markets for new
information and communication technologies and supporting software currently
exhibit rapid innovation with products moving quickly from demonstration to full
commercialisation – a process which reflects relatively lower barriers to entry for new
products and is driven by high consumer demand for the technological advances
and convenience that such products can offer. On the other hand the innovation
system for the development of new drugs, or new energy generation technologies,
may look very different, with longer lead times, higher barriers to entry and larger
costs and risks attached to new technology development. Where technological
advances are rapid, barriers to entry low and consumer demand for new products
high, the role for Government may be relatively limited, given that private companies
can be expected to bring forward new products of their own accord. Where,
however, there are significant impediments to successful innovation, then the case
for Government intervention may be higher.
The role for Government in innovation

5 The role for Governments in supporting innovation therefore depends significantly on
the nature of the sector, the extent of any market failures and the characteristics of
the innovation system in question. The Government’s approach to innovation is set
out in The Science and Innovation Investment Framework 2004-
2 Public sector
intervention in support of low carbon innovation has traditionally been justified in
terms of two main market failures.-
2 (http://www.dti.gov.uk/files/files
pdf) and the Government’s Investment Framework for Science and Innovation (http:/www.hm-
treasury.gov.uk/spending_review/spend_sr04/associated_documents/spending_sr04_science.cfm
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

20
& the external cost of carbon – since emitters do not pay the full social cost their
carbon emissions impose on society there is less incentive to bring through low
carbon innovation than is optimal
& the public good nature of innovation – new knowledge is often easy to copy and
therefore it is difficult for an innovator to capture the full value of the innovation. A
private market might therefore not produce enough innovation from a societal point
of view.
Recent work in this area suggests that an approach focussed on ‘innovation
systems’ and ‘innovation systems failure’ provides a broader way to understand the
barriers to innovation and the role for the government
 This approach emphasises
the role of factors in addition to the above market failures such as the importance of
networks and interactions between users, producers and technology developers, the
role niche markets can play in technology development and the impact of uncertainty
on investment decisions.

6 The Stern Review published in October 2006 argues that technology policy is one of
the three essential elements of any policy framework aiming at reducing greenhouse
gas emissions (alongside carbon pricing and removing barriers to behavioural
change). Stern observes that effective action on the scale required to tackle climate
change requires a widespread shift to new or improved technology in key sectors
such as power generation and transport. The Review also argues that most of the
development and deployment of new technologies will be undertaken by the private
sector; the role of governments is to provide a stable framework of incentives.

7 Stern suggests that carbon pricing alone will not be sufficient to induce enough
innovation. There are other market failures in the innovation sector (e.g. to do with
the uncertainty of the long term carbon price and other information asymmetries and
network externalities) which justify additional (more direct, technology specific)
public sector intervention. Stern argues that policy should aim at bringing a portfolio
of low-emission technology options to commercial viability, but that technology-
neutral market incentives also need to be complemented by focused incentives
supporting technology development and deployment. The review also emphasises
the importance of the specific interventions being well-designed and having clear
review and exit strategies. Overall the Stern Review recommends that global public
energy R&D funding should double and deployment incentives for low-emissions
technologies should increase two to five times.
Factors impacting on innovation for lower carbon transport

8 In considering existing markets for low carbon transport technologies there are a
range of considerations which may guide Government intervention. Some of these
are common to low carbon technologies in general, and some are more specific to
the transport sector.
3 See for example Timothy J Foxon (2003) Inducing Innovation for a low-carbon future: drivers, barriers and policies, A Report for The Carbon
Trust
LOW CARBON INNOVATION AND THE TRANSPORT SECTOR 3

21

9 Firstly, as is discussed in more detail in later sections of this strategy, and in
common with many other energy using sectors, many lower carbon transport
technology options are technologically and commercially immature and are at earlier
stages of the innovation chain described above. Current technology costs are often
higher, markets are less well developed and improvements in technology
performance are frequently required in order to achieve large scale commercialisa-
tion.

10 Secondly, many developers of, and investors in lower carbon transport technologies
presently face carbon pricing un-certainties. The technical or commercial immaturity
of many low carbon alternatives may be less of a barrier to market penetration if
there are in place regulatory interventions or market mechanisms which give a value,
eg through a carbon price - to the carbon savings offered by low carbon
technologies. However, in general, carbon pricing mechanisms have yet to be
applied to the transport sector internationally – though it is arguable that fuel duty in
the UK already provides a significant carbon price signal in the road sector. Even
where they are in operation, carbon pricing mechanisms such as the EU Emissions
Trading Scheme (EU ETS) are in their relative infancy. Uncertainties over the scope
and strength of future carbon pricing signals in the transport sector remain an
inhibitor to investment in lower carbon alternatives.

11 Thirdly, the nature of the UK’s existing transport infrastructure can act as a
constraint on the technological options which it is viable or cost-effective to
introduce – creating a degree of ‘‘infrastructure lock-in’’. This is perhaps most
evident in the road sector where an extensive network of filling stations and refineries
has grown up over many years to support road transport based on gasoline and
diesel fuels. Replacing this network with one based, for example, on the supply of
hydrogen fuels, or numerous re-charging points for electric or part electric vehicles,
could be a significant undertaking. Similarly, existing infrastructure impacts to a
degree on the scope for new technology development in other transport modes.

12 Fourthly, while public awareness of climate change and the carbon impacts of
individual actions is rising, in general the available evidence suggests that consumer
behaviour in relation to travel is not yet heavily influenced by climate considerations.
Most consumers still make the majority of their travel and transport decisions
principally on the basis of criteria of cost, performance and convenience - rather than
carbon impacts. There is therefore, as yet, only limited market pull from consumers
to drive large scale market penetration of lower carbon options.

13 Finally, most relevant transport technology is highly capital intensive and therefore
exhibits slow replacement rates. The average replacement rate for passenger cars
and light vehicles is around 10 years. Replacement rates for new trains, aeroplanes,
ships and buses are generally considerably longer with timescales which usually run
into many decades. Capital intensity and slow replacement rates in the transport
sector inhibit low carbon innovation in a number of ways. They make purchasers
more risk averse and inclined to opt for proven alternatives over new technologies.
They significantly increase the costs of demonstration projects, which are generally
an essential phase in the innovation process, prior to commercialisation. They limit
the size of the market which is open to new technologies at any moment in time, and
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

22
thus the speed at which new lower carbon transport technologies can achieve
market penetration, even if other barriers can be overcome. They also increase the
challenges associated with raising capital or new finance to support the develop-
ment and demonstration of new lower carbon options.

14 The above factors contribute to a number of features which, in very broad terms,
seem to characterise existing innovation processes for lower carbon technologies in
a number of transport modes. One such factor is that timescales for the
development of new technologies in the transport sector are often long – with a
substantial timelag between investment in research & development and that
investment bearing fruit in commercial markets. For example, in the aviation sector,
which is particularly capital intensive, UK firms are still benefiting directly from
Government funded investment in wing aerodynamics and fundamental engine
technology made in the late 1950’s and 1960’s and which fed into the complete
range of Airbus and RB211/Trent engine families. The Society of British Aerospace
Companies (SBAC) estimates that, in the aviation sector, the timescale between
research and implementation of new products can often be as much as 20 years – as
shown in the diagram below4:

15 The long timescales between research and commercialisation which often apply in
the transport sector also significantly increase the commercial risks, for private
sector companies operating in competitive markets, of funding R,D&D activities.
Profits from research activities are distant, uncertain and may be captured by
competitors through knowledge transfer. While levels of private sector R&D in some
transport modes (notably the automotive and aviation sectors) are substantial, the
majority of this tends to be focussed on nearer market and incremental product
development as opposed to inevitably riskier further from market options. This
feature of relevant markets increases the case for financial contributions from the
public sector in support of longer term R,D&D activities which may deliver broader
4 Source SBAC (Society of British Aerospace Companies) 2006
LOW CARBON INNOVATION AND THE TRANSPORT SECTOR 3

23
public goods and bring currently more distant technologies closer to commercia-
lisation.

16 Thirdly, the capital intensity of projects – along with uncertain demand from
consumers – means that moving successfully from the demonstration phase to full
scale commercial roll out can be particularly challenging in the transport sector. This
phase of the innovation chain – sometimes known as the ‘‘valley of death’’ – is the
point at which costs and risks usually rise very substantially for technology
developers – and where investors and financiers typically seek firmer assurances
about the scale of their likely return. To some extent, in an efficient market, the
higher costs and risks of the demonstration phase should act to separate out the
most promising technology options from those with less potential. However broader
market failures, including uncertainties about the scale of potential markets for such
new technologies, or the degree to which they will be supported by carbon pricing or
other regulatory interventions, can act as a significant deterrent to further
development even for technology options with significant long term commercial
potential.

17 Considered in combination, the above factors would seem to place some quite
formidable barriers in the way of the development and deployment of lower carbon
transport technology options. This observation is supported by the available
evidence from the UK and other major industrialised countries. With few exceptions,
in most countries carbon emissions from the transport sector are rising, fossil fuel
based transport systems predominate and market penetration of lower carbon
technology options remains very limited.
Government position

18 We consider that the barriers to successful low carbon innovation in the transport
sector are considerable and do justify a broad spectrum of interventions by
Government. Subsequent sections of this strategy set out in detail a wide range of
actions that the Government is already taking in different transport modes, as well as
some significant new measures that we will develop following the publication of this
strategy.

19 In broad terms the Government’s approach to creating a stronger incentive
framework for lower carbon transport technologies will be fourfold:
& In dialogue with our EU and international trading partners, the Government will
continue to consider the application of a range of mechanisms which provide a
carbon price signal to all major transport modes which are significant emitters of
carbon. Our commitment to include aviation in future phases of the EU Emmisions
Trading Scheme (EU ETS) is an example of this.
& The Government will continue, on a case by case basis, to utilise and explore the
case for other market based or regulatory approaches to incentivising the
deployment of lower carbon transport technologies – including action at the EU or
domestic level.
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

24
& The Government will support research, development and demonstration
projects in a wide range of lower carbon transport technologies across all major
transport modes. Section 8 of this strategy discusses in detail the steps the
Government is taking to increase the level of support it provides for R,D&D in this
area, as well as measures aimed at bringing greater coherence and clarity to
existing and future activities.
& The Government will seek to provide consumers and other users and purchasers of
transport equipment or services with better information about the carbon impacts
of their choices and the lower carbon options available to them.
The Government believes that this approach represents a coherent overall frame-
work for guiding Government activity and policy making in this area. It is consistent
with the recent Stern Review conclusions on the steps Governments should take to
most effectively encourage the development and deployment of lower carbon
technologies in a wide range of sectors.

20 The approach however, will not be adopted in a prescriptive or formulaic way.
Decisions on carbon pricing or signals may need to be taken in conjunction with EU
and other international partners, and should also take account of any existing
regulatory or taxation frameworks. The timings at which carbon price signals are
introduced into different transport sectors may also be a relevant consideration – it
could for example be counterproductive to introduce a carbon price signal into one
sector if it encouraged modal shift of passengers or freight to another form of
transport which had higher carbon emissions but was not yet covered by any form of
carbon pricing regime.

21 Similarly, decisions on research, development & demonstration priorities for UK
funding within different transport modes should take account of a wide range of
considerations including the costs and carbon saving potential of different
technological options, the scope and extent of existing R,D&D activity undertaken by
the private sector and other countries, areas of UK academic and industrial strength
and so on. The levels of global R,D&D necessary to support a widespread
international transition to a much lower carbon transport sector are likely to be
substantial
 Expanding levels of R,D&D will require substantial contributions globally
from both the private and public sectors. It is not realistic for the UK Government or
UK companies to seek to establish a technology lead or competitive advantage in
every major low carbon transport technology area. Equally, the UK considers that it
should play its part in supporting relevant domestic and international R,D&D - not
least because the UK posseses many companies with a strong competitive position
in transport technologies and who stand to benefit if they can maintain leading
positions in future markets for lower carbon options.

22 In short, while the above approach represents the guiding principles by which the
Government will develop a stronger framework for stimulating lower carbon transport
5 The Stern Review noted that global levels of R&D into lower emission energy technologies have fallen significantly since 1980 and
recommended that this trend be reversed through a doubling of global levels of public energy R&D (see Chapter 16 of the Stern Review –
Accelerating Technological Innovation). Similarly the International Energy Agency’s Technology Perspectives 2006 Report also stated that
‘‘there is an acute need to stabilise declining budgets for energy-related R&D and then increase them...government funded R&D will remain
essential, especially for technologies that are not yet commercial’’
LOW CARBON INNOVATION AND THE TRANSPORT SECTOR 3

25
technology development, it is necessary to consider the specific circumstances and
existing policy measures which apply in different areas of the transport sector before
examining the case for additional measures or further Government interventions.
Subsequent sections of the strategy examine each of the major transport modes in
the UK.
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

26
Chapter 4
Low Carbon Technologies and the
Road Sector
Carbon emissions from the road sector

1 The road sector is the largest source of carbon emissions from transport in the UK.

2 In 2005 the road sector was responsible for carbon emissions of 
5MtC measured
by source. Passenger cars were responsible for the majority of those emissions, with
substantial contributions from heavy goods vehicles (HGV’s) and light duty vehicles
such as small commercial vans. The pie chart below shows the breakdown for the
major sources of emissions:

3 Overall, carbon emissions from road transport have been on a moderate upward
trend having risen from 
5 MtC in 
 Broadly speaking this reflects continued
growth of road transport within a growing economy.

4 However within the overall figures there are somewhat different trends. While carbon
emissions from HGV’s and light duty vehicles are continuing to rise, those from
passenger cars have been essentially stable over the past decade. The impact of
continued growth in total passenger kilometres travelled by car has been offset by
modest but steady progress in improvements in fuel efficiency.

27

5 The tailpipe carbon emissions of new cars purchased in the UK is on a slow gradual
downward trend, as shown in the graph below

New car average CO2 emissions

155160165170175180185190195
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006

Year Tailpipe CO2 (g/km)

6 This trend reflects a combination of increased penetration of diesels into the car
fleet, continued progress by the automobile industry in achieving incremental
improvements in fuel efficiency and the impacts of existing Government and EU
policies in this area. In the UK the average CO2 emissions from new cars sold in the
UK in 2006 was 
7g/km – a fall of around 
2% from the previous year. However,
figures on average fuel efficiency hide substantial variation in the tailpipe carbon
emissions from cars sold in the UK – with the most fuel efficient models achieving
CO2 emissions of a little over 100g/km while the least efficient may have emissions
of 250g/km or more

7 The graph below shows the distribution of new car sales by CO2 emissions for
2006 – as well as the current Vehicle Excise Duty (VED) band into which they
fall

1 Source: pre-2001 fuel efficiency estimates come from The Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT). Post-2001, estimates are
based on new car emissions data collected by the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA).
2 Source – DVLA
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

280
50,000
100,000
150,000
200,000
250,000
0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 225 250 275 300 325 350 375 400 425 450 475 500
CO2 (g/km)

Cars registered
A B CVED Band: GFED
It can be seen that the majority of new cars sold in the UK have emissions within the
range of 130–190g CO2/km, though there is also a long tail of cars with higher
emissions.3
Existing Government policies

8 The Government has in place a range of policies which impact on the development
of lower carbon technology options in the road sector. The major policies in this area
are set out below. Firstly, there are a number of relevant taxation measures:
& Road fuel duty encourages the purchase of more fuel efficient vehicles by
increasing the cost of petrol and diesel.
& Vehicle Excise Duty (VED), which is levied annually, is graduated according to CO2
emissions.
& Company Car tax rules have been reformed to provide significant incentives to
purchase lower CO2 vehicles
& Biofuels – bioethanol and biodiesel - enjoy preferential tax treatment relative to
gasoline and diesel, with a 20p/litre reduction in the duty levied until 2009/


9 In addition to taxation measures, the Government is also taking a range of other
actions at the domestic level:
& The Government is introducing a Renewable Transport Fuel Obligation (RTFO) to
incentivise the use of biofuels. The RTFO will be introduced in 2008/9 with the
Obligation level rising to 5% by 2010/
 The Government has indicated its
intention to raise the Obligation level above 5% subject to a range of cost,
standards and sustainability criteria being met.
3 Most studies suggest that the large majority (around 80%) of carbon dioxide emissions arise during the operational phase of a vehicle’s life
rather than during construction or disposal. The Government therefore considers that, while manufacture and disposal are important, focussing
on tailpipe carbon emissions from cars remains an appropriate method of examining and incentivising the market penetration of lower carbon
vehicles.
LOW CARBON TECHNOLOGIES AND THE ROAD SECTOR 4

29
& The Department for Transport (DfT) has a £5m per annum programme of support
for industry led low carbon vehicle R&D, as well as providing around £
5m per
annum of grants for the trialing and demonstration of infrastructure for alternative
fuels. Both of these programmes are currently managed by the Energy Savings
Trust (EST).
There is also significant relevant action at the European level. The EU has a voluntary
agreement with automotive manufacturer associations which aims to reduce the
average CO2 emissions of new cars to 140g/km by 2008/
 However, although
progress has been made in reducing average emissions of new cars (both in the UK
and across the EU) on current trends the 140g/km target is not likely to be achieved.

10 The EU also supports research and development into lower carbon vehicle
technologies within the wider Framework Programmes (FP) which support R&D
across the EU. FP7 will run from 2007-2013 and includes a significant transport work
programme, within which there will be significant support for lower carbon vehicle
research. FP funded projects must involve collaborations between organisations in
different member states
Key technologies for a lower carbon road sector

11 There are a range of different vehicle and fuel technologies with the potential to
reduce carbon emissions from the road sector. As part of the preparatory work for
the Energy Review the Government commissioned E4tech to assess the carbon
reduction potential of a range of technologies in the road transport sector. Their
report was published alongside the Energy Review.4 Box 1 provides short
summaries of some of the key future technologies in this area – further detail can be
found in the original E4tech report.

12 In developing the Low Carbon Transport Innovation Strategy the Government asked
E4tech to extend their original analysis to a second stage, and to examine how the
innovation system functions for some of the key technologies likely to be central to
carbon reduction in the road transport sector and to make broad recommendations
for policy options that could strengthen the functioning of that system in a UK
context. E4tech’s work takes account of the international nature of the automotive
and fuels industries, while providing a particular focus on UK actors, policies and
expertise.

13 E4tech’s second study A Review of the UK Innovation System for Low Carbon Road
Transport Technologies is being published alongside this strategy (and is available in
full at www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/scienceresearch/technology/). E4tech’s work brings out
the complexity of innovation systems for low carbon road transport technologies and
the many actors – from both the public and private sectors – who are involved. It
also highlights that technology categories such as biofuels and hybrids should be
seen as broad terms encompassing a range of different component technologies
which are often at widely differing stages of development.
4 The report is available at http://www.dti.gov.uk/files/file
pdf
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

30

14 That said, their conclusions point to a range of existing and closer to market
technologies that have, in combination, the potential to make significant contribu-
tions to carbon reduction in the relatively near term. These technologies include:
Box 1 –Potential future lower carbon vehicle technologies
Hybrid and Electric Vehicles
Hybrid vehicles can come in many varieties with different levels of cost and
complexity. Essentially a hybrid is a vehicle that combines electric power from an
on board battery with a standard internal combustion engine (ICE) running on
petrol, diesel or biofuels. A ‘‘mild hybrid’’ is one where the engine shuts down
when the vehicle is stationary, and where energy from braking is used to charge
up the battery, to be re-used later alongside the ICE in acceleration. These both
save energy and reduce carbon emissions. A ‘‘full hybrid’’ refers to a vehicle
which can run purely on stored electric energy for limited distances, without
burning any fuel. The car will run on electric power at low speeds where the
efficiency of the ICE is low, and on normal engine power at higher speeds where
efficiency is high, thereby maximising the overall efficiency of the car.
For existing hybrids the range of the electric-only mode is limited, while all the
energy ultimately comes from the petrol or diesel in the car. If a larger battery is
used and is charged from an external source then a vehicle could be used in
electric mode for longer distances. This is called a ‘‘plug-in hybrid’’ and could
be used for short-medium length journeys purely in electric mode, with longer
trips using the ICE and petrol or diesel fuel. Last is a purely-electric vehicle
which has a battery large enough to make all its trips in electric only mode and
does not use an ICE or liquid fuel. Existing electric only vehicles have limited
range due to the constraints of battery technology. The carbon emissions of a
plug-in hybrid or fully electric vehicle will of course depend on the sources of
electricity used to charge the battery.
Biofuels
Biofuels are liquid fuels derived from many different biological sources which at
present include sugar, wheat, corn, rapeseed, soy and palm oils. These
materials can be converted into liquid fuels, which can be blended with petrol
or diesel or used alone, or gaseous fuels such as biogas. When biofuels are
burned, they release into the atmosphere the carbon that they absorbed in the
growing process. In this way biofuels can be ‘‘carbon neutral’’ in that they
absorb and release the same carbon. However in practice the carbon benefit is
lower due to the energy used in the manufacture and transportation of the
biofuels. Different biofuels can have very different carbon impacts over the full
life cycle, though most offer significant advantages over petrol or diesel.
LOW CARBON TECHNOLOGIES AND THE ROAD SECTOR 4

31
In the future biofuels may come from a broader range of biomass sources
converted in a variety of ways. Such ‘‘second generation’’ biofuels could
include ‘‘lignocellulosic’’ biofuels which can use the woody plant matter from a
crop (including the tougher stems) as well as wood, waste and other materials
which widen the possible sources for fuel beyond food crops. In many cases,
through utilising waste materials or more of the crop, and through more
efficient processes, these future biofuels have the potential to achieve larger
carbon reductions over the life cycle than existing biofuels. Competition for
land use could also be reduced through use of these materials and through
growing woody crops on land unsuitable for food crops.
Hydrogen and Fuel Cells
Hydrogen can be used to provide energy for transport, through use in a fuel cell
vehicle or internal combustion engine. When hydrogen is used, there are zero
or very low emissions of air pollutants, with only water and heat as by-
products. However hydrogen must be produced using another form of energy.
Significant overall carbon savings from using hydrogen in transport can be
made only if hydrogen is produced using low carbon sources.
In a fuel cell vehicle the hydrogen is split, and combined with oxygen from the
air, to produce electricity to power the vehicle. The fuel cell, which is generally
combined with a battery to form a hybrid system, has the potential for high
efficiency, and so very low emissions from the system as a whole. However fuel
cell vehicles need significant cost reduction and performance improvement
before they can reach mass market. Advances in the storage of hydrogen in
vehicles, which can be in the form of compressed gas, liquid or within another
solid material, are also required.
& a range of technologies offering the scope for further incremental improvements in
the fuel efficiency of conventional petrol and diesel internal combustion engines
& a range of lightweight materials with the potential to reduce the weight of future
vehicles and thus improve fuel efficiency
& nearer market versions of hybrid vehicles.
& first generation biofuels (bioethanol made from sugar or starch crops, and biodiesel
made from oil crops and wastes) and potentially some of the most advanced
‘‘second generation’’ biofuels made from biomass wastes or a range of
lignocellulosic non-food crops.

15 In general, these technology options offer the potential for continued incremental
improvements in the fuel efficiency and carbon footprint of road vehicles, rather than
offering the promise of large scale de-carbonisation of the road transport sector.
That said, the combined scope for carbon savings offered by these technologies is
substantial.
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

32

16 Technology options which may become widely deployed over somewhat longer
timescales include:
& more advanced versions of hybrids, including ‘‘plug-in’’ hybrids in which the
battery is re-charged from the electricity grid
& fully electric vehicles (which may expand independently or evolve from plug-in
hybrids)
& a broad spectrum of 2nd generation biofuels, manufactured in a variety of ways and
from a wide range of biomass sources
& hydrogen fuelled vehicles, whether powered by an internal combustion engine or
more likely by a fuel cell.
The key attraction of these technologies is the possibility they offer of delivering very
substantial carbon reductions from road transport over the longer term – including
potentially achieving the almost total de-carbonisation of road transport - with
supplementary benefits for UK energy security and air quality. In general however
they are not yet ready to be applied to mass markets in the road transport sector,
either because costs are too high for large scale commercial deployment or further
technological progress is required to bring down costs and overcome performance
issues likely to be important to most consumers.

17 E4tech’s work suggests that for all technologies, clear and long term policy signals
supporting lower carbon road transport are needed to drive all stages of the
innovation cycle. This should include a recognition that a variety of technology
options are likely to be required in order to deliver large scale emissions reductions
across a broad range of vehicle types over time. Their work also suggests that there
are some important differences between the support needed for innovation in
technologies nearer and further from market, and thus some differences in the nature
of the policy responses that are most appropriate from Government. In particular,
E4tech suggest that, for nearer market technologies, the most effective intervention
from Governments would be a strengthening of policies supporting market
deployment of lower carbon vehicles. This may involve further regulatory or taxation
measures, as well as use of public procurement to help the creation of niche
markets. For riskier and further from market technologies, while deployment signals
remain important in providing a stimulus for technology development, there is in
addition a stronger case for Government providing targeted financial support for
industry and academic led, R,D&D projects.

18 The Government supports the broad conclusions of E4tech’s work. Going forward
our policies towards lower carbon road transport technologies will:
& seek to provide strengthened deployment signals which increase the prospects
that cost-effective carbon savings from existing and nearer term technologies are
realised in the UK
& provide targeted support for national and international R,D&D efforts to improve the
technological and commercial potential of lower carbon options in the road sector
LOW CARBON TECHNOLOGIES AND THE ROAD SECTOR 4

33
We now discuss in more detail the basis for this approach and the policies we are
developing to support it.
Securing cost-effective carbon savings from existing and closer to
market technologies

19 There are a range of strong arguments for placing a high priority on securing carbon
emissions savings in the road sector from the range of technologies which are either
available now or likely to be available in the near-term.

20 Firstly, considered in combination, the carbon savings potential of these technol-
ogies is substantial. As noted above, there is significant variation in carbon
emissions from existing vehicles on the market. This indicates that there is potential
to reduce carbon emissions from passenger vehicles simply through influencing
consumer behaviour and gradually accelerating purchasing decisions in favour of
lower carbon vehicles. This does not necessarily or always mean persuading
consumers to purchase smaller cars, as there is quite considerable variation in the
fuel efficiency of vehicles even when considering those within the same class or
approximate engine size – figures from the Society of Motor Manufacturers and
Traders (SMMT) suggest that a reduction of up to 30% in average fleet CO2
emissions could be achievable if every consumer chose the most fuel efficient
vehicle in its category


21 Moreover, over the next 10-15 years, E4tech’s and other work suggests continued
incremental improvements in fuel efficiency can be achieved by the automobile
industry through additional refinements, in-particular to petrol and to a lesser extent
diesel internal combustion engines. In combination, it is estimated that these
technologies could improve internal combustion engine fuel efficiency by of the order
of 15-20% compared with today’s levels by 
 Further improvements can also be
potentially achieved from a range of lightweight materials (for further detail see
sections 4 and 5 of E4tech’s report).

22 Continued evolution and market penetration of current hybrid technology, applied
both to petrol-electric and potentially in due course, diesel-electric vehicles, also has
the potential to provide additional carbon savings. The graph below, from UK
automotive engineering consultants Ricardo, indicates that hybrids could deliver of
the order of an additional 20% above improvements to the internal combustion
engine alone, though at higher powertrain cost
 The current position on hybrid
technology and its potential evolution is discussed in more detail in section 6 of
E4tech’s report.
5 http://smmtlib/findlay.co.uk/articles/sharedfolder/Publications/ACF22CC.pdf
6 Source: Ricardo – reproduced in the E4tech report section 

LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

34

23 Finally, near-term exploitation of biofuels has the potential to deliver further carbon
savings. For example, the Government estimate that achieving the Renewable
Transport Fuel Obligation (RTFO) target of 5% biofuels sales by volume by 2010
would save around 1MtC.

24 Improvements in vehicle technologies can lead to substantial carbon savings. At
present carbon emissions from passenger cars in the UK are around 19MtC. The
Government estimates that average fuel efficiency for the current passenger car fleet
(ie all passenger vehicles presently on the road, new and old) is around 180g/km
CO2, with the new car average for 2006 being 
7g/km.

25 The following chart illustrates the level of carbon savings from passenger cars we
might achieve in 2020 if, between now and then, we were able to reduce average
new car CO2 emissions to the levels indicated.

012345

135 120 113 104
Average new car fuel efficiency in 2020 (g CO2/km)

Carbon Saving (Mt C)

26 The above carbon savings are estimates and average new fuel efficiency levels are
illustrative only and do not represent Government targets
 The figures also take
7 More detail on this analysis can be found in the Energy White Paper Synthesis of Cost Benefit Analysis.
LOW CARBON TECHNOLOGIES AND THE ROAD SECTOR 4

35
account of a potential ‘‘re-bound effect’’ in which higher fuel efficiency lowers the
cost of driving compared to alternatives and thus leads to greater car usage and
increased total distances travelled by car. If this re-bound effect proved to be less
than assumed – either as a result of other government policies or other factors – then
total carbon savings would be higher than shown. Moreover, it should be noted that
the graphs above are illustrations for passenger cars only - many of the technology
options discussed above are also applicable, to a greater or lesser extent, to other
road vehicles such as light duty vehicles, Heavy Goods Vehicles (HGV’s) and Buses,
which in combination were responsible in 2005 for another 
4 MtC of emissions.
Thus the graph under-states the total carbon savings possible in the road sector
from greater market penetration of existing and nearer market technologies

27 There is little doubt that carbon savings of this scale are technologically achievable
taking account of the combined potential of existing and near market technologies.
The scale and achievability of the possible savings is however by no means the only
argument for placing a high priority on progress in this area. Other important
considerations are as follows:
& carbon savings in this area are likely to be among the lowest cost options which
can be delivered from technology in the transport sector over the next 10-20 years.
This is because the savings can be secured from technologies which are already
available or close to commercialisation. Nor are the carbon savings dependent on
the provision of new transport infrastructure, a lower carbon electricity mix, or
major technological breakthroughs which are uncertain.
& As other sections of this strategy make clear, the scope for new technology to
deliver very large scale carbon savings in the aviation, rail or shipping sectors is
probably quite limited in the near term, not least because the rate of capital stock
turnover and replacement in these sectors is much slower. Moreover, progress in
the road sector in the development and commercialisation of lower carbon
engines, lighter materials, hybrids and biofuels all has some potential for read
across to other transport modes over the medium and longer term.
& As E4tech’s work makes clear, technology development is a complex evolutionary
process and many nearer market lower carbon technologies are on the pathway to
further development of currently longer term options. For example, continued
development of hybrid technology may enhance the prospects of for plug-in
hybrids and fuel cell vehicles, just as progress with early biofuels will provide some
technical and commercial learning relevant to the development of future second
generation biofuel options. Similarly, improved internal combustion engine and
lightweighting technologies may benefit many future vehicle options. Continuing to
develop existing and nearer-market technology options will help, and is to some
degree a pre-requisite for, the successful development of longer term options (as
well as specific work on the longer term options themselves).
& E4tech’s report highlights that the R,D&D programmes of major international
automobile companies tend to be predominantly focused on nearer market
options. The automotive industry is therefore well placed to make a major
contribution to the commercialisation of technologies in this area.
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

36
& The UK has a range of internationally competitive companies with significant
capabilities in nearer market options. While there will always be some commercial
winners and losers from a changing regulatory environment, these companies
would be well placed to benefit from a stronger focus on reducing carbon
emissions from the road sector and from the large global markets for lower carbon
technologies likely to develop over coming decades.
& Continued fuel efficiency improvements in the car fleet would be likely to deliver
some additional benefits aside from carbon savings. Reduced fuel usage would
make the economy as a whole more insulated against potential negative impacts
from rising fuel costs and would improve energy security. Air quality benefits could
also be achieved over time


28 Greater utilisation of existing and close to market technologies for reducing carbon
emissions would however have some impacts on the cost of new vehicles. A study
by Ricardo Automotive Consultants for the DfT has provided estimates of the
relationship between the cost of fuel saving technology and efficiency improvements.
For passenger cars these are estimated as typically in the range of £300-£2,500 per
vehicle – depending on the scale of carbon reduction achieved
 However other
studies, such as a review for the European Commission by TNO, IEEP and LAT10
estimate significantly lower costs of fuel saving technologies. In addition, for many
consumers the additional purchase costs of lower carbon vehicles would be offset to
a significant degree, if not entirely, by reduced fuel costs over time.

29 Despite these considerations, it is by no means certain that all the existing and
nearer-market technologies which can deliver carbon reductions will be rolled out at
commercial scale across UK vehicle fleets. Recent research suggests carbon
emissions have not been high on the list of consumer concerns when buying a car

Limited market pull from consumers impacts on the range and kinds of vehicles
which automotive companies bring to market. Moreover, commencing product
development is high risk for manufacturers. As the technology and product
development process moves close to commercialisation costs rise substantially. And
while the scale of investment is considerable the prospects of return on that
investment remain uncertain. These high risks of new model development tend to
encourage manufacturers to favour incremental adjustments to existing models over
radical re-designs for improved fuel efficiency – there is a natural degree of risk
aversion in bringing new models or technologies to market. The fact that a new lower
carbon technology has been successfully demonstrated in a prototype model does
not necessarily mean that it will be rolled out at commercial scale.

30 Moving successfully from the demonstration to the commercial phase of technology
development is thus one of the most challenging elements of the innovation process.
Reducing risks at this stage can therefore help increase the rate at which new
technology options can be brought to market. E4tech suggest that Governments can
8 While, in the short term, increased dieselisation of the car fleet could have negative impacts on local air quality, new Euro emission standards
for diesel vehicles coming into force over the next decade will deliver further significant reductions in particulate and NOx emissions from
vehicles.
9 The Ricardo work can be found at http://www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/roads/environment/research/studyintocostsoffuelsavingte3845?version

10 http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/automotive/projects/report_co2_reduction.pdf
11 LowCVP ‘‘Car Buyer Research Report’’, March 
 http://www.lowcvp.org.uk/uploaded/documents/Consumer_research_-_final_

pdf
LOW CARBON TECHNOLOGIES AND THE ROAD SECTOR 4

37
play an important role in this area through interventions focussed on public procurement
and creation of niche markets for lower carbon vehicles. These interventions can be
effective as, by increasing the visibility and certainty of an early market for a new lower
carbon model – subject to the attainment of cost and performance criteria – they have
the potential to reduce the initial risks faced by companies when considering whether to
introduce a new technology to the marketplace.

31 Given the above considerations, the Government is committed to working at both
European and domestic level to develop new measures and policies aimed at
strengthening current and future demand for, and provision of, lower carbon vehicles.
European level actions

32 At the European level, the major existing policy has been a series of voluntary
agreements with automotive manufacturer associations. On 7 February of this year
the European Commission published it’s communication on CO2 emissions from
cars and light commercial vehicles. This communication, amongst other things, sets
out the Commission’s ideas for what should replace the current CO2 voluntary
agreements that expire in 2008/
 These agreements set targets for 2008/9 of 140g/
km (average new car tailpipe CO2 emissions).

33 The communication calls for the voluntary agreements to be replaced by a legislative
framework - a proposal will be delivered late 2007 or mid-
 It states that this
framework should have as its core target 120g/km by 
 Of this, 130g/km should
come from vehicle fuel efficiency, with another 10g/km coming from other measures
(for example, biofuels, fuel efficiency improvements in vans, better tyre pressure
monitoring, more efficient air conditioning systems etc).

34 The Government welcomes the Commission’s intention to bring forward a legislative
framework and supports a move to demanding mandatory fuel efficiency targets.
Subject to understanding how the targets will be implemented and subsequent
impact assessment, the Government is supportive of the Commission’s proposals.
However it is our view that the proposals should also set out a longer term strategy
for improving vehicle fuel efficiency. The Government announced in Budget 2007
that its longer term objective is that average new car emissions be reduced to 100
grammes of carbon dioxide per kilometre.

35 In addition, the Government will also work with the Commission and other
stakeholders on the range of more detailed regulatory issues relevant to the fuel
economy and carbon dioxide emissions of future vehicles. In particular the
Government broadly welcomes the Commission’s proposals to mandate a range of
detailed requirements or minimum standards for future passenger car and light
commercial vehicles – including compulsory fitting of tyre pressure monitoring
systems, compulsory use of gear shift indicators, maximum tyre rolling resistance
limits and minimum fuel efficiency requirements for vehicle air conditioning systems.
However before any final decisions are made further discussions will be necessary on
the appropriate way of doing this, with a full impact assessment. We will also work
with the Commission and EU member states on issues relating to the future evolution
of the standard test cycle for establishing a new vehicle’s CO2 emissions – in order to
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

38
ensure that the test cycle continues to accurately reflect the comparative emissions
performance of different vehicles and that it takes appropriate account of the evolution
over time of technologies supporting lower CO2 emissions from vehicles.

36 The Government will also seek to ensure that the development of new safety
measures and standards for new vehicles at EU and international level recognises
the potential impact on fuel economy and that, where significant conflicts occur,
these are considered alongside potential safety benefits. While, historically, new
safety measures have tended to increase the weight of new vehicles, in general the
Government expects that the anticipated trend towards ‘‘intelligent safety systems’’
in vehicles is unlikely to create significant conflicts with fuel economy objectives –
indeed there may be some synergies – eg systems which alert drivers to speed limits
could also assist in encouraging more fuel efficient driving.

37 Finally, with regard to European level measures the Government will, along with other
EU member states, continue to consider the feasibility and case for including surface
transport emissions within future phases of the EU ETS. The EU ETS is currently
being reviewed by the European Commission and the Government has been working
to encourage the Commission and other member states to consider the inclusion of
surface transport.
Domestic level actions

38 The Government is also continuing to act to strengthen relevant policies at the
domestic level:
& We are continuing to strengthen incentives to purchase lower carbon vehicles
through the graduated vehicle excise duty regime. In Budget 2007 we announced
reduced rates for low-carbon band B cars and increased rates for the most
polluting (band G) cars

& The Government will provide new funding of an initial £20m to support a new
programme aimed at accelerating the market penetration of lower carbon vehicles
and reducing the barriers faced by companies in moving from prototype
demonstrations of lower carbon technologies to full commercialisation. This
programme will provide financial support for public procurement of fleet scale
demonstrations of lower carbon vehicles (and where appropriate supporting
infrastructure). The programme will seek to build on the model of contractual
forward commitments in which commitments to purchase vehicles are linked to the
achievement of pre-determined cost and performance criteria. The Government
will consult on the detailed operation of this new programme later in 2007 – with a
view to supporting the first fleet procurements/demonstrations in 2008/

& To ensure that Government leads by example we have set a fleet average car
procurement target of 130g/km CO2 by 2010/11 for new cars purchased by
Government and used for administrative operations. We will keep the target under
review and look to extend the scope of this target following further analysis.
12 The lowest carbon (band A) vehicles are already exempt from VED. For further details on the most recent changes see paras 
77-
78 of
Budget 2007 - http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/media/73B/74/bud07_chapter7_
pdf
LOW CARBON TECHNOLOGIES AND THE ROAD SECTOR 4

39
& The Government has launched a new communications campaign – ‘‘Act on CO2’’ -
covering smarter driving and purchasing. This highlights to consumers that they
can contribute to tackling climate change without compromising on the type of car
they drive – both by purchasing a lower carbon vehicle within a given class and by
driving in a more fuel efficient way


39 In relation to biofuels and the development of the Renewable Transport Fuel
Obligation (RTFO), the Government also launched a consultation in February of this
year. This consultation covers both the detailed implementation of the RTFO over the
period 2008/9 to 2010/11 and issues relating to the future evolution of the RTFO after
its initial phase


40 The Government has made clear that it is committed to increasing the level of RTFO
beyond 5% after 2010/11, but only provided certain essential conditions are met – in
particular:
& Confidence that the biofuels will be produced in a sustainable way, so that they
deliver the maximum practicable carbon savings with the minimum practicable
adverse environmental impact.
& Certainty that the use of blends of biofuel higher than 5% will not lead to
mechanical problems, particularly for owners of older cars which were not
designed to run on such mixtures.
& Confidence that costs to consumers will be acceptable, both in terms of fuel prices
at the pump, and in terms of wider economic impacts, including for example the
impacts on food prices and other industries which make use of similar feedstocks.
The need to satisfy these conditions has been recognised in the agreement reached
at the March 2007 European Council that endorsed the introduction of a 10% by
energy content biofuels target by 
 The UK will continue to work closely with
Europe in developing these initiatives further. In particular we shall need to respond
to the Commission’s proposals for revising the Biofuels Directive and for
implementing the EU biofuel targets. The Government will also want to be satisfied
that expanded use of biofuels beyond the 5% level represents an effective use of our
biomass resources. Alternative uses of biomass (which can often deliver greater
carbon savings at lower cost than producing high quality transport fuel), include
using biomass as a substitute for fossil fuels in the generation of electricity and heat.
These issues are considered further in the Government’s Biomass Strategy which is
also being published alongside the Energy White Paper.

41 The Government believes that a combination of strengthened action at the EU and
domestic level has the potential to significantly accelerate improvements in average
new car fuel efficiency and carbon dioxide emissions from the vehicle fleet over the
next 10-15 years. We will continue to work with EU member states, the Commission,
and key international and domestic stakeholders to try and ensure that new
13 For further details on this communications campaign see http://www.dft.gov.uk/ActOnCO2/
14 Details of the consultation can be found at www.dft.gov.uk/consultations/open/draftrtfo/ The Government is also putting in place more detailed
fiscal incentives supporting the use of biofuels, including a duty differential for biogas and from 2008 reduced company car tax for vehicles
using E85 bioethanol. An enhanced capital allowance scheme to support the development of the most carbon efficient biofuels plants. Fo
further details see paras 
47-
54 of Budget 

LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

40
regulations and measures in this area are introduced in the most cost effective and
efficient manner as possible.
Light duty vehicles, HGV’s and Buses

42 While much of the discussion in this section has focussed on passenger cars, which
are the largest source of emissions from the road sector, most of the technologies
capable of reducing carbon emissions from cars are also, to a greater or lesser
extent, applicable to other road vehicles such as light duty vehicles, Heavy Goods
Vehicles (HGV’s) and Buses. Hybrid and fuel cell powered buses have already been
demonstrated in a range of urban environments as have lorries fuelled by biodiesel.
Certain niche vehicle applications may also be particularly suitable for lower carbon
options – for example fully electric delivery vans and trucks may be a viable option
for delivery patterns which allow for regular re-charging.

43 In addition to promoting carbon reduction through the application of new
technologies, the Department for Transport also plays a key role within the freight
and logistics sector in promoting more sustainable ways of distributing goods
around the country. The two basic methods used by the Department are the Mode
Shift Program (where we directly support the use of rail or water to transport goods
where practical) and the logistics Efficiency Programs. The aim of the Efficiency
Programs is to reduce the impact of road based logistics. It does this through
demonstration projects (such as the successful Safe and Fuel Efficient Driving
scheme (known as SAFED), research into logistics and through the promotion of
‘‘Freight Best Practice’’ to industry.

44 In relation to the bus sector, one of the most important sources of subsidy for buses
from central Government is Bus Service Operators Grant (BSOG) currently worth
around £400 million in England in 2006/
 Bus subsidy plays a crucial role in
supporting the provision of bus services, reducing fares and increasing bus
patronage, which in turn play an important economic, social and environmental role.
But it is also important to ensure that the government’s substantial investment in
buses remains as effective and well targeted as possible. BSOG payments are
currently linked to fuel consumed and therefore clearly poorly targeted on objectives
for patronage, punctuality and quality. Furthermore, by subsidising fuel consumption
BSOG does not fit well with our environmental objectives.

45 The Government’s white paper on bus policy Putting Passengers First published in
December 2006, noted there is potentially a case for refocusing bus subsidy, for
example to provide a more direct linkage between subsidy levels and our policy
goals. However, it would be important to understand fully the potential impact of any
reform to the subsidy regime before deciding whether to bring forward proposals.
The Department of Transport is considering these issues further with stakeholders,
including whether there is a good case for reforming bus subsidy to focus it more
closely on the Government’s priorities, such as congestion, the environment and
accessibility

15 Putting Passengers First is available at: http://www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/regional/buses/secputtingpassengersfirst/pdfputtingpassfirst
LOW CARBON TECHNOLOGIES AND THE ROAD SECTOR 4

41
Intelligent transport systems

46 The Government is also committed to the utilisation of new information and
communications technologies to improve traffic management and information for
travellers. Many Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) technologies are likely to deliver
their main benefits in reducing congestion and improving traffic flows – which can
potentially deliver additional benefits in terms of reduced emissions and improved
fuel consumption. The DfT has published an ITS strategy for the roads sector
 Nor
are ITS systems only applicable to road applications - advanced train safety
systems, better air traffic systems and electronic navigation for shipping can all
contribute to more efficient useage of transport networks. ITS systems can also be
used to provide information that helps people make better travel choices - and
therefore makes better use of transport and capacity. The DfT’s Transport Direct
internet system - a world first - enables travellers to plan door-to-door journeys
anywhere within Britain, using any mode of transport. Transport Direct already
provides information on the carbon emissions associated with car journeys and this
will be extended to other modes of public transport later this year.
Further from market and longer term technologies

47 While accelerated development of near-market technologies in the road sector has
the potential to deliver significant carbon savings, these options cannot by
themselves deliver the large scale de-carbonisation of the road and other transport
sectors which may be required if longer term domestic and international carbon
reduction objectives are to be met.

48 To deliver these larger carbon savings, a significant contribution from currently
further from market technologies such as second generation biofuels, hydrogen and
fuel cells, plug-in hybrids and electric vehicles would be required. In general these
technologies require significant cost reductions and/or technological progress to be
achieved before widespread commercialisation can be achieved.

49 Sections, 6, 7, and 8 of E4tech’s report, which consider in detail hybrid electric
vehicle technology, biofuels and hydrogen and fuel cells respectively, set out in detail
the current technology challenges faced by these options, the relevant UK actors
and policies and the current state of innovation. A brief discussion of the key
challenges for each technology area are set out here.

50 For future evolution of hybrids,’’plug-in’’ hybrids and electric vehicles the key
technological challenge is to develop, at acceptable cost to the consumer, battery
technology which will allow a much greater contribution and performance from the
battery in terms of engine power and vehicle range. Nickel-metal hydride is the
battery technology of choice in current commercial hybrids but is generally expected
to be replaced by lithium-ion batteries in future models from the end of this decade
onwards. Other new battery technology options may also be developed over time.

51 All-electric vehicles may be a viable option for consumers who require a car for short
urban journeys only but these vehicles do not yet possess the range, size or top
16 See http://www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/roads/network/policy/intelligenttransportsystemsi3907
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

42
speeds likely to make them attractive for the majority of consumers. Significant
battery advances would be required to allow electric vehicles to achieve mass
market commercialisation and many view the development of plug-in hybrids, which
can potentially combine the lower emissions of electric vehicles with improved range
and performance, as an alternative route to widespread use of electricity in vehicles.
However costs would need to be reduced significantly before the fuel saving benefits
of plug-in hybrids would become attractive for most consumers. Plug-in hybrid
development is now a feature of some of the major automotive companies research
and development activity.17

52 For second generation biofuels the key challenge is to improve the efficiency and
reduce the costs of a wide range of potential conversion routes for creating biofuels
from lignocellulosic and other organic matter – in order that they become more
competitive with existing biofuels chains and in time fossil fuel based alternatives as
well. A very wide range of routes for future biofuel production are potentially
available and a combination of basic and applied research, demonstration and
commercial support is required in order to bring forward these technologies. An
issue of particular importance for the future development of biofuels is to ensure that
those biofuels that provide additional carbon benefits are rewarded in future market
mechanisms and regulatory measures. The Government’s current consultation on
the future evolution of the Renewable Transport Fuel Obligation discusses in more
detail a range of options for rewarding biofuels on the basis of their life cycle carbon
emissions and sustainability performance.

53 Hydrogen and fuel cell technologies face a number of technical and cost challenges
before they can become commercially viable options for road or other transport
modes. Fundamental fuel cell stack performance is not yet able to deliver the
required mix of power density, lifetime, cold start and other properties at acceptable
cost. Even if the impact of scale economics is considered, fuel cells currently cost
significantly more than the long term cost targets necessary for volume manufacture
for mass markets. A mixture of basic, applied research and demonstration trials are
needed to explore technological options for performance improvement and cost
reduction. In addition, for both fuel cell vehicles and hydrogen powered internal
combustion engines, on board hydrogen storage does not yet provide an acceptable
range for most vehicles in conventional applications. Hydrogen storage requires
basic and applied research and development, depending upon the option under
investigation. Novel production methods for hydrogen are also worthy of further
research. More detailed consideration of the issues relating to the development of
hydrogen as a transport fuel are discussed in Section 8 and Appendix B of E4tech’s
report.
Carbon impacts of longer term options

54 The carbon impacts of advanced or second generation biofuels will depend on the
specific biofuel in question and any emissions associated with the cultivation of
crops and production of the fuels. However a key advantage of many second
17 For example at the North American International Auto Show in Detroit earlier this year, General Motors discussed plans to develop a plug-in
hybrid car, the Chevrolet Volt.
LOW CARBON TECHNOLOGIES AND THE ROAD SECTOR 4

43
generation biofuels is the potential they offer for lower carbon emissions over the life
cycle. The Government is working with the European Commission, EU member
states and other international bodies to develop verifiable and robust environmental
standards for biofuels.

55 For hydrogen or electricity based transport systems the level of carbon savings
would be dependent on the energy source used to make the hydrogen or generate
the electricity. For electric vehicles or plug-in hybrids, the level of carbon savings
would be linked to the electricity mix used to charge vehicle batteries. For hydrogen
systems the level of carbon savings will depend principally on the hydrogen
production method chosen. Analysis for DTI concluded that there are six distinct
hydrogen energy chains that could deliver cost competitive well to wheel CO2 benefit
for transport in the future – production from electrolysis of water using renewable or
nuclear electricity, from biomass, from natural gas or coal combined with carbon
capture and storage or from a range of novel technologies


56 Section 9 and Appendix C of E4tech’s report considers in more detail the potential
carbon emissions impacts of these different routes. This section highlights that
further de-carbonisation of the electricity generation mix would increase the scope
for a hydrogen or electricity based transport sector to offer very substantial carbon
savings. The electricity supply impacts of shifting energy demand for transport
towards the electricity sector, whether through use of electricity or hydrogen based
road transport, could also be substantial.
Infrastructure issues

57 It is also important to note in this context that a road transport system in which either
hydrogen powered or plug-in hybrid or fully electric vehicles predominated would
also be likely to require additional re-fuelling or re-charging infrastructure. New
infrastructure requirements for a hydrogen based transport system could be
particularly significant – though developments in different technological options for
producing, storing and transporting hydrogen could have significant implications for
the shape and scale of any future infrastructure in this area. Development of biofuels
is less likely to have major new infrastructural implications for the transport system.

58 The Department for Transport is supporting research work on hydrogen infra-
structure issues through the Horizons programme and will continue to assess the
case for additional research on infrastructure issues along with other stakeholders.
New refuelling or re-charging infrastructure may also be supported within wider
demonstration programmes supported via research programmes or procurement
activities. That said, continuing uncertainties around the nature and extent of the new
infrastructure which may be required to support lower carbon transport limit the
degree to which it is possible to plan for new infrastructure at this stage in the
technology development cycle.

59 More generally, the uncertain pace and nature of technology development in longer
term lower carbon transport technologies – as well as, in many cases, their
18 A Strategic Framework for Hydrogen Energy in the UK. Final report by Eoin Lees Energy, E4tech and Element Energy (2004). See http://
www.dti.gov.uk/files/file
pdf
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

44
dependence on lower carbon energy sources of electricity generation to deliver very
large scale carbon savings, has a number of potential implications for the
Government’s transport and energy policies. These issues are discussed in more
detail in sections 9 and 10 of this strategy.
Policy mix for further from market options

60 For further from market options E4tech’s work suggests that, while regulatory and
policy measures impacting on market deployment are extremely important in
signalling Government intentions and stimulating additional industrial R&D, they may
not be a sufficient driver on their own to deliver rapid and successful innovation.
Effective and integrated research, development and demonstration activities –
involving both academic and industrial entities, will also be required.

61 While much can and is being done by the private sector in this area, the costs and
risks inherent in further from market technology development are inevitably higher.
E4tech’s report suggests that the majority of automotive industry R&D is focussed,
as would be expected for commercial companies operating in a highly competitive
international environment – on nearer market product development activities.19 The
longer term commercial benefits of more distant technologies may be much harder
for individual companies or research groups to capture and there may be
competition for funding within global companies. For these reasons there is often
much more limited internal company investment funding available for the early
stages of new technology development and proofing - and such funding has to be
fought for against global competition for other development activities within global
companies. Government-supported R&D projects can therefore be an important
lever in accessing this optional company investment prior to the obligatory
investment companies must undertake in specific new model development.
Appropriate support can facilitate earlier qualification of technical approaches, and
subsequent ramp up of development investment, in those volume manufacturers
whose product development and design engineering decision making locus is in the
UK, while also encouraging innovation in the supply chain through niche vehicle
development and demonstration activity.

62 As is set out in the Stern Review and the Energy White Paper, Governments have a
clear role to play in supporting R,D&D activities across a broad range of lower
carbon transport technologies – including road transport options. The Government
considers that, while it is unfeasible for the UK to be the global market leader in all
lower carbon road transport technologies, there are strong reasons for supporting a
broad range of UK academic and industry led R,D&D in these areas. Not least of
these is the continuing strength and importance of the automotive sector in the UK.

63 There are more than 40 companies that manufacture vehicles in the UK. These
include seven global volume car makers, van, truck and bus builders and specialist
niche vehicle manufacturers. More than 2,600 UK based companies are active in the
automotive supply chain and engine and vehicle manufacture volumes are close to
19 These would include ensuring that a vehicle meets air quality, safety, and durability standards required by regulation and de-risking the
manufacturing and system integration processes to achieve the quality, reliability and cost standards demanded by the market.
LOW CARBON TECHNOLOGIES AND THE ROAD SECTOR 4

45
an all time high. The turnover of the UK automotive sector in 2005 was estimated at
£47 billion, contributing around £10bn of added value to the UK economy. The
sector is responsible for around 12% of total UK manufactured exports.

64 These figures emphasise the continuing significance to the UK economy of
maintaining a strong presence in the automotive sector. At a global level, the
automotive industry is almost certain to face increasing regulations and policies
impacting on fuel economy and carbon emissions, so technological expertise in
lower carbon options is likely to be increasingly important for UK automotive sector
competitiveness over time. In this respect the UK has a number of strengths on
which it can build – the UK is a worldwide centre of excellence for powertrain
development and possesses a number of world class low carbon vehicle and
powertrain design & development companies. Ford’s European centre of excellence
for internal combustion engine development at Dunton is the focus of much relevant
UK R&D and in the summer of 2006 Ford announced plans to spend £1 billion on
environmental engine developments, doubling its previous rate of spending. The UK
also has significant strengths in vehicle lightweighting, a pool of relevant engineering
skills from world leading motorsport and design engineering companies and a strong
academic research capability in relevant technologies such as combustion and
materials.

65 Sections 4-8 of E4tech’s report highlight in more detail the areas in which UK
companies and research groups are active in low carbon road transport technology
development. However the UK’s existing capabilities in lower carbon technology
development cannot be taken for granted and risk being eroded in the absence of
supportive regulatory and R&D environments.

66 Moreover, many of the UK’s major competitors are intensifying their R&D efforts in
these area. Japanese car manufacturers have been recognised as world leaders in a
number of fuel efficiency technologies including hybrids – and there is close co-
operation between the Japanese car industry and government on the development
of progressively more demanding fuel efficiency standards. In France a national
programme of activity also reflects their traditional strong links between government
and industry. This is exemplified by the recent and current support for hybrid
development. Nearer to market major demonstration project activity is financed via
the Agence de l’innovation industrielle (AII) that has invested 120mJ in projects such
as diesel hybrids (led by PSA) and stop-start hybrids (led by Valeo) and plans to
spend a further 250mJ over the next three years on similar project activity.
Germany’s national strategy aimed at promoting alternative fuels and innovative
propulsion technologies includes hybrids and synthetic biofuels as medium term
development priorities. The German Federal Government has also recently
announced a major programme of funding into hydrogen fuel cell vehicles over the
next decade.

67 The Government considers that, in order to maintain a competitive UK position in key
technologies, and to help accelerate the introduction of low carbon technologies into
the UK manufactured vehicle range, it is desirable that both UK academic and
industrial levels of R,D&D in these areas are expanded over time. Such an expansion
is also consistent with the conclusions of the Stern Review on the overall need to
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

46
expand global levels of R&D in lower carbon technology development – a process in
which the UK, as a major industrialised economy and member of the G8 – must play
its part.

68 Section 8 of this strategy discusses in more detail the existing support the
Government is providing for R,D&D activities in low carbon transport technology
development, and the steps we are taking to expand support levels over time.
However a number of key measures can be identified here.

69 Firstly,in conjunction with the Technology Strategy Board (TSB), DfT and the
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council will help finance and develop a
new Low Carbon Vehicle Innovation Platform providing critical coordination and up
to £30million of support from 2008/09 onwards. The Innovation Platform will bring
together key stakeholders in the UK automotive sector and provide new funding for
UK industry led demonstration and collaborative R&D projects – focussed on nearer
and further from market technologies where the UK has or can develop world leading
expertise. Assuming the Innovation Platform develops successfully we would expect
to extend the programme to run over a number of years.

70 Secondly, the Government is setting up the Energy Technologies Institute (ETI), a
joint venture partnership which brings together public & private sector R&D in the
UK, to set strategic direction and fund its delivery. The ETI will have a minimum
budget of around £600m over the next decade and will significantly expand the scale
of basic and applied R&D into lower carbon technology development taking place in
the UK.

71 The Institute will focus on a small number of specific industrially relevant R&D
projects, selected from within a framework of seven themes, which includes low
carbon transport technologies. Detailed research priorities for the ETI will be set by
the ETI Board on advice from the Research Advisory Group, and informed by work
such as the E4tech report. From 2008 onwards, The Department for Transport will
contribute £5m per annum of new money to ETI expenditure on lower carbon
transport technologies, and will work to ensure ETI’s funded research is co-ordinated
with national low carbon transport policy directions and other Government and
industry activities.

72 Thirdly, the Government has asked Professor Julia King, Vice-Chancellor of Aston
University and former Director of Advanced Engineering at Rolls Royce plc, working
with Sir Nicholas Stern, to lead a review to examine the vehicle and fuel technologies
which over the next 25 years could help to decarbonise road transport. This review
will feed into the work of the Energy Technologies Institute.

73 In these ways – along with UK participation in European and international research
projects, the Government aims to ensure that the UK automotive sector and
research base will maintain and develop its strong position in a range of technologies
likely to be critical to lower carbon transportation in future decades.
LOW CARBON TECHNOLOGIES AND THE ROAD SECTOR 4

47
Chapter 5
Low Carbon Technologies and the
Aviation Sector
Carbon emissions from the aviation sector

1 Globally, carbon dioxide emissions from aviation are responsible for around 
6% of
total greenhouse gas emissions
 In 2004 carbon dioxide emissions from UK
domestic aviation were estimated to be 
7 MtC and from international aviation

2MtC. Both of these figures are based on sales of aviation fuel (kerosene) in the
UK. The domestic figure represents all domestic flights while the international figure
is based on sales of fuel for international flights departing from the UK


2 However, aircraft are also responsible for other climate effects, for example, high-
altitude emissions of nitrogen oxides (NOx), which can lead to the production of
ozone, and for the formation of contrails – they are also believed to contribute to the
formation of cirrus clouds. While scientific knowledge in this area continues to evolve
and remains uncertain the total climate change impact of all aviation emissions is
presently estimated to be at least two (and possibly four) times greater than the
effects of carbon dioxide alone


3 The estimated additional climate impacts of aviation are not the only reason to take a
particular interest in emissions from this sector. A second reason is that emissions
from the aviation sector are forecast to grow significantly over time - the 2006 Future
of Air Transport White Paper Progress Report presented a range of scenarios for
growth of aviation demand. After accounting for future UK airport capacity restraints,
national air travel demand is forecast to grow under the central case from 228 million
passengers per annum in 2005 to 465 million passengers per annum in 
 Taking
account of both forecast growth in aviation demand, and the full climate impacts of
aviation, means that this sector could in future represent a significant proportion of
total UK greenhouse gas emissions – particularly if efforts to reduce emissions in
other sectors are more successful. The Air Transport White Paper (2003) estimated
that by 2030, air transport could amount to up to one quarter of the UK’s total
contribution to global warming. Finally, aviation is, at present, for the average
journey, one of the most carbon intensive forms of travel – both for passengers and
for freight.
1 Stern Review of the Economics of Climate Change – p.342
2 Only emissions from domestic flights are included in the emissions figures reported for Kyoto Protocol purposes, as there is no international
agreement on how to allocate emissions from international aviation.
3 For a summary of the scientific evidence on the full climate impacts of aviation see Aviation and the Global Atmosphere; A Special Report of
the Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change (1999) – http://www.grida.no/climate/ipcc/aviation/index.htm

48

4 These considerations all add particular relevance to the question of the potential of
new technology to reduce carbon dioxide and other climate related emissions from
the aviation sector in the future.
Government position on aviation’s climate impacts

5 In the 2003 Future of Air Transport White Paper and in the 2006 Progress Report on
that White Paper – we set out the Government’s approach to the future of aviation in
the UK and to the continued growth in demand for air travel
 Both of these
documents make clear that the Government considers that the regulatory frame-
works bearing on both domestic and international aviation should strike the right
balance between economic, social and environmental goals. The 2006 Progress
Report included a commitment to develop a new emissions cost assessment to
inform decisions on major increases in airport capacity.

6 Aviation is by its very nature an international industry and the Government believes
for action to be most effective in this area it should be taken at an international level.
Consequently, the Government’s preferred way of addressing the climate impacts of
aviation is through a well-designed emissions trading scheme. The UK is pursuing
emissions trading through the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO), but
until a truly global solution to this can be found, we are pressing for aviation to be
included in the existing EU emissions trading scheme (EU ETS).

7 The UK has taken a lead in arguing for the early introduction of aviation in the EU
ETS. In the last year much work has been done to progress the debate
internationally, and on 20 December 2006 the European Commission published its
legislative proposal to include aviation in the EU ETS. The proposal sets out a
phased approach to including aviation, with intra-EU flights covered from 1 January
2011 and all departing and arriving flights at EU airports being covered from 1
January 


8 The UK welcomed the publication of the Commission’s proposal and will continue to
lead the debate in Europe on aviation’s incorporation into the EU ETS with the aim of
ensuring a robust and environmentally efficient scheme is introduced as soon as
possible. Following the publication of the draft legislation we have begun negotiating
with other Member States to finalise the details of the legislation. To help inform our
negotiating position the Government launched a public consultation on 30 March
and we will continue to consult with industry and international partners as the
negotiations progress


9 That said, the Government has made clear that our focus on the EU ETS does not
preclude consideration of additional measures to ensure that aviation plays its part in
meeting the challenge of climate change. For example, regarding the anomalous
nature of aviation fuel tax exemptions, the UK continues to argue for change to the
current international agreements on this exemption and wherever possible we are
seeking to re-negotiate bilateral or multilateral aviation agreements to address this. It
has not yet been possible to reach a consensus within the ICAO on this matter.
4 For the 2003 White Paper and 2006 Progress Report see http://www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/strategy/whitepapers/air/
5 The consultation can be found at: http://www.dft.gov.uk/consultations/open/aviationemissionstrading/
LOW CARBON TECHNOLOGIES AND THE AVIAT ION SECTOR 5

49
Without international agreement on the issue, market and environmental distortions
could result, such as the carrying of extra fuel to avoid tax, which would lead to
increased emissions. The ICAO Assembly in 2007 will be the starting point for work
to help equip aviation with a structure and legal framework more reflective of today’s
world.

10 The Government has also taken action in this area at a domestic level. In December
of last year we announced that levels of Air Passenger Duty (APD) would be doubled
with effect from 1 February of this year. HM Treasury estimated in the pre-Budget
Report that these changes to APD could deliver carbon savings of around 
3 MtC a
year by 2010/


11 The paragraphs above make clear the Government’s commitment to addressing the
climate impacts of aviation through carbon pricing and related regulatory or fiscal
measures. The importance we attach to this approach arises from our view that,
through carbon price signals of this kind, the aviation industry will be appropriately
incentivised to pursue cost effective approaches to emissions reduction and to the
development of new technology to reduce emissions – or, where such measures
may not be cost effective – to purchase emissions reduction credits from other
sectors operating within the EU ETS. Below we discuss the operational and
technological options which are or may become available in time for reducing
emissions from the aviation sector.
Air-traffic management options for reducing emissions

12 There is some potential to reduce emissions from aviation through improved air
traffic management. Internationally, the largest gains in this area are likely to arise
from more direct routing of aeroplanes – at present there are a range of restrictions
and/or charges which apply to certain international aircraft flights and mean that
aeroplanes do not always take the most direct route to a destination. The Civil
Aviation Authority (CAA) leads for the UK on air traffic management issues, liaising
with relevant international organisations, and continues to work for international
agreements which will allow the most direct routes for flights.

13 There has been some progress in this area through international discussions such as
the Single European Sky initiative - this is a European Commission initiative that is
intended to change the future structure of air traffic control across Europe. The aim
is to use more efficient air traffic management that is more closely based on actual
flight patterns, rather than using the present arrangements, which are more closely
based on national boundaries.

14 Continuous Descent Approach (CDA) is primarily a noise mitigation measure but one
which also offers some carbon reduction benefits. It involves aircraft beginning their
descent from high altitude much earlier, leading to a slower and smoother approach
before landing. This earlier descent means that aircraft descend at a more efficient
speed, therefore reducing fuel burn. Compliance with CDA is already quite high at
6 Without taking account of the additional benefits of also reducing the non-carbon dioxide related climate impacts of aviation.
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

50
Heathrow (around 80%) and other UK airports where the approach is viable. There
is, however, further scope for CDA to be rolled out internationally.

15 In the long-term, potential new airspace management techniques could allow aircraft
to be routed to avoid climate-sensitive parts of the sky, where contrails would be
produced. However, this remains a complex area with many uncertainties, and
would not eliminate CO2 or NOx related effects.

16 Overall, the above measures and other more detailed operational changes to air
traffic management procedures have the potential to offer modest improvements to
the fuel economy of aviation - potentially reducing average carbon emissions on a
per passenger km basis by around 6-12% over the long term.
Improving the fuel economy of the current aviation fleet

17 New aircraft are more fuel efficient than existing older aeroplanes which are still in
operation. Aviation fuel (kerosene) remains a significant cost factor for the airline
industry and this has provided pre-existing incentives to improve efficiency - the
aviation industry claims that it has delivered around a 70% improvement in fuel
efficiency over the past 40 years. Improvement continues to this day with the newest
models developed by both Airbus (the A380) and Boeing (the 787) estimated to be
up to around 20% more fuel efficient per passenger km than the current typical
average. In the case of the 787 roughly one-third of this efficiency improvement will
come from the engines; another third from aerodynamic improvements and the
increased use of lighter weight composite materials; and the other third from
advanced systems. The most notable system advancement contributing to efficiency
is a ‘‘more electric architecture’’ which replaces bleed air and hydraulic power with
electrically powered compressors and pumps.

18 The accelerated introduction of more modern aircraft therefore has the potential to
quite significantly reduce carbon emissions per passenger kilometre flown. However
aircraft are very large, capital intensive investments and the current replacement rate
for aircraft is slow. High capital costs in the industry provide a strong business
incentive to extend the lifetime of existing fleets. Worldwide, around 60% of aircraft
are still in service 30 years later (though major UK and European airlines generally
have a higher turnover rate than average and will therefore have a somewhat
younger fleet).

19 The Government believes that the introduction of carbon pricing into the aviation
sector – eg through the inclusion of aviation in the EU ETS – would provide an
appropriate level of incentive for airlines to gradually accelerate their fleet
modernisation programmes – balancing this with the other competitive pressures
which they face.
Improving the fuel economy and emissions performance of future
aircraft

20 Further improvements in the fuel efficiency of aircraft can be expected beyond that
achieved by models presently operational or shortly to come to market. The Advisory
LOW CARBON TECHNOLOGIES AND THE AVIAT ION SECTOR 5

51
Council for Aeronautics Research in Europe (ACARE) has set a series of ambitious
goals for reducing the environmental impact of aviation. These include reducing
carbon dioxide emissions from new aircraft by 50% per passenger km (to be
achieved from a combination of more efficient aircraft and engines, operations and
air traffic management), reducing nitrous oxide (NOx) emissions by 80% and noise
by 50%, all by 2020 (relative to a 2000 base).

21 The International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) also sets emissions standards for
aeroplanes covering: smoke, unburned hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide (CO) and
oxides of nitrogen (NOx). The NOx standard was recently tightened by 15% effective
from 2008 for new engine designs. The UK continues to press for further tightening
to be agreed by ICAO in 


22 Reducing NOx emissions from aircraft is in many respects almost as important an
objective in climate change terms as reducing CO2, as, over a 50 year timescale,
NOx is as potent as CO2 in its greenhouse gas effects - due to its role in ozone
generation. Thereafter, CO2 has the dominant climate change effect. However there
can be difficult trade offs in this area as some measures to reduce NOx emissions
are likely to reduce the fuel efficiency of aero-engines, thus increasing CO2
emissions.

23 Within the UK and internationally, large scale Government and industry funding is
being provided to support the development of the next generation of aeroplanes.
Research & development into higher fuel economy and lower emission aircraft forms
a significant part of those research programmes. Aerospace research involves a
large number of public and private agencies, companies, national research
organisations and academia. It also requires sophisticated, complex and expensive
research infrastructure such as wind tunnels and test facilities.

24 As the possessor of the world’s largest aerospace industry outside the USA, the UK
has significant commercial interests in aviation and a strong incentive to maintain
competitive advantage in technologies which will deliver improved fuel economy and
emissions performance in aeroplanes. The UK aviation industry supports around
276,000 jobs and has a turnover of about £22bn per year (of which more than £15bn
are exports). The UK industry is also a very significant funder of R&D. Total
aerospace R&D in the UK alone in 2005 was around £
7bn (including UK
Government funding) – though a significant proportion (more than 50%) of this was
for defence purposes and, as with the automotive sector, the majority of expenditure
is focussed on nearer market activity as opposed to riskier or more speculative
research.

25 The graph below breaks down UK aerospace industry R&D expenditure by source
and between civil and defence related activities. Further from market research &
technology (R&T) activities are also separately highlighted – and totalled £
1m
(split evenly between civil and defence) in 
7
7 Source SBAC (Society of British Aerospace Companies) 
 R&T activities are defined as all those R&D activities which are not directly
attributable to product development. They can thus be regarded as generic technology development activities which are designed to maintain
or expand the technological base.
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

52

26 The UK aviation industry is also engaged in voluntary initiatives such as ’Sustainable
Aviation - A strategy towards sustainable development of UK aviation8, This has
been developed by all sectors of the UK commercial aviation industry as a long term
strategy to balance the needs of the environment with economic growth. It includes
adoption by UK industry of the ACARE goals for 2020 as well as establishing a
common system for the reporting of total CO2 emissions and fleet fuel efficiency.

27 In the UK, the National Aerospace Technology Strategy (NATS) is a partnership
between industry, Government and academia to address UK competitiveness in
aerospace technology. To pursue the NATS programme the aerospace industry bids
NATS projects into the DTI led Technology Programme for support. Through this
process the Government is currently providing around £45m per year for civil
research and technology demonstration activities via the Department of Trade &
Industry (DTI), and the Regions (the Regional Development Agencies (RDAs) in
England and the Devolved Administrations in Wales, Scotland & Northern Ireland) -
to be matched by a similar amount from industry. This compares to around £20m per
year available from DTI through the previous aviation sectoral research and
technology support scheme.

28 Many of the programmes in NATS have a direct bearing on environmental issues –
most notable amongst these are the Environmentally Friendly Engine (EFE)
Technology Validation Programme and the Integrated Wing Aerospace Technology
Validation Programme (IWATVP).

29 The EFE programme is supporting a range of research and development work into
aerodynamic and mechanical designs, novel high temperature materials, low
emissions combustion, advanced control systems and actuators – with the overall
aim of developing new aero-engines which progress towards the ACARE 2020 goals.
EFE will establish and operate two large validation platforms: a gas turbine core and
a wind tunnel nacelle/powerplant vehicle. The programme began last year and test
vehicles will first run in 
 Rolls-Royce is leading a consortium of five UK
aerospace companies (Goodrich, Bombardier Aerospace, Smiths Aerospace and HS
8 Further information on the Sustainable Aviation strategy can be found at www.sustainableaviation.co.uk
LOW CARBON TECHNOLOGIES AND THE AVIAT ION SECTOR 5

53
Marston) and six universities (Queens Belfast, Loughborough, Oxford, Cambridge,
Sheffield and Birmingham) with this 5 year, £95m project.

30 The Integrated Wing programme has the objective of developing key technologies
and, via the application of advanced methods, optimising their application at the
integrated-wing level. Due to the demanding targets set for sustainable aviation,
higher risk/high potential technologies are being considered for application across
the product life cycle. These include technologies focussed on wing optimisation,
flow control and noise reduction, new materials design and manufacturing and
advanced fuel and landing gear systems. Phase1 of this programme is a £34m
programme (with £17m from Government) in which there are a total of 17 industrial
and academic partners. The lead industrial partner is Airbus, with additional
participation from (amongst others) QinetiQ, Bombardier Aerospace, Ultra, Messier-
Dowty, BAE systems, GKN, Smiths Aerospace and Eaton.

31 In the second phase of the programme it is intended that the most promising
technologies for advanced integrated wing configuration will be selected for further
validation via a large scale physical platform – with the aim of assessing
performance, risk and cost/benefits against the ACARE targets


32 EU funding for relevant aeronautics research is also substantial. Under Framework
Programme Six eight major large Integrated Projects were launched. The major
project in the environmental area has been the ‘EEFAE’ (Efficient and environmentally
friendly aircraft engine) initiative – targeting reduced aircraft engine CO2 and NOx
emissions, improved reliability, lower ownership and life cycle costs and shorter time
to market. This comprised two major technology demonstration platforms ANTLE
(Advanced near-term low emissions) and CLEAN (Component validator for
environmentally friendly aero-engine), both launched in 


33 These projects involved all of Europe’s major aero-engine companies and received
more than J100 million in funding, half from the European Commission and the other
half from EEFAE’s 20 industrial, university and research partners. A key focus of
EEFAE projects has been to coax better combustion from an engine, which means
improving how it burns fuel and re-cycles its by-products of heat and emissions.
Another goal is to reduce the weight and size of engine-related components and
systems, such as gearboxes or the control system that regulates an engine’s rate of
combustion.

34 The ANTLE project has been lead by Rolls-Royce in the UK. Demonstrator testing at
maximum engine conditions at a facility, near Madrid, marked the culmination of the
project. The test results are now being analysed in detail. Technologies developed
and proven as part of this programme will set the foundation for new engine
programmes and may be used in the next generation of engines – with the potential
to provide a considerable step towards the ACARE environmental goals.

35 Through the next EU Framework Programme, FP7, which commences this year and
will run until 2013, further substantial funding of over J4 billion is available for
transport research with about half for collaborative research in aeronautics and air
9 For further information on the NATS programme see www.aeigt.co.uk
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

54
transport. The Commission is also proposing a ‘‘Clean Sky’’ Joint Technology
Initiative on more environmentally friendly aeroplane technology as a public private
partnership between the Commission and the industry with about J800m of EU
funding from the transport programme. ‘‘Clean Sky’’ is a large technology research
programme seeking step changes in the reduction of fuel consumption, emissions
and noise of future aircraft. Industry will invest an additional J850m representing
around 50% of the Clean Sky programme. The CEOs of the major European
Aeronautics companies (Airbus, Dassault Aviation, Eurocopter, Liebherr-Aerospace
Lindenberg, Rolls Royce Group, Safran and Thales) signed a Memorandum of
Understanding in October 2006 agreeing to work together to fund and deliver the
Clean Sky programme in addition to existing technology programmes. Clean Sky
aims to assess and validate a range of technological approaches with the potential
to deliver step changes in component, system and engine technologies, leading to
the earlier introduction of new, greener products that will accelerate the reduction of
emissions from aviation and increase the competitiveness of European industry.
Longer-term options for re-designing aircraft to optimise fuel
efficiency

36 Despite the very significant levels of funding for R&D into environmentally friendly
aero-engine development described above, the current view of many experts in this
area is that achieving in full the stated ACARE goals of a 50% carbon reduction per
passenger per kilometre (and an 80% reduction in NOx) remains extremely
challenging and may not be delivered solely through incremental evolution of current
technology approaches to aeroplane design and operation.

37 In order to achieve larger scale reductions in emissions, more radical aeroplane
designs may need to be considered. One such design is the ‘‘SAX-40’’. This design
was developed as part of the Silent Aircraft Initiative (SAI) – a £
3m three year
collaboration between Cambridge University, the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Boeing, Rolls-Royce and NASA – and was unveiled last year at the
Royal Aeronautical Society. The SAX-40 design, which was originally motivated
principally by the goal of substantial aircraft noise reduction – involves a ‘‘blended
wing’’ concept in which the fuselage and wings are blended together in a manner
comparable to that used in stealth military aircraft. Such designs are more
aerodynamic and produce less air drag over the body – it is estimated that the SAX-
40 design, which is at this stage only a computer based simulation – could deliver
fuel efficiency improvement of around 25% over today’s most efficient aircraft – and
with some further potential for reductions beyond that as the existing design was
developed as much with noise reduction in mind as reduced fuel consumption. The
graph below shows how the SAX team estimate the design would compare against
other aircraft and alternative modes of travel.10
10 Figure reproduced from http://silentaircraft.org/efficiency/. Note that the figures in the table compare fuel economy and do not take into
account non-CO2 related climate impacts of aviation. Further detail on the SAX-40 design can be found at http://silentaircraft.org/SAX40/
LOW CARBON TECHNOLOGIES AND THE AVIAT ION SECTOR 5

55

38 The SAX-40 is at this stage only a conceptual computer based design. Much further
work would be required to verify and test many of the proposed innovations within it.
However the broad approach may point the way for how future aircraft design needs
to evolve if a large step-change in fuel efficiency is to be achieved over the long
term.
The scope for powering aircraft from renewable or alternative fuels

39 In theory, renewable or other non-fossil fuel based alternative fuels could also
provide a potential route to significantly lower carbon emissions from aviation over
the long term – though it is widely considered that there are not any commercially
viable alternatives to kerosene-based fuels for jet aircraft in the near term.

40 In 2003, the Department for Trade & Industry commissioned Imperial College to
provide a report on the potential for renewable energy sources in aviation. The study
examined both the potential for biofuels and hydrogen based fuel chains for
aviation.11 It concluded that methanol, ethanol & biogas were unsuitable for
commercial jet aircraft but that hydrogen, biodiesel and FT kerosene (kerosene
manufactured from biomass sources through the Fischer-Tropsch process) all had
the technical potential to bring savings in the aviation sector’s use of fossil fuel
energy and emissions of greenhouse gases. However, all of these options would be
significantly more expensive to produce compared to the current costs of kerosene
though, in the long term, the costs of producing hydrogen and FT kerosene may
drop sufficiently for them to become more viable options.

41 Other relevant considerations in this area are that hydrogen fuelled aircraft would
require new engines and airframes and are unlikely to be seen for many decades.
Nor would aeroplanes fuelled by alternative fuels necessarily have a lower climate
impact in relation to those using conventional fuels because of the effects of water
vapour and NOx at high altitude. Moreover, due to a range of technical, safety and
other economic challenges, it is arguable that both renewably produced hydrogen
and biofuels would be used either in road transport or electricity generation in
11 ‘‘The Potential for Renewable Energy Sources in Aviation’’ http://www.iccept.ic.ac.uk/pdfs/PRESAV%20final%20report%2003Sep
pdf
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

56
preference to aviation. That said, the Imperial College study noted that the Fischer
Tropsch process for manufacturing biodiesel necessarily produces a minimum of 20-
30% kerosene so perhaps the most plausible medium-term route for the introduction
of renewable fuel into aviation is FT kerosene produced in conjuction with FT
biodiesel and blended with conventional kerosene. Virgin Atlantic, working in
conjunction with Boeing and General Electric, has recently announced plans to trial
the use of biofuel in a commercial aircraft in the near future.

42 In other developments in this area Boeing is working on developing fuel cells to
power aircraft air-conditioning and electrical systems – and is also working on a
prototype fuel cell powered light aircraft. However fuel cells are not presently
considered a viable option for large scale passenger aircraft.
Further work on more radical lower carbon options for aviation

43 The sections above highlight that, while they are at extremely early stages of
consideration, there are a number of potential options for achieving significant
reductions in the carbon footprint of aviation over the longer term. However these
options are at such a large distance from commercial viability that further research,
development & test trialing of them is very unlikely to be taken forward by the private
sector alone. Nor would inclusion of the aviation sector within carbon pricing
mechanisms such as the EU ETS provide sufficient incentives for this in the short—
medium term, though it may stimulate the sector to begin considering these options
more seriously within their longer term business plans.

44 Given the above, it will be important to ensure that UK and international public
funding is available for research and development work on longer term technological
options for lower carbon aviation. The Government believes that the forthcoming EU
‘‘Clean Sky’’ Joint Technology Initiative offers an attractive additional route for
supporting international collaborative work on some of the more promising
technological options and to deliver extra benefits compared with existing
mechanisms. We will work to ensure that the UK aviation industry is an active player
in and beneficiary of the Clean Sky programme.

45 The UK Government will also continue to support relevant domestic academic and
industry work in this area. One academic initiative, shortly to be launched, is OMEGA
(Opportunities for Meeting the Environmental Challenges of Growth in Aviation). The
OMEGA project is being supported by £5m of Government funding and is being led
by Manchester Metropolitan University while bringing together a wide range of
leading UK academic and industrial expertise in the environmental impacts of
aviation and opportunities for mitigation of those impacts. OMEGA will consider a
2050 time horizon and support a range of initial research projects focussed on long
term and more radical options for addressing the environmental impacts of aviation.
Drawing on the UK’s considerable academic and industrial expertise in a wide range
of aviation issues, OMEGA aims to place the UK at the forefront of both policy and
technological work in this area.
LOW CARBON TECHNOLOGIES AND THE AVIAT ION SECTOR 5

57
Conclusion

46 It is clear that technology innovation can play a significant role in carbon reduction in
the aviation sector. At the same time the Government recognises that, on current
trends, and in the short-medium term at least, carbon reductions achieved from
improved air traffic management and improved aeroplane efficiency are likely to be
outweighed by continued growth in the demand for aviation, leading to continued
overall growth in total carbon emissions from this sector. It is also likely that, even
with significant improvements in fuel economy, the full climate impacts of aviation
(when taking account of the additional impacts of emissions at altitude) will remain
significant compared to other transport modes. These considerations will continue to
be taken into account by the Government in developing its policies towards the
aviation sector, alongside consideration of aviation’s economic and social benefits.

47 This section of the LCTIS has also illustrated the significant steps the Government is
taking to address the environmental challenges posed by the rapid growth of
demand for aviation. We are taking the lead internationally to argue for the inclusion
of aviation within emissions trading schemes, while also acting domestically and
providing substantial support for relevant technology development. Whilst recog-
nising that the environmental impact of aviation is not simply from carbon, the
section has also highlighted the carbon reduction potential offered by a combination
of improved air traffic management and continued incremental improvements in the
fuel economy of new aircraft – as well as presenting the currently more distant
potential for larger scale carbon reduction offered by more radical approaches to the
design and fuelling of aircraft over the long term.
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

58
Chapter 6
Low Carbon Technologies and the
Rail Sector
Introduction

1 Rail is a relatively energy efficient means of transporting people and freight and, in
general terms, tends to have a lower environmental impact than other transport
modes. Part of this advantage is inherent given the low rail wheel to rail friction
offered by steel wheels running on steel track and the lower aerodynamic drag
caused by running train carriages coupled in convoy.

2 In overall UK terms, rail’s carbon emissions are relatively low with rail responsible for
less than 1% of total UK carbon emissions. Increasing numbers of passenger and
freight services combined with the introduction of newer, heavier and higher
performance trains has resulted in modest increases in rail carbon emissions over
the past decade. However, rail’s carbon efficiency – measured in terms of the
amount of carbon emitted per passenger or tonne transported – remains good. In
addition, the net impact of increasing rail activity on UK carbon emissions must take
account of modal shift ie: where passengers and goods travel by rail instead of road
or air. If strong modal shift can be demonstrated, then additional rail activity could
lead to a net reduction in UK carbon emissions.

3 However, it is clear to the Government that rail must improve its carbon efficiency in
order to maintain its environmental advantage over other modes and to reduce its
operating costs. The rail industry has also recognised the importance of improving its
environmental performance to its longer term success. The sections below discuss a
range of issues relevant to this.
Electrification

4 About 40% of the rail network is electrified. Carbon emissions from electric trains
therefore depend on the power generation mix. Electric trains are also zero emission
at point of use, which is of particular benefit for air quality in pollution ‘‘hot-spots’’
such as city centres. They can also offer improved passenger comfort through
reduced levels of passenger noise and vibration.

5 There are disadvantages with electric trains too. Significantly, they lack the go-
anywhere capability of diesels. From a carbon perspective the picture is complex but
at present electric trains generally offer a modest benefit over diesels. In future this

59
will depend on the evolution of the power generation mix and the efficiency
performance of diesel engines or their alternatives.

6 A key future decision for the railway, and for Government, is whether to increase - or
indeed decrease - the scope of the electrified network. A wide range of cost,
technical and environmental factors will influence this including the relative
anticipated carbon performance of different options over time. This issue will be
considered further in the Government’s long term rail strategy, to be published in the
summer.
Industry regulation: ORR’s sustainable development consultation

7 The Office of Rail Regulation recently consulted on how it discharges its duties
related to the environment and sustainable development. The ORR has recently
published its conclusions. These include commitments to:
& Ensure, by the end of 2007, that a set of key performance indicators are in place to
monitor the rail industry’s environmental performance.
& Review key aspects of industry incentives and processes to ensure that
sustainable development concerns are adequately taken into account. As part of
this revised environmental guidelines will be issued by the end of 

& Test Network Rail’s plans and the emerging conclusions of the periodic review from
a sustainability perspective

Rail franchise incentives

8 The Government will use the rail franchising process to encourage bidders to set out
clear plans and objectives for reducing carbon (and wider environmental) impacts of
their rail operations. This process has started already with bidders for the West
Midlands, East Midlands, Cross Country and Inter City Coast franchises being
required to set out plans for reducing environmental impacts.
Design of new rolling stock

9 Rolling stock has an operational life of around 30 years which is substantially longer
than that of typical cars, trucks and buses. Consequently, it takes a considerable
time for new environmental technologies to deliver benefits across the national fleet.
So, from an environmental perspective, getting the design of trains right at the outset
is important given how long they will be in operation. The increased weight of recent
train designs – which has a direct knock-on impact on fuel consumption (and on
track damage) – has demonstrated that too little emphasis has been placed on
environmental issues in the past.

10 The Department for Transport is currently leading the Inter City Express (IEP)
programme which sets out to deliver a best overall value solution for train
replacement and demand growth on key long distance routes. For both environ-
1 ORR’s conclusions can be accessed in full at www.rail-reg.gov.uk/upload/pdf/
pdf
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

60
mental and cost reasons, a key objective will be to ensure that the new high speed
train is as fuel efficient as possible. The DfT published the IEP OJEU notice on 8
March 2007 anticipating that the contract will be awarded in early 2009 for the
package to design, build, maintain and finance the IEP fleet. It is envisaged that
between 500 and 2000 vehicles will be supplied with full in-service deployment
taking place from 2014 onwards.

11 A related issue facing the project is ensuring the new train is sufficiently flexible to
adapt to future changes in power-source. For example, if fuel cells or bio-fuels
become sustainable, cost-effective options in the lifetime of the new train, then these
could replace, or be utilised within, the train’s diesel engine.
Regenerative braking

12 Regenerative braking is a way of slowing an electrically powered train by using the
motors as brakes. Instead of the surplus energy of the vehicle being wasted as
unwanted heat, the motors act as generators and return it as electricity into the
supply rail or overhead wire. Regenerated power can be re-used by trains within the
local substation area, provided that the service density is high, or fed back to the
regional supply company for wider redistribution through the grid. A further benefit is
reduced maintenance of mechanical braking systems.

13 The amount of energy saved through this type of system will depend on the type of
train operation. A frequent service of trains making stops at short intervals offers
opportunities to save 25% in energy consumption. Less dense services stopping
less often will save less. Currently, 60% of the electric train fleet is capable of
regeneration but only 20% uses this capability. However, significant progress is now
being made by Network Rail and train operators in enabling a wider range of rolling
stock to regenerate. All modern AC electric passenger trains that are capable of
regeneration will be doing so by the middle of 2007, followed shortly after by the
equivalent DC units.
Further technical and operational measures to reduce carbon
emissions

14 The rail industry increasingly recognises the importance of maintaining and
improving its environmental performance. It has started to monitor its performance
more closely and to investigate and introduce measures to reduce its carbon
footprint. A strong driver for this has been the increased energy costs faced by the
industry. The Government is committed to working with the rail industry to support
and facilitate the introduction of more energy efficient technologies and operational
practices.

15 During 2006, the rail industry undertook two important initiatives to improve
understanding of how trains use energy and identify opportunities for reducing
energy consumption. Firstly, the Association of Train Operating Companies,
Bombardier Transportation and National Express Group measured, in as much detail
as practicable, the energy consumption and resultant carbon dioxide emission of
three representative passenger train classes operating in Great Britain. And
LOW CARBON TECHNOLOGIES AND THE RAIL SECTOR 6

61
secondly, a research project managed by the Rail Safety and Standards Board
considered measures to improve the efficiency of traction energy. A further study is
underway to identify opportunities to reduce non-traction energy consumption eg:
stations, depots, signalling equipment.

16 As a result of this work, Government and industry now have a better understanding
of measures that could lead to significant reductions in energy consumption in the
shorter and longer term. The following table illustrates some of the more significant
opportunities:
Short to medium term opportunities Potential
saving
(MWh/year)
As percentage of
total traction energy
consumption
Switching off electric trains over night 350000 
4
Running shorter trains when extra capacity
not required 280000 
7
Improved driver training and more energy
efficient train management 225000 
2
Reduced idling of diesel trains 200000 
9
Reduced power consumption for heating
and cooling 176000 
7
More efficient and better managed lighting 79000 
8
Lighter train batteries 12750 
1
TOTAL 1322750 
7
Medium to long term opportunities
Potential
saving
(MWh/year)
As percentage of
traction energy
consumption
Hybrid diesel/battery trains 470000 
5
On-train energy storage 424000 
1
Shutting down diesel engines not in use 160000 
5
Weight reduction 85000 
8
Drag reduction - passenger and freight 94000 
9
Diesel fuel additives 50000 
5
Local power generation 48000 
5
TOTAL 1331000 
8

.

17 As shown above, one of the more significant longer term opportunities lies through
the potential benefits of hybrid train technology. Just like a Toyota Prius, a hybrid
train would use electric power to move the train at low speeds, with a diesel engine
cutting in to provide extra power at higher speeds. And when braking the train’s
kinetic energy would be converted into electrical energy to recharge the
batteries. This technology has already been demonstrated in Japan, and a
consortium of Hitachi, Brush Traction and Network Rail has announced a trial later
this year on one of the power cars of Network Rail’s New Measurement Train. The
Government intends to encourage the further development of this technology for
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

62
suburban diesel trains, where the benefits will be the greatest. A further
enhancement of this approach would be to enable the train to pick up power from
overhead or third rails where available.

18 There are further opportunities to reduce energy consumption and/or carbon
emissions including:
& Switching to a biodiesel blend. The industry is planning a series of test bed and
service trials to assess the technical risks involved in using a range of biodiesel
blends in existing diesel rolling stock and to evaluate more fully the environmental
benefits. Results are expected in summer 
 The Government announced in the
Pre-Budget Report in December 2006 that it would allow duty on biofuels used in
railway engines to be charged at a reduced rate of 
9ppl for the purposes of these
pilots. In the 2007 Budget the Government confirmed its intention to permanently
reduce the current duty rate for biofuel/rebated gas oil mixtures with the new rate to
be determined in the light of the outcome of the pilots and other factors.
& Optimising the rail network for energy efficiency. Reducing the number of
unnecessary stops between stations and providing better information to drivers on
appropriate speeds could deliver substantial carbon benefits as well as improving
performance and increasing the effective capacity of the network. Network Rail is
working with its industry partners to develop a scheme for application of this
technology, which will be even more effective when applied in combination with
precise train positioning using satellites.
& Using onboard electricity meters for all electric trains. Although having no direct
benefit, the ability to measure directly the effect of auxiliary power saving, driver
training, advisory speed and other traction energy schemes and to compare the
energy performance of trains for maintenance purposes has been estimated by
Scandinavian countries at around 7% of overall traction energy cost. The
Government intends to encourage the system wide deployment of onboard
metering. An initial trial is being developed with ATOC and a number of train
operators.
& Developing more sustainable stations and depots. New depots and stations offer
an opportunity to draw on best practice in sustainable building design, for example
by including rainwater harvesting, renewable electricity generation and high
standards of energy efficiency. A moderately large station development could also
use combined heat and power plants to provide electricity and heating for both the
station and any neighbouring retail facility.
& Hydrogen fuel cell technology. In the long term, fuel cells could offer significant
environmental benefits for the rail sector if a renewable supply of hydrogen can be
developed. However, as discussed in more detail in the road sector chapter, there
remain significant uncertainties as to when fuel cells will become a commercially
viable option. Nevertheless, progress is being made in overcoming the order of
magnitude reductions in cost and increases in cell life that are needed and although
switching to fuel cell technology would require a new refuelling infrastructure, this
would be less of a problem for rail, which has vastly fewer fuelling points than road.
The Government will continue to monitor developments closely and is encouraging
LOW CARBON TECHNOLOGIES AND THE RAIL SECTOR 6

63
the UK rail sector to participate actively in the forthcoming EC Framework
Programme 7 initiative.

19 The Government will consider carefully its potential role in supporting both shorter
and longer term measures. In some cases, for example where there is a clear
commercial benefit to implement an energy saving measure, there may be no
justification for Government funding or intervention. In others, however, particularly
those requiring cross-industry co-operation, where there is considerable perceived
risk or no direct commercial benefit, or further significant research, development and
demonstration work is required, there may be a case for additional funding or
sponsorship.

20 The Government’s long term rail strategy will be published in summer 2007 and will
set out a wide-ranging programme for reducing rail’s carbon and other environ-
mental impacts.
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

64
Chapter 7
Low Carbon Technologies and the
Shipping Sector
Emissions from shipping

1 Globally, shipping has been estimated to account for between 
8% and 
5% of global
carbon dioxide emissions.1 The most recent published figure for UK carbon emissions
in 2005 from domestic shipping – i.e. journeys from UK port to UK port – is 
1 MtC,
while the figure for UK carbon emissions from international shipping is 
6 MtC. Both of
these figures are based on sales of marine diesel bunker fuel in the UK.2

2 The Government recognises the UK figure for international shipping is likely to be an
understatement of the UK’s contribution to global carbon emissions from shipping.
This is because the method used to calculate the figure does not take account of the
way international shipping companies refuel. The UK, unlike some other countries
such as the Netherlands and Singapore, is not a major refuelling hub. Many ships
transit goods to and from the UK but refuel elsewhere as it is cheaper or more
convenient. Basing the figure for carbon emissions from UK shipping on sales of
bunker fuels in the UK will not include emissions from these ships.

3 Estimates of UK carbon emissions from commercial shipping based on calculating UK
GDP as a proportion of global GDP and relating that proportion to global sales of
bunker fuels gives a figure for 2004 of 5 MtC.3 Similarly, estimates based on the UK’s
share of global trade would seem to suggest a figure of 5–6 MtC. However these
estimates, while indicative, are very broad and may not be sufficiently accurate as a
method for allocating shipping emissions between countries. For these reasons the
Government believes further work must be done through international organisations
such as the International Maritime Organization (IMO) to secure international agreement
on the best approach for allocating carbon emissions from the shipping sector.

4 Other gases emitted by ships such as oxides of sulphur (SOx) and nitrous oxides
(NOx) can have climate impacts. Scientific understanding in this area is still evolving
and DfT is supporting relevant UK research led by Manchester Metropolitan
University.4
1 CE Delft (2007), Greenhouse Gas Emissions for Shipping and Implementation Guidance for the Marine Fuel Sulphur Directive (http://
ec.europa.eu/environment/air/pdf/transport/final_report.pdf, p. 187) - figures vary depending on the method used to calculate emissions.
2 As with aviation, only emissions from domestic shipping are included in the emissions figures reported for Kyoto Protocol purposes.
3 For example, Tyndall Centre (2006), Living within a carbon budget (http://www.foe.co.uk/resource/reports/living_carbon_budget.pdf , p. 18).
4 The recent CE Delft report for the European Union suggests that the overall effect of shipping emissions at present is probably to cool the
global average temperature, but the cooling is highly localised and may have other climate effects such as altering wind and precipitation
patterns. Moreover policies to reduce sulphur emissions from shipping are likely to reduce the cooling effects and the report suggests it is
probable that shipping will have a net warming effect on global average temperatures in the near future. CE Delft (2007), p.


65
Shipping’s contribution to the UK economy

5 Shipping is immensely important for trade, both in the UK and worldwide. Some 95%
of the UK’s international trade in goods travels by sea. A statistical survey of the UK
maritime sector in 2002 put the annual turnover of the sector at £37 billion, providing
over J million jobs directly (with a similar figure also in indirect employment). In
servicing world trade, the maritime sector makes an important contribution to the UK
economy, employing about 14,000 people, largely in London, and generating over £1
billion in overseas earnings. Foreign shipping communities represent a very
substantial customer base for UK maritime services and about one fifth of the world
fleet is controlled from London. The City of London is the world’s leading maritime
centre and home to a unique wealth of maritime expertise.
AEA/MAST report

6 Shipping is a very fuel efficient method of moving bulk freight, and is generally the
most low carbon method currently available for long distance movement of freight on
a per tonne basis. Shipping companies spend a large proportion of their operating
costs on fuel, providing a significant incentive for shipping companies to invest in
improving fuel economy. Though efficient compared to other modes shipping does
nonetheless contribute to global carbon emissions, and movement of goods by ships
continues to grow. For these reasons, while the shipping sector has not been a major
focus of emissions reduction policy or technology development so far, there remains
a strong case to consider technology options for reducing the carbon footprint of
shipping over time. The Government therefore commissioned AEA Energy &
Environment (AEA) and the School of Marine Science and Technology at Newcastle
University (MAST) to report on the future technological options for low carbon
commercial shipping and their long term economic viability. This report is being
published alongside this document (and can be found at www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/
scienceresearch/technology/). Below is a summary of its key findings.
Improved journey management and incremental changes to existing
shipping technology

7 There is some potential to reduce carbon emissions from shipping by reducing fuel
consumption through improved fleet management. Examples include better journey
planning, effective weather routing, minimising speed variation during journeys,
employing larger vessels and using shore-side electricity to power ships at berth in
ports.

8 Incremental changes to current technologies also have potential to reduce carbon
emissions. These changes can be grouped into two sets of techniques. The first
would aim to improve the movement of vessels through the water by methods such
as refining hull design, using ‘‘slick’’ hull coatings, modifying bow and stern design,
improving engine efficiency and aerating the water around the hull. The second set of
techniques would aim to improve energy conversion and transmission of power.
Examples include using new propeller designs, utilising heat recovered from ship
exhausts and switching away from heavy fuel oils.
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

66

9 The majority of these options are already commercially available or likely to be so in
the near future - indeed some are already being deployed by the industry, or are
likely to be utilised in the short term, as the benefits to be gained in reduced fuel
costs outweigh the expenditure necessary to introduce the changes. Other
technologies may become viable in the medium term if increases in the price of
marine diesel or the introduction of carbon pricing mechanisms to the shipping
sector make them more attractive.
Other technological options for improving the fuel economy and
emissions performance of future ships

10 The AEA and MAST report highlighted a range of other technological options for
improving the fuel economy and emissions performance of future ships. The options
varied in their potential to reduce carbon emissions and the timescales when they
were likely to become economically viable, and some of the options are not likely to
reach the market in the short to medium term.

11 One of the more promising technological options is biofuels. The shipping sector
would seem to offer several advantages for the use of biofuels for propulsion,
including the high sulphur content of marine diesel, the fact that marine engines are
more tolerant of different types of fuel than land-based engines. A number of trials
investigating the feasibility of running ships on biofuels have recently taken place,
and the results have so far been promising. This is encouraging as biofuels could
offer potentially large carbon savings, although life cycle impacts of biofuels
production need to be taken into account.5 The main barrier to biofuels replacing
marine diesel fuel is cost. There are also issues associated with the lower energy
density of biofuels which would necessitate bigger fuel tanks, their tendency to be
more corrosive than conventional fuels, their higher levels of engine deposits and
their long term availability.

12 Various technologies using renewable sources of energy also offer the potential for
carbon emissions reductions. For example, different companies around the world are
seeking to develop kites or skysails as a means to supplement the propulsions
systems of commercial shipping. The reductions in carbon emissions are potentially
considerable, but they depend on the average wind speed during the trip, the
direction of the wind, the route, seasonal weather variation and transit times. Other
options using renewable sources of energy include wave power and photovoltaic
cells. Wave power is an unproven technology, however, and both options face issues
of cost and durability as well as problems with installation.

13 Nuclear technology has long been used to power military submarines, and there
have been a small number of examples of commercial ships powered by nuclear
reactors. Nuclear ships could offer significant reductions in carbon emissions from
shipping. There are, however, significant barriers to the development and adoption of
this technology by the shipping sector including the high cost, necessary safety
precautions and worries over potential security risks. These factors suggest that
5 As with biofuels used in road transport, the Government would wish that any biofuels used in shipping were produced in a sustainable way and
represented a sensible use of biomass resources. See the Government’s Biomass Strategy for further discussion of these issues.
LOW CARBON TECHNOLOGIES AND THE SHIPPING SECTOR 7

67
nuclear power is unlikely to be a commercially attractive option for shipping in the
near future.

14 Hydrogen fuel cells face significant barriers before they can become a viable
technology for shipping and this technology is likely to become feasible in other
forms of transport before shipping. Existing challenges faced by developers of the
technology for automobile and other motive applications are likely to be
compounded by additional problems in the shipping sector, including issues of
power density, space, durability, temperature and cost. Some organisations are
conducting research into the potential of hydrogen fuel cells for shipping however,
including Rolls Royce who are investigating fuel cells in work sponsored by the
European Union.

15 Electric power is already being exploited by the shipping industry, especially for
powering auxiliary systems. Current technology does not offer the option of
powering large commercial vessels using electricity stored in batteries, and while
other ways of using electricity to power or propel ships are in development it is not
clear how effective these will be at reducing carbon emissions. As with other
technologies that use electricity, the carbon benefits would depend on the source of
the electricity or how the battery was charged.
Encouraging the adoption of low carbon technology in the shipping
sector

16 In order to stimulate interest in the development of more fuel efficient and lower
carbon ships, the Government considers that, over time, carbon pricing approaches
or related regulations should be extended to the shipping sector as well as other
modes of international transport. As with aviation, the shipping industry is an
international one and any approach to carbon pricing or other relevant regulations
needs to be developed at an international level to be effective. The UK Government
has already put a discussion paper to the IMO on emissions trading and the
possibilities of extending it to the shipping sector. Another option could be to
develop emissions standards for different ship categories, following on from work
done by the IMO, and progressively tighten these standards over time. The report by
CE Delft for the European Union mentioned above assesses various policy options
for reducing the climate impact of shipping


17 We will continue to work with the IMO and other relevant international organisations
to progress discussions on options for incentivising carbon emissions reductions in
the shipping sector – this will include consideration of the potential scope for
regional emissions trading schemes and other economic instruments. We will also
work within the EU Framework Programme and domestically to examine the case for
additional R,D&D into technologies for lower carbon shipping.
6 CE Delft (2007), pp. 207–

LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

68
Chapter 8
Government funding for Research,
Development & Demonstration of
low carbon transport technologies

1 There are currently a range of sources of existing and potential funding for research,
development and demonstration (R,D&D) into low carbon transport technologies.
This section discusses the main sources of existing and future support in this area.
Main existing funding sources
DfT funding for automotive industry led R,D&D

2 DfT currently spends £5million per year on a grants programme designed to support
UK based R,D&D into low carbon road vehicle technologies. Grants are awarded for
industry led activities at the research and pre-competitive development stages. This
programme is managed for Dft by the Energy Saving Trust (EST) – see http://
www.est.org.uk/fleet/funding/lowcarbonresearch/ for further information.

3 DfT, through EST, also provides grants for the trialing and demonstration of
infrastructure for alternative fuels and vehicles – including infrastructure for biofuels,
electric vehicles and hydrogen. Current grant funding for infrastructure projects is
around £
5m per annum.

4 Moving forward, DfT expenditure on low carbon vehicle R&D will be managed jointly
with DTI within a new Innovation Platform supporting low carbon technology
development in the UK automotive sector – see paragraph 
21 below.
Research Councils funding

5 The Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) is currently the
main funder of transport research in the UK, with in the region of £50-60million (per
annum) funding for all transport-related areas. A list of current grants can be found
by browsing the EPSRC ’Funded grants on the web’: http://gow.epsrc.ac.uk/ . The
Natural Environment Research Council (NERC), Economic and Social Research
Council (ESRC) and the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences (BBSRC) also
support some relevant research - as does the UK Energy Research Centre (UK ERC).

6 EPSRC is also leading the Research Councils’ Energy Programme, working with
BBSRC, CCLRC, ESRC and NERC. The Research Councils’ Energy programme
funds energy related research across a range of areas, including the UK Energy
Research Centre (UK ERC). Total Research Council expenditure on energy is being
increased to £70m per year by 2007-


69

7 The major programmes with transport related applications are the Supergen
Consortia on Bioenergy, Hydrogen and Fuel Cells. NERC, EPSRC and ESRC also
fund the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change that has research strands related to the
impact of transport on climate change. The Research Councils’ Energy Programme
is working with its Scientific Advisory Committee and other stakeholders to
determine future programme priorities. For further details on the Research Councils’
Energy programme activities see http://www.epsrc.ac.uk/ResearchFunding/
Programmes/Energy/default.htm
Regional Development Agencies (RDAs)

8 RDA’s can potentially support transport R,D&D work where it matches regional
priorities. In particular Advantage West Midlands (AWM) is supporting the Premium
Auto Research and Development (PARD) Programme, which is a £70m programme
set up to support the luxury automotive vehicle sector- reflecting the significant
automotive industry presence in this part of the UK. PARD consists of a portfolio of
research and development projects, aimed at enhancing the manufacturing and
design capabilities of West Midlands supplier companies. The programme is
supported by AWM, together with numerous partner companies targeted at being
over 160 by the end of the programme. Among these companies are the vehicle
manufacturers Land Rover and Jaguar, who form part of the Premier Automotive
Group in the Ford motor company. PARD supports a range of project areas relevant
to developing lower carbon vehicles, including work on hybrid vehicles and
lightweight materials. For further information on the PARD programme see http://
www.iarc.warwick.ac.uk/
DTI funding for Hydrogen & Fuel Cells

9 The hydrogen, fuel cell and carbon abatement technology demonstration fund was
launched last year. £15m of this fund has been allocated to technology
demonstration of fuel cell and hydrogen technologies. This funding is being allocated
through competitive calls and transport related applications will benefit from a share
of this funding although stationary (non-transport) power generation applications will
also benefit. For further information see http://www.hfccat-demo.org/
National Aerospace Technology Strategy (NATS)

10 The National Aerospace Technology Strategy (NATS) is the result of a partnership
between industry, Government and academia to address UK competitiveness in
aerospace technology. The aerospace industry bids NATS projects into the DTI led
Technology Programme for support. Through this process the Government is
providing around £45m per year of civil aviation development funding from the
Department of Trade & Industry (DTI), Regional Development Agencies (RDAs) and
the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) - to be matched
by a similar amount from industry. Many of the programmes in NATS have a direct
bearing on environmental issues – most notable amongst these are the
Environmentally Friendly Engine (EFE) Technology Validation Programme and the
Integrated Wing Aerospace Technology Validation Programme (IWATVP). For further
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

70
information on the NATS programme see http://www.sbac.co.uk/pages/

asp
EU Framework Programme Funding

11 The EU spends large sums on transport R,D&D – more than 4 billion Euros is
anticipated for Framework Programme 7 which will run from 2007-
 A significant
proportion of this funding is likely to be for low carbon related projects. The
Commission will also spend around 
3 billion Euros on energy research, some of
which will have relevance to reducing the carbon impacts of transport.

12 Framework Programme funded projects must involve collaborations between
organisations in different member states. Priority areas for research are agreed with
member states. Funds are awarded on the basis of competitive calls or through Joint
Technology Initiatives. European Research Area (ERA)-Net communities seek to
ensure co-ordination between national programme activities of member states.

13 EU funding for aeronautics research is particularly substantial. Through Framework
Programme 7 significant funding is available for collaborative research in aeronautics
and air transport and the Commission is proposing a ‘‘Clean Sky’’ Joint Technology
Initiative (JTI) on more environmentally friendly aeroplane technology (see para 
35
for further details)

14 The European Commission also intends to bring forward a proposal for a Fuel Cells
and Hydrogen JTI. This public-private partnership would focus on the demonstration
of fuel cell and hydrogen technologies for various types of transport applications
together with stationary power generation and combined heat and power. The JTI
would be expected to be operational by early 
 The UK is encouraging the
Commission to bring forward its proposals as soon as possible.

15 The UK Government actively encourages UK companies and research
organisations to participate in the EU R,D&D Framework Programmes. The UK has
been successful in securing a significant proportion of the available resources, at
around 15%. The Government seeks to maximise benefit in three main ways:
& we actively participates in the process for defining the programme at every level.
We are also represented on all the programme committees which approve the
workprogrammes, against which applicants bid for funds. The Government seeks
to ensure that the Framework Programme focuses as far as possible of UK
priorities and strengths.
& we participate in the various Technology Platforms (TP) set up by the Commission
to advise of future research needs in most sector including transport. The outputs
of the various TPs have been extensively used to inform the FP7 work programmes.
& we have set up an extensive network of National Contact Points whose role is
inform UK organisations of the opportunities available under the Framework
Programmes and to provide help and advice to potential applicants.
Further information on transport research within the EU Framework programme can
be found at: http://cordis.europa.eu/fp7/dc/
index.cfm?fuseaction5UserSite.CooperationDetailsCallPage&call_id

GOVERNMENT FUNDING FOR RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT & DEMONSTRATION OF
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT TECHNOLOGIES 8

71
Information on the National Contact Points can be found at http://
www.fp7uk.dti.gov.uk/
Future new funding sources

16 The Government has recognised the case for a significant expansion of the scale of
support for R,D&D activities in a range of low carbon technologies, including those
relevant to the transport sector. Especially relevant in this context are a number of
major new initiatives:
Energy Technologies Institute (ETI)

17 The ETI is a new initiative - a joint venture partnership which brings together public
and private sector R&D in the UK to set strategic direction and fund its delivery.
The objectives of the Energy Technologies Institute are to:
& increase the level of funding devoted to R&D in low-carbon (non-nuclear)
energy technologies to meet UK’s energy policy goals, both domestically and
internationally;
& deliver R&D that facilitates the rapid commercial deployment of cost effective, low
carbon technologies;
& provide better strategic focus for commercially applicable energy related R&D in
the UK;
& connect and manage networks of the best scientists and engineers both within the
UK and overseas to deliver focussed R&D projects to accelerate eventual
deployment; and
& build R&D capacity in the UK in the relevant technical disciplines to deliver the UK’s
energy policy goals.

18 The Institute starts work during 2007 and reaches full strength next year. Some of
the world’s biggest energy companies are already involved in this venture and
helping to drive the initiative forward. The ETI will have a minimum budget of around
£600m over the next decade.

19 The Institute will focus on specific industrially relevant R&D projects, including R&D
in support of demonstration and eventual deployment. The R&D will be carried out in
centres of excellence across the UK and overseas. Low carbon transport
technologies will be one of the seven key themes of the ETI. Detailed research
priorities for the ETI will be set by the ETI Board with advice from the Research
Advisory Group.

20 From 2008 onwards, The Department for Transport will contribute £5m per annum of
new money to ETI expenditure on lower carbon transport technologies, and will work
to ensure ETI funding fits with national low carbon transport policy directions and is
appropriately co-ordinated with other Government and industry research activities.
Further information on the ETI can be found at http://www.dti.gov.uk/science/
science-funding/eti/index.html
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

72
Innovation Platform

21 In conjunction with the Technology Strategy Board (TSB), DfT and EPSRC will help
finance and develop a new Low Carbon Vehicle Innovation Platform providing critical
coordination and up to £30million of support from 2008/09 onwards. Creation of the
IP is a recognition of the growing importance to the UK automotive sector of
maintaining and developing world class expertise in a range of technologies relevant
to the development of lower carbon vehicles. The Innovation Platform will bring
together key stakeholders in the UK automotive sector and provide new funding for
UK industry led demonstration and collaborative R&D projects – focussed on nearer
and further from market technologies where the UK has or can develop world leading
expertise. Assuming the Innovation Platform develops successfully the Government
intends to extend extending the programme to run over a number of years.
Public procurement support for small fleet demonstration programmes

22 The Government will provide new funding of an initial £20m to support a new
programme aimed at accelerating the market penetration of lower carbon vehicles
and reducing the barriers faced by companies in moving from prototype
demonstrations of lower carbon technologies to full commercialisation. This
programme will provide financial support for public procurement of fleet demon-
strations of lower carbon vehicles (and where appropriate supporting infrastructure).
The programme will seek to build on the model of contractual forward commitments
in which commitments to purchase vehicles are linked to the achievement of pre-
determined cost and performance criteria. It will be developed alongside the work
programme for the new Innovation Platform described above. The Government will
consult on the detailed operation of this new programme later in 2007 – with a view
to supporting the first fleet procurements/demonstrations in 

Environmental Transformation Fund – support for demonstration and
deployment activities

23 In June 2006, the Government announced the creation of a new joint Defra/DTI Fund
which will boost investment in demonstration and deployment of lower carbon
energy technologies and in energy efficiency. The Fund brings together DTI and
Defra’s work to support new energy technologies, and to promote the better use of
energy. It will complement the Energy Technologies Institute and other forms of
support.

24 The Fund is expected to invest in the demonstration, pre-commercial deployment,
and roll-out of low-carbon energy technologies, complementing the work of the
Energy Technologies Institute by supporting private sector investment in promising
technologies emerging from research and development.

25 The Environmental Transformation Fund will open in April 2008 and operate initially
over the three years to 2010/
 The size of the Fund over this period will be
determined through the Government’s Comprehensive Spending Review and is
expected to be announced later this year, together with more detailed objectives. In
order to provide a long-term framework for investment decisions, the Government
expects the Fund to continue beyond the current spending round.
GOVERNMENT FUNDING FOR RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT & DEMONSTRATION OF
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT TECHNOLOGIES 8

73
OMEGA

26 The OMEGA (Opportunities for Meeting the Environmental Challenges of Growth in
Aviation) project is being supported by £5m of Government funding and is being led
by Manchester Metropolitan University while bringing together a wide range of
leading UK academic and industrial expertise in the environmental impacts of
aviation and opportunities for mitigation of those impacts. OMEGA will consider a
2050 time horizon and support a range of initial research projects focussed on long
term and more radical options for addressing the environmental impacts of aviation.
Drawing on the UK’s considerable academic and industrial expertise in a wide range
of aviation issues, OMEGA aims to place the UK at the forefront of both policy and
technological work in this area.
Improving the coherence and co-ordination of R,D&D actitivies

27 The paragraphs above illustrate that existing funding for low carbon transport
technologies R,D&D comes from a range of diverse sources – and that new
additional sources of potential support for UK industry and academic research
groups are also becoming available. While diverse and growing funding streams
bring many benefits, in order to maximise the effectiveness and value for money of
Government supported activity in this area it will be important to ensure that:
& funding streams appropriately match Government priorities, UK industrial and
academic capabilities and that a range of key technology areas for lower carbon
transport are addressed
& duplication or un-necessary overlap of funding streams is avoided where possible
or appropriate
& un-intended gaps in funding streams or research areas are avoided
& potential beneficiaries of support in the relevant industrial and academic
communities have clarity about the different kinds of potential support available
and how to access them

28 To address these issues the Department for Transport will, working closely with DTI
and DEFRA, maintain an ongoing strategic oversight of R,D&D activities in this area
across all major transport modes. In particular through our participation in the ETI
and the Innovation Platform we will seek to:
& encourage the merging and simplification of funding streams where appropriate –
our decision to bring together future DfT and DTI support for UK low carbon vehicle
R&D through the Innovation Platform is an example of this approach in practise
& encourage the use of joint calls and wider co-ordination of funding approaches –
potentially bringing funding from a range of partners together to allow larger
projects or calls to be supported
& ensure that the balance of, and priorities for, funding, continue to match
Government’s transport and energy policies in this area over time – while
maintaining support for a diversity of technology options
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

74
& ensure detailed technology research priorities and project proposals are reviewed
and assessed by relevant industry and academic experts
& share and publish regularly up-dated information on R,D&D funding programmes,
open calls and other relevant developments.
& engage directly with industry and other key stakeholder groups in this area such as
the Low Carbon Vehicles Partnership, the National Non-Food Crops Centre and
Cenex – the UK centre of excellence for low carbon and fuel cell technologies – in
particular to identify areas where research, development and demonstration
activities can be most effectively deployed in the UK.
GOVERNMENT FUNDING FOR RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT & DEMONSTRATION OF
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT TECHNOLOGIES 8

75
Chapter 9
Potential importance of a low carbon
electricity mix

1 At present a fossil fuel, oil, in various derivative forms such as gasoline, diesel and
kerosene, provides the vast majority of energy for transportation – both in the UK
and globally. An efficient worldwide infrastructure of oil exploration, production,
refining and distribution has been built up over many decades to supply a growing
worldwide demand for oil for transportation use.

2 Previous sections of the LCTIS have illustrated that, for different transport modes,
there are a wide range of technologies with the potential to reduce carbon emissions
from the transport sector over time. However a feature of some of those options with
the potential to deliver very significant carbon savings over the long term is their
utilisation of electricity to provide new fuels or power for transportation.

3 Electricity can potentially be used for transport in a variety of ways:
& as currently, to provide power for the electrified parts of the rail network
& in future, to charge batteries in plug-in hybrids or fully electric vehicles
& in future, to manufacture hydrogen from the electrolysis of water. The hydrogen
may then be used as a transport fuel either in fuel cells or internal combustion
engines.

4 Electricity is an energy carrier rather than an energy source in itself. Significant
energy may also be consumed in the manufacture and transportation of hydrogen.
The scale of carbon savings offered by a future electricity or electricity/hydrogen
based transport system would therefore be dependent on the energy source used to
produce the electricity or hydrogen in question. Indeed in certain scenarios there
might be no carbon savings at all, although the existence of lower carbon options for
electricity and hydrogen generation, such as renewables, nuclear, natural gas (which,
while a fossil fuel, is much less carbon intensive than oil) and carbon capture and
storage, create the possibility of a future transportation system with very significantly
lower carbon emissions than today’s.

5 To illustrate these effects, as part of their report on innovation systems for low
carbon road transport technologies, the Government asked E4tech to conduct a very
short analysis of the scale of potential carbon savings – and additional electricity
demand - which would be implied if the UK’s existing passenger car fleet were
converted to vehicles using electricity or hydrogen – under a range of different
electricity grid mix scenarios. E4tech’s analysis is set out in Appendix 3 of their
report – a summary of the key points is provided below.

76

6 E4tech considered three electricity grid mix scenarios – one broadly equivalent to
today’s grid mix (Scenario A), one modestly de-carbonised compared to today
(Scenario B) and one with significant de-carbonisation (Scenario C). Alongside this
they considered four technology scenarios – all electric vehicles, plug-in-hybrids
(which were assumed to consume 50% of their energy in electric mode), hydrogen
produced from reformation of natural gas and hydrogen produced from electrolysis
of water.

7 The impact on carbon emissions from passenger vehicles under the different grid
mix scenarios is shown in the table below – assuming 2004 levels of demand:
The emissions that would result from use of a 50:50 mix of new gasoline and diesel
vehicles are also shown in the grey column on the right. For comparison, actual
carbon emissions from passenger cars in 2004 were 
4MtC.

8 A significant number of caveats should be placed on an analysis of this kind. Firstly,
this type of analysis is useful in comparing each technology option by assessing the
impacts of using that option alone – however it may be that greater benefits would
be achieved through use of a range of technology options. Secondly the options
considered are for passenger cars only – not all modes of road or other forms of
transport. They assume, for illustrative purposes only, that total distance travelled by
passenger car remains static at 2004 levels. Thirdly, the analysis relies on a range of
detailed assumptions around vehicle efficiency, technology performance, electricity
conversion efficiencies, losses and so on. In particular the vehicle efficiency data
assumes an improvement on today’s values for both hydrogen and electric vehicle
applications. Significant technology development which would be required for the
widespread commercialisation considered here, and even with this development, the
all electric vehicles modelled would not have the range necessary for widespread

use.

POTENTIAL IMPORTANCE OF A LOW CARBON ELECTRIC ITY MIX 9

77

9 Lastly, the emissions produced from the overall electricity grid mix are, in practice,
time-dependent. This is due to different demand levels at different times, and
different fuel costs resulting in the use of different power stations providing power. In
the future, as energy markets are likely to become more flexible, this time-sensitivity
may become greater and so steady-state analysis of the benefits of different options
may become less valuable

10 That said, an analysis of this kind can be considered indicative of the broad
emissions levels that would be likely under different scenarios. It suggests that all of
the technology options have the potential to give significantly lower carbon
emissions than new gasoline and diesel vehicles. This is important, as different
options may be needed for different applications, based on the vehicle range and
performance required, and may be available in different timeframes.

11 Based on today’s electricity mix, a transition to electric vehicles or plug-in hybrids
would have the potential to deliver significant carbon savings, which would increase
with further de-carbonisation of the grid mix. Plug-in hybrids offer the potential to
extend the electric vehicle range, albeit with lower emissions savings. Using
hydrogen produced from natural gas would also offer substantial carbon savings,
largely un-related to the grid mix (as the process uses only limited amounts of
electricity). However the carbon emissions associated with hydrogen production
from electrolysis are very substantially affected by the grid mix – with the current grid
mix levels this route would offer no carbon savings compared with new gasoline and
diesel vehicles, but with further de-carbonisation of the grid mix the carbon savings
would become substantial.

12 E4tech also considered the scale of additional electricity demand which would be
implied by the different technology scenarios outlined above. These are shown,
against a comparison of total electricity demand in 2005, in the graph below:
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

78
The graph suggests that the additional electricity that would be required to supply
2004 transport demand from passenger cars if electric vehicles were used could be
around 16% of current total electricity demand. For plug-in hybrids, this would
depend on the time spent in electric mode. Hydrogen produced from grid electricity
could lead to much higher additional electricity demand (over 30% of 2005 demand)
– as a result of the lower efficiency of the hydrogen supply chain (energy
transmission, electrolysis and hydrogen transport) compared with electricity
transmission and distribution, and the increased energy use of hydrogen vehicles
compared with battery electric ones.

13 While the impacts on total UK electricity demand from the above technology options
are significant, impacts on the requirement for additional generation capacity could
be less so. This is because re-charging of electric vehicles or plug-in hybrids, or
production of hydrogen by electrolysis, might take place principally at night when
electricity demand is lower. This could also potentially be used to help absorb any
surplus electricity from intermittent forms of renewable generation.

14 Again the caveats and uncertainties noted above should be applied to analysis of
this kind. That said, the analysis clearly indicates that moving in future to a transport
system based on electricity and/or hydrogen could have significant impacts on total
UK electricity demand under a range of scenarios. Maintaining efforts to improve the
fuel efficiency of vehicles may help to contain the scale of additional electricity
demand. But it is clear that, for such a transition to have large scale positive impacts
on UK carbon emissions, it would be essential for that additional electricity demand
to be met from lower carbon sources of electricity generation. The more ‘‘de-
carbonised’’ the electricity mix is, the greater the potential for substantial carbon
savings from these future transport technology options. This is an important
conclusion which reaffirms the importance of the steps the Government is taking to
support current and future forms of lower carbon electricity generation, as well as
greater energy efficiency in the utilisation of electricity – these are set out in more
detail in the Energy White Paper.
POTENTIAL IMPORTANCE OF A LOW CARBON ELECTRIC ITY MIX 9

79
Chapter 10
Uncertainty, technology development
and next steps

1 Various sections of this strategy have assessed the state of development of a wide
range of different technologies with the potential to reduce carbon emissions from
the transport sector. In doing so we have sought, in broad terms, to distinguish
between technologies which can contribute to emissions reduction at the present
time or could do so in the relatively near future, and those with longer term potential.

2 However, it must always be recognised that technology development and
deployment is an inherently uncertain process – especially over the longer
timescales which are relevant to issues such as carbon abatement and addressing
climate change. Technology development is not a linear process which can
guarantee the emergence of a particular option by a specific pre-determined date.
Historians could point to numerous occasions when new technologies have
surprised markets with the speed at which they have advanced and penetrated mass
markets – as well as occasions when advances in unexpected areas have upset
conventional wisdom about the technologies most likely to emerge. Equally, there
are examples of technologies which have failed to justify early optimism or to
achieve widespread commercialisation at the scale or speed which was once widely
envisaged.

3 These points are as relevant to lower carbon technology development within the
transport sector as they are to any major area of innovation and scientific
development. Considering the road sector, for example, even within the space of
several decades, views on the most promising future technologies have varied
widely. To this day, leading experts and automotive companies hold somewhat
differing positions on the potential of biofuels, plug-in hybrids, electric vehicles and
hydrogen fuel cells to displace gasoline or diesel and over the timescales at which
such technologies might contribute significantly to carbon reduction.

4 The inherently uncertain nature of technology development has a number of
implications for Government policy in this area. Firstly, in respect of policies which
impact directly on the commercial deployment of lower carbon technologies – for
example carbon pricing mechanisms or other regulatory or tax incentives – it
strengthens the case for Governments to develop or maintain a ‘‘technology neutral’’
approach to incentives which does not seek to predict or prescribe which
technology options are utilised by private individuals and companies. Technology
neutrality will remain a key issue for Government interventions focussed at the
market/deployment end of the innovation spectrum.

80

5 How technology neutrality may be applied in practise may differ depending on
specific circumstances but, broadly speaking, the objective would be to ensure that
technologies which deliver similar levels of carbon reduction in the marketplace
receive similar levels of incentivisation. In the case of the Renewable Transport Fuels
Obligation (RTFO) the issue of technology neutrality is more complex as similar
volumes of different biofuels may deliver very different quantities of carbon
reduction. For this reason the Government is consulting on options for adjusting the
RTFO in future to take stronger account of carbon emissions impacts of different
biofuels.

6 In relation to Government support for R,D&D activities the above considerations also
point to an approach which:
& seeks to maintain a broad spectrum of future technology options, through support
for a broad variety of R,D&D actvities and UK participation in international
collaborative activities.
& avoids placing full reliance on a single or limited number of technology solutions
& acknowledges the inherently risky nature of R,D&D – and therefore accepts that
some projects and technologies supported by Government will disappoint and fail
to be commercialised

7 At the same time, while adopting a technology neutral approach where appropriate,
and seeking to keep options open wherever possible, it must also be accepted that
Governments cannot afford to be entirely agnostic about the differing potential of
technologies to contribute to future carbon reduction. Future decisions on the
priorities for and direction of R,D&D funding, as well as on the funding of transport
infrastructure and investment, are examples of occasions on which Governments
may be forced to reach more definitive judgements about the potential of different
technologies to achieve carbon reduction over given timescales. Where this is the
case, the Government will seek to make those judgements on the best available
science and technology understanding available to it at the time – and to consult
widely with relevant industry and academic experts before settling on priorities.

8 In the case of the transport sector, uncertainty applies not only to the question of
which of a range of potential technologies may prove to be the most effective in the
longer term, but also to the question of the extent to which these technology options
as a whole will be capable of providing cost effective large scale lower carbon
alternatives to existing fossil fuel based modes of transportation, and over what
timescales. As various sections of this strategy have highlighted, many of the
technologies which could deliver very significantly lower or zero carbon transport are
not yet commercially available and require further technological progress and/or cost
reduction before they become widely deployed. Moreover, in some sectors such as
aviation and shipping, technology options capable of delivering very large scale cost
effective reductions in carbon emissions appear to be relatively limited at the present
time.

9 This aspect of technology uncertainty also has implications for policy development. It
strengthens the case for a balanced set of incentives which both exploit the
UNCERTAINTY, TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT AND NEXT STEPS 10

81
emissions reduction potential of technologies which are already proven or very close
to market, as well as encouraging the development of new technology solutions
which may or may not prove to be commercially viable. Similarly, technology
uncertainty argues for utilising a mix of policies for incentivising emissions reduction
in the transport sector – a mix which includes support for technology development
alongside a range of non-technology based measures aimed at influencing travel
behaviour towards more sustainable options - such as encouraging school,
workplace and individualised travel planning, supporting public transport, utilising
the potential of teleworking and other options.

10 The Government’s overall strategy for tackling carbon emissions from the transport
sector, as set out in section 3 of this strategy and in the transport chapter of the
Energy White Paper, aims to deliver this broad and balanced approach. It is clear
technology has a major role to play and we are committed to developing a policy
and regulatory environment which will enhance innovation and stimulate low carbon
transport technology development and deployment in the UK.
Next steps

11 This strategy has set out in detail a range of policies and new measures the
Government is taking to incentivise lower carbon transport technologies. There are
clearly many challenges ahead and we will continue to revise and refine our
approach in the light of new developments and research

12 In this context, and bearing in mind the importance of the road sector for transport
carbon emissions, the Government has asked Professor Julia King, Vice-Chancellor
of Aston University and former Director of Advanced Engineering at Rolls Royce plc,
working with Sir Nicholas Stern, to lead a review to examine the vehicle and fuel
technologies which over the next 25 years could help to decarbonise road transport.
This review will feed into the work of the Energy Technologies Institute and the
Government’s wider strategy for encouraging innovation in lower carbon transport
technologies.

13 More generally, we will continue to monitor technology developments in this area
closely, and will consult with key stakeholders on the implementation of the new
expenditure programmes set out in this strategy. While we are confident in our
approach, we do not rule out developing new policies or adjusting existing ones in
the light of new evidence or research on the best approach for supporting new
technology development in this area. This is consistent with our commitment to
make the UK an attractive place to develop the new transport technologies which
can help us move to a lower carbon future.
LOW CARBON TRANSPORT INNOVATION STRATEGY

82

