




Code for Sustainable Homes: Technical Guide. November 2010




Code for Sustainable Homes
Technical Guide
November 2010

www.communities.gov.uk9 7 8 1 8 5 9 4 6 3 3 1 4

ISBN 978-1-85946-331-4

The previous version was published under  
ISBN: 978 1 85946 330 7

Further copies available from:

RIBA Publishing

15 Bonhill Street

London

EC2P 2EA

Tel: 020 7256 7222

Fax: 020 7374 2737

Email: sales@ribabookshops.com

Website: www.ribabookshops.com

Price: £40 
ISBN: 978 1 85946 331 4

The Code for Sustainable Homes provides a comprehensive measure of the 
sustainability of new homes, ensuring that sustainable homes deliver real 
improvements, in key areas such as carbon dioxide emissions and water use. 

This Technical Guide sets out the requirements for the Code and the process for 
achieving a Code assessment. It aims to make gaining a Code assessment as simple, 
transparent and rigorous as possible. It also aims to inspire confidence in Code 
assessors, home builders, product manufacturers and consumers. 

This new full-colour 2010 edition follows a recent wide-ranging Government 
consultation that sought views on updating and streamlining the Code, to take 
account of changes to Part L of the Building Regulations, and to resolve some 
problems that had arisen during its use.


Code fo




r Su

stain


able Homes Technical Guide November 2010

Code for Sustainable Homes
Technical Guide
November 2010 

November 2010
Department for Communities and Local Government




Department for Communities and Local Government
Eland House
Bressenden Place
London
SW1E 5DU
Telephone: 0303 444 0000
Website: www.communities.gov.uk

© Crown Copyright, 2010

Copyright in the typographical arrangement rests with the Crown.

This publication, excluding logos, may be reproduced free of charge in any format or medium for research,  
private study or for internal circulation within an organisation. This is subject to it being reproduced accurately  
and not used in a misleading context. The material must be acknowledged as Crown copyright and the title of  
the publication specified.

E-mail: licensing@opsi.gov.uk

If you require this publication in an alternative format please email alternativeformats@communities.gsi.gov.uk

Communities and Local Government Publications
Tel: 0300 123 1124
Fax: 0300 123 1125
Email: product@communities.gsi.gov.uk
Online via: www.communities.gov.uk

November 2010 

ISBN 978 1 85946 331 4

Copyright in the contents, the cover, the design and the typographical arrangement rests with the Crown.

This document/publication is value added. If you wish to re-use this material, please email:  
psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk




Acknowledgements 
The Code for Sustainable Homes Technical Guidance has been drafted by the 
BREEAM Centre at the Building Research Establishment (BRE) under contract to the 
Department for Communities and Local Government.

Acknowledgements | 3




Contents

 Acknowledgements  3

 Preface 7

1  Purpose of the Technical Guide 9

 1.1 Summary of the assessment system  9

 1.2 Weightings, credits and percentage points 12

 1.3 Calculating an assessment score 15

 1.4  Total percentage points score and resulting Code level  16

2  Obtaining a Code rating – The Process 18

 2.1  Registering a site (before detailed designs are finished)  18

 2.2 Performing Code assessments  18

 2.3 Evidence Requirements 25

 2.4 Using the Schedule of Evidence Required  25

 2.5 Roles and Responsibilities 25

 2.6 Definitions of Terminology Used in the Evidence  
  Requirements Tables 26

 2.7 Assessment Routes 27

 2.8 Certifying Code for Sustainable Homes assessments 28

3 Keeping This Guide up to Date 29

Organisations delivering the Code for Sustainable Homes 30

Category 1: Energy and Carbon Dioxide Emissions 32

 Dwelling Emission Rate 32

 Fabric Energy Efficiency 40

 Energy Display Devices 46

 Drying Space  50

 Energy Labelled White Goods 54

 External Lighting 58

 Low and Zero Carbon Technologies 63

 Cycle Storage  72

 Home Office  77

Category 2: Water  82

 Indoor Water Use 82

 External Water Use 87

Contents | 5




6 | Code for Sustainable Homes

Category 3: Materials 92

 Environmental Impact of Materials 92

 Responsible Sourcing of Materials – Basic Building Elements 97

 Responsible Sourcing of Materials – Finishing Elements 113

Category 4: Surface Water Run-off 124

 Management of Surface Water Run-off from Developments 124

 Flood Risk  143

Category 5: Waste 150

 Storage of Non-recyclable Waste and Recyclable Household Waste 150

 Construction Site Waste Management 162

 Composting  169

Category 6: Pollution 175

 Global Warming Potential (GWP) of Insulants 175

 NOx Emissions  182

Category 7: Health & Well-being 192

 Daylighting  192

 Sound Insulation 199

 Private Space  204

 Lifetime Homes  208

Category 8: Management 213

 Home User Guide 213

 Considerate Constructors Scheme 219

 Construction Site Impacts 224

 Security   231

Category 9: Ecology  234

 Ecological Value of Site 234

 Ecological Enhancement 240

 Protection of Ecological Features 245

 Change in Ecological Value of Site 250

 Building Footprint 261

Annex 1: Acronyms 266

Annex 2: References 270

Annex 3: Sources of further information 283




Preface | 7

Preface
The Code for Sustainable Homes (the Code) is an environmental assessment method 
for rating and certifying the performance of new homes. It is a national standard 
for use in the design and construction of new homes with a view to encouraging 
continuous improvement in sustainable home building. It was launched in December 
2006 with the publication of Code for Sustainable Homes: A step-change in 
sustainable home building practice (Communities and Local Government, 2006) and 
became operational in April 2007. Where Building Regulations apply, compliance is 
necessary at all times.

The implementation of the Code is managed by BRE Global (formerly BRE 
Certification Ltd) under contract to Communities and Local Government under 
arrangements based on the EcoHomes© operating systems. BRE Global is the main 
licence holder. Under the terms of its agreement with Communities and Local 
Government, BRE Global issues licences to both assessors and other Code service 
providers. BRE Global provides training, licensing and registration of Code assessors 
to standards ISO 17024 and EN 45011, within a UKAS accredited ‘competent 
person’s certification scheme’.

Code service providers are licensed organisations offering all or part of the range 
of Code services, including assessor training; registration and monitoring; quality 
assurance of assessments; certification; investigation and resolution of complaints; 
and maintenance of records (BRE Global, 2007). At the time of publishing, Stroma 
Certification Ltd and Robust Details Limited are the other organisations licensed 
to provide Code services. Further information about Code service providers can be 
found at www.communities.gov.uk/thecode.

The Code for Sustainable Homes covers nine categories of sustainable design: 

• Energy and CO2 Emissions 

• Water 

• Materials 

• Surface Water Run-off 

• Waste 

• Pollution 

• Heath and Well-being 

• Management 

• Ecology.

Each category includes a number of environmental issues, see table 1.1. 

Each issue is a source of environmental impact which can be assessed against a 
performance target and awarded one or more credits. Performance targets are more 
demanding than the minimum standard needed to satisfy Building Regulations or 

http://www.communities.gov.uk/thecode




8 | Code for Sustainable Homes

other legislation. They represent good or best practice, are technically feasible, and 
can be delivered by the building industry.

In addition to meeting mandatory standards, achievement of the requirements in 
each design category scores a number of percentage points. This establishes the 
Code level or rating for the dwelling. The Code certificate illustrates the rating 
achieved with a row of stars. A blue star is awarded for each level achieved. Where 
an assessment has taken place and no rating is achieved, the certificate states that 
zero stars have been awarded.

Figure 1.1: Final Code Certificate

 Front  Back




Purpose of the Technical Guide | 9

1  Purpose of the Technical 
Guide

 The purpose of this technical guide is to enable Code service providers and 
licensed assessors to deliver environmental assessments of new dwellings 
on the basis of the Code scheme requirements. The guide includes a list 
of issues associated with the building process which are known to impact 
on the environment, and for which performance measures to reduce their 
impacts can be objectively assessed, evaluated and delivered in a practical 
and cost-effective way by the construction industry. Results of the Code 
assessment are recorded on a certificate assigned to the dwelling. The 
process of gaining a Code assessment rating and certificate is described 
in Section 2. The guide includes a comprehensive list of definitions and 
reference material for everyone involved in the process. The system of 
evaluating environmental performance in the Code is both transparent and 
open to scrutiny. A Technical Group consisting of industry representatives, 
sustainability specialists and Government representatives advise on the 
content of the guidance and any necessary updates. Significant future 
changes will be subject to consultation.

 This technical guide includes:

 Part One

• The Code for Sustainable Homes assessment procedure

• The scoring system.

 Part Two

• The environmental issues to be assessed 

• Performance requirements and their evaluation

• Evidence required to confirm performance evaluation

• Calculation algorithms, checklists and other tools used in the assessment 
method.

1.1 Summary of the assessment system 

 The Code for Sustainable Homes is an environmental assessment rating 
method for new homes which assesses environmental performance in a 
two-stage process (design stage and post construction stage) using objective 
criteria and verification. The results of the Code assessment are recorded on 
a certificate assigned to the dwelling. 




10 | Code for Sustainable Homes

 The report Code for Sustainable Homes: A step-change in sustainable home 
building practice (Communities and Local Government, 2006) defined a set 
of nine categories of environmental impact, see Table 1.1.

Table 1.1: Summary of Environmental Categories and Issues

Categories Issue

Energy and CO2 Emissions Dwelling emission rate (M) 

Fabric energy efficiency (M)

Energy display devices

Drying space

Energy labelled white goods

External lighting

Low and zero carbon technologies

Cycle storage

Home office

Water Indoor water use (M) 

External water use

Materials Environmental impact of materials (M)

Responsible sourcing of materials – basic building elements

Responsible sourcing of materials – finishing elements

Surface Water Run-off Management of surface water run-off from developments (M) 

Flood risk

Waste Storage of non-recyclable waste and recyclable household waste (M) 

Construction site waste management 

Composting

Pollution Global warming potential (GWP) of insulants

NOX emissions

Health and Well-being Daylighting 

Sound insulation 

Private space

Lifetime Homes (M)

Management Home user guide

Considerate Constructors Scheme

Construction site impacts

Security

Ecology Ecological value of site 

Ecological enhancement 

Protection of ecological features

Change in ecological value of site

Building footprint

(M) denotes issues with mandatory elements. 




Purpose of the Technical Guide | 11

 The Code assigns one or more performance requirements (assessment 
criteria) to all of the environmental issues. When each performance 
requirement is achieved, a credit is awarded (except the three mandatory 
requirements with no associated credits). The total number of credits 
available to a category is the sum of credits available for all the issues  
within it.

 Mandatory minimum performance standards are set for some issues. For 
three of these, a single mandatory requirement is set which must be met, 
whatever Code level rating is sought. Credits are not awarded for these 
issues. Confirmation that the performance requirements are met for all three 
is a minimum entry requirement for achieving a Level 1 rating. The three un-
credited issues are:

• Environmental impact of materials

• Management of surface water run-off from developments

• Storage of non-recyclable waste and recyclable household waste  

 If the mandatory minimum performance standard is met for the three  
un-credited issues, four further mandatory issues need to be considered. 
These are agreed to be such important issues that separate Government 
policies are being pursued to mitigate their effects. For two of these, credits 
are awarded for increasing levels of achievement recognised within the 
Code. 

 The two issues with increasing mandatory minimum standards are:

• Dwelling emission rate

• Indoor water use. 

 The final two issues with mandatory requirements are Fabric Energy 
Efficiency and Lifetime Homes. To achieve an overall Code rating of level 5 it 
is necessary to achieve at lease 7 credits in Ene 2. To achieve an overall Code 
rating of level 6 it is necessary to achieve at least 7 credits in Ene 2 and 3 
credits in Hea 4 – Lifetime Homes.

 Tables 1.2 and 1.3 below illustrate how, for the creditable mandatory issues, 
the minimum mandatory standards increase with increasing rating levels. For 
CO2 emissions there are increased mandatory minimum standards for each 
increase in Code level. 




12 | Code for Sustainable Homes

Table 1.2: Code Levels for Mandatory Minimum Standards in CO2 Emissions (Ene 1)

Code Level Minimum Percentage Improvement in Dwelling Emission Rate over 
Target Emission Rate 

Level 1 (H)

Level 2 (HH)

Level 3 (HHH)

Level 4 (HHHH)

Level 5 (HHHHH)

Level 6 (HHHHHH)

0% (Compliance with Part L 2010 only is required)

0% (Compliance with Part L 2010 only is required)

0% (Compliance with Part L 2010 only is required)


25%




100%


Net Zero C02 Emissions

 For indoor water use there are increased mandatory standards at Code 
Levels 1, 3 and 5. 

Table 1.3: Code Levels for Mandatory Maximum Standards in Indoor Water Consumption

Code Level Maximum Indoor Water Consumption in Litres per Person per Day

Level 1 (H)

Level 2 (HH)

Level 3 (HHH)

Level 4 (HHHH)

Level 5 (HHHHH)

Level 6 (HHHHHH)


120120105105 80 80


 Further credits are available on a free-choice or tradable basis from other 
issues so that the developer may choose how to add performance credits 
(converted through weighting to percentage points) to achieve the rating for 
which they are aiming.

 The environmental impact categories within the Code are not of equal 
importance. Their relative value is conveyed by applying a consensus-based 
environmental weighting factor (see details below) to the sum of all the 
raw credit scores in a category, resulting in a score expressed as percentage 
points. The points for each category add up to 100, see table 1.4. 

1.2 Weightings, credits and percentage points

 Table 1.4 shows how weightings are applied across all Code categories of 
environmental impact to adjust the relative values of credits within different 
categories. Within each category, credits are awarded for achieving specified 
degrees of performance. The weighting factors show the contribution made 
by each category to the total performance recognised and rewarded by the 
Code. The total available contribution is expressed as 100 per cent. The 
weighting of each category is expressed as a fraction of this, such that the 
sum of all the category contributions equals 100 per cent. 




Purpose of the Technical Guide | 13

 As an example, the 31 credits available for energy and CO2 emissions 
contribute 36.4 per cent of the total available performance. Similarly, the 
four credits available for pollution contribute 2.8 per cent of the total 
available performance. By dividing the weighting factor by the number of 
credits for each category, we arrive at an approximate weighted value for 
each credit. For instance, within the energy and CO2 emissions category, 
36.4 per cent contribution to the total, divided by the 31 credits available, 
means that each credit in this category is worth roughly 1.17 percentage 
points. Similarly, for the Pollution category, 2.8 per cent contribution to the 
total, divided by the four credits available, means that each credit in this 
category is worth roughly 0.70 percentage points.

 It is important to note that weightings apply at the category level and not to 
individual credits to avoid rounding errors. For instance, for the Energy and 
CO2 Emissions category, 36.4 per cent weighted contribution divided by 31 
credits equals 1.1741935 expressed to seven decimal places, but 1.17 when 
expressed to two decimal places.

 It is also important to note that achieving high performance in one 
category of environmental impact can sometimes result in a lower level of 
performance for another. For instance, if biomass is used to meet heating 
demand, credits will be available for performance in respect of energy 
supplied from a renewable source, but credits cannot be awarded for low 
NOX emissions. It is therefore impossible to achieve a total percentage points 
score of 100. 

Table 1.4: Total Credits Available, Weighting Factors and Points

Categories of 
Environmental Impact

Total Credits in 
each Category

Weighting Factor  
(% points contribution)

Approximate Weighted 
Value of each Credit

Category 1
Energy and CO2 Emissions

31  36.4% 1.17

Category 2 
Water

 6   9.0% 1.50

Category 3
Materials

24   7.2% 0.30

Category 4
Surface Water Run-off

 4   2.2% 0.55

Category 5 
Waste

 8   6.4% 0.80

Category 6
Pollution

 4   2.8% 0.70

Category 7
Health and Well-being

12  14.0% 1.17

Category 8
Management

 9  10.0% 1.11

Category 9
Ecology

 9  12.0% 1.33

Total – 100.0% –




14 | Code for Sustainable Homes

 Table 1.5 summarises the environmental impact categories, issues, credits 
and weighting factors.

Table 1.5: Summary of Environmental Impact Categories, Issues, Credits and Weighting

Code Categories Available 
Credits

Category  
Weighting Factor

Energy and CO2 Emissions

Dwelling emission rate  10

Fabric energy efficiency   9

Energy display devices   2

Drying space   1

Energy labelled white goods   2

External lighting   2

Low and zero carbon technologies   2

Cycle storage   2 

Home office   1

Category Total  31  36.40

Water

Indoor water use   5

External water use   1

Category Total   6   9.00

Materials

Environmental impact of materials  15

Responsible sourcing of materials – basic building elements   6

Responsible sourcing of materials – finishing elements   3

Category Total  24   7.20

Surface Water Run-off

Management of surface water run-off from developments   2

Flood risk   2

Category Total   4   2.20

Waste

Storage of non-recyclable waste and recyclable household waste   4

Construction site waste management   3

Composting   1

Category Total   8   6.40

Pollution

Global warming potential (GWP) of insulants   1

NOx emissions   3

Category Total   4   2.80

Health & Well-being

Daylighting   3

Sound insulation   4

Private space   1 continued




Purpose of the Technical Guide | 15

Table 1.5: Summary of Environmental Impact Categories, Issues, Credits and Weighting

Code Categories Available 
Credits

Category  
Weighting Factor

Lifetime Homes   4

Category Total  12  14.00

Management

Home user guide   3

Considerate Constructors Scheme   2

Construction site impacts   2

Security   2

Category Total   9  10.00

Ecology

Ecological value of site   1

Ecological enhancement   1

Protection of ecological features   1

Change in ecological value of site   4

Building footprint   2

Category Total   9  12.00

Total 107 100.00

1.3 Calculating an assessment score

 The assessment process should proceed in a logical order through the 
environmental impact categories and issues, summarised in figure 1.3 below:

• It should begin with a check that the three mandatory issues for which no 
credits are awarded have been achieved.

• The mandatory requirements for CO2 emissions, fabric energy efficiency, 
internal water use and Lifetime homes should be checked and confirmed 
at the minimum values required to meet the Code level sought.

• The remaining tradable credits should be checked and confirmed so that 
they also, contribute to the required Code level.

 If any of the standards for the three non-creditable issues are not met, then a 
zero rating will result, regardless of the other credits achieved, including the 
creditable mandatory issues.

 If all the non-creditable mandatory standards are met, but one or other 
of the creditable mandatory issues fails to reach the minimum required to 
achieve a higher level, the rating will be determined by the lowest mandatory 
level met. 




16 | Code for Sustainable Homes

1.4  Total percentage points score and resulting Code 
level 

 Figure 1.3 illustrates the calculation method to obtain the total percentage 
points score. For each category, the number of credits achieved is divided by 
the total available and multiplied by the category weighting factor to derive 
the percentage points score. This number should be rounded down to 
two decimal places before the next step.

 The rounded percentage points scores for each category are then summed 
to arrive at the total percentage points score for the dwelling. The total 
percentage points score must be rounded down to the nearest whole 
number.

Figure 1.3: Scoring System for the Code for Sustainable Homes

• Waste

• Materials

• Water Surface Run-off

Total
percentage

points
score 

• Energy and CO2 Emissions

• Water

• Lifetime Homes (Level 6 only)

• Energy and CO2 Emissions

• Water

• Waste

• Materials

• Surface Water Run-off

• Pollution

• Health and Wellbeing

• Management

• Ecology

For each category 
identify credits 
awarded as a 
fraction of the 
total available   

Multiply by 
weightings 
factor for each 
category 

Sum all the 
percentage 
points scores 
for all the 
categories: 
Total 
percentage 
points Score 

Categories

• Energy and CO2 Emissions 

• Water

• Materials

• Surface Water Run-off

• Materials

• Waste

• Health and Wellbeing

• Management

• Ecology

Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Level 5
Level 6T


radable Credits Credits  per category total Multiply by weighting factor Mandatory Standards 


Purpose of the Technical Guide | 17

 The Code level is then derived from the total percentage points according to 
table 1.6. Each Code level is represented on the certificate by an equivalent 
number of stars from 1 to 6.

Table 1.6: Relationship Between Total Percentage Points Score and Code Level

Total Percentage Points Score  
(equal to or greater than)

Code Levels 

36 Points Level 1 (H) 

48 Points Level 2 (HH) 

57 Points Level 3 (HHH) 

68 Points Level 4 (HHHH) 

84 Points Level 5 (HHHHH) 

90 Points Level 6 (HHHHHH) 

 The report submission tool (available for assessors from the Code service 
provider) must be used to determine an accurate score for an assessment. 




18 | Code for Sustainable Homes

2  Obtaining a Code rating –  
The Process

2.1  Registering a site (before detailed designs are 
finished) 

1. The client for the assessment chooses a service provider for the Code from 
the register at www.communities.gov.uk/thecode. The service provider 
will offer a register of licensed and trained Code assessors from which the 
client can choose and appoint an assessor.

2. The appointed Code assessor registers the development formally with 
the service provider as early as possible. This registration is valid for a 
maximum of five years between expiry of the Technical Guide version at 
registration and submission of the design stage report. So far, there is no 
time limit on the delivery of the associated post construction stage or final 
certificates for the development. This enables the version of the Code to 
be set such that even if the Code is updated the version used can remain 
the same across the site. 

3. It is only possible to register developments/dwellings against the current 
version of the Code for Sustainable Homes. The only exception is where 
there is a documented contractual or legal requirement to meet a specific 
level of the Code against a previous version. Documentary evidence 
would need to be provided to the Code service provider in order to have 
this exception approved prior to assessment taking place. Sites already 
registered under a previous version can be re-registered under the current 
version of the Code. 

4. Once a site is registered by the assessor on the service provider database, 
it is given a unique registration number. 

2.2 Performing Code assessments 

 Code assessments are normally carried out in two stages:

• Design stage (DS), leading to an interim certificate

• Post construction stage (PCS), leading to a final certificate.

 The assessment process for these two stages is very similar. Evidence is 
collated and used as the basis for the assessor to determine how many 
credits are to be awarded for each issue. A summary report is submitted to 
the Code service provider for quality assurance and certification.

http://www.communities.gov.uk/thecode




Obtaining a Code rating – The Process | 19

Figure 2.1: The Code Assessment Process

Client  with
development



site


Licensed
Assessors

CSH Service
provider Training

& Licensing 

Choose
a CSH service
provider and

assessor

QA Pass/Fail

Register site with CSH
service provider under
current CSH version

Areas where DS
assessment failed

are corrected

On to PCS process

Assessor advises on
design process to gain

required CSH levels

DS report submitted to
CSH service provider for

DS certification

CSH service provider
performs QA checks on

DS report

CSH service provider
issues DS CSH certificate to

each dwelling assessed

DS evidence gathered

Optional

QA Fail

Onto PCS

QA Pass

TO PCS




20 | Code for Sustainable Homes

Figure 2.1 (Cont.) The Code Assessment Process

From DS
Certification

From direct PCS
registration

PCS assessment
evidence gathered

PCS report submitted to
CSH service provider for

PCS certification

CSH service provider
performs QA checks on

PCS report 

QA pass/fail
Areas where PCS

assessment failed are
corrected

CSH service provider issues
final PCS certificates for
each dwelling assessed

All dwellings
certified?

CSH assessment complete

QA Fail

More dwellings
to assess

 The licensed organisation has responsibility for the assessment and the Code 
assessor has responsibility for producing the report. It is possible for different 
licensed organisations to undertake the DS and PCS assessments for a 
particular site. Code assessors are required to make DS assessment evidence 
available to the post construction assessor where this is the case.

 Licensed organisations are required to keep full supporting documentation 
of all assessments carried out. Assessors are required to retain this 
information for a period of 10 years from submission of the report. Each 
licensed organisation is required to establish and maintain internal quality 
management procedures relating to record-keeping. 




Obtaining a Code rating – The Process | 21

2.2.1	 Design	stage	assessment	

 The aim of the design stage assessment is:

• To assess the design specifications (i.e. before construction begins) for 
each individual dwelling to determine the design stage or interim rating

• To award (subject to quality assurance) a design stage or interim 
certificate.

 The DS assessment is carried out on the detailed design of each dwelling in 
the period up to the issue of tender documents, sometimes referred to as 
RIBA Stages A–G. A Code assessment requires a more detailed specification 
than Building Regulations compliance because the Code covers many more 
aspects of the performance of the dwelling. For instance, specification details 
of all the sanitary fittings are required to calculate the score for the Code 
indoor water issue.

 The assessor will also be able to calculate, at this initial design stage 
assessment, any site-related credits. Therefore, details of final landscaping 
and ecological enhancement measures will also need to be known.

 The assessor should work closely with the design team to:

• Demonstrate that the performance requirements set for each of the three 
non-creditable mandatory issues of environmental impact are met for each 
dwelling.

• Demonstrate that the performance requirements set for each of the 
credited mandatory issues of environmental impact (dwelling emission 
rate, fabric energy efficiency, indoor water use and Lifetime Homes) are 
met for the desired rating for each dwelling.

• Choose the remaining tradable issues which are required to achieve the 
desired overall rating.

• Evaluate the performance of each dwelling against the requirements set 
for each of the chosen issues to confirm that the required standards are 
met for the desired overall rating.

• Assemble and check the evidence required for the developer, design team 
and other consultants to show the intended performance will be met.

 When the assessor is satisfied with the performance under the Code, 
they shall submit the assessment report to the service provider for quality 
assurance and to receive design stage or interim Code certification. The 
report must contain references to documentary evidence describing how 
performance requirements are met, creating a clear audit trail linking the 
rating awarded to the evidence used to justify it. The service provider may 
issue a standard report format for the assessor to complete. 




22 | Code for Sustainable Homes

2.2.2	 Post	construction	stage	assessment	

 The aim of the PCS assessment is to assess each individual dwelling as built 
to determine the final score and Code level for the dwelling.

 If a DS assessment has been undertaken, this can be used as the starting 
point for the PCS assessment. The PCS assessment is carried out to confirm 
that dwellings are either built to the DS specifications or, if there are 
variations from the DS, that they are documented, reassessed, and a new 
score and Code level calculated for each dwelling that is affected. The 
assessor organisation should carry out an appropriate level of checking to be 
satisfied that commitments made have been achieved. 

 If there has been no prior DS assessment, then the full assessment shall be 
completed against the as-built dwelling(s).

 Licensed organisations are required to set up robust and auditable post 
construction stage assessment procedures. These are to include:

• An appropriate number of site visits for each development site (at least 
once per site). The appropriate number of site visits is dependent on the 
particular situation. It is the assessor’s responsibility to determine the 
necessary number of site visits required to satisfy themselves that the 
assessment properly reflects the dwelling

• Every different specification for each issue shall be reviewed and evidence 
recorded to confirm that it complies with the requirements for PCS 
assessment

• Where dwellings of identical construction type are planned to be 
released in phases, the assessment evidence must show that the same 
specifications have been incorporated into dwellings completed following 
the initial release. If there are variances to the specification in subsequent 
releases, the assessor shall reassess the dwellings based on the new 
specifications.

 The number of PCS assessment reports is likely to be based on the phased 
completion of dwellings within a development. The number of PCS 
assessment reports submitted to cover a particular development is entirely at 
the discretion of the assessor (and developer).

 For a large or phased development, there are some issues that will not be 
complete when a post construction stage assessment for the first dwelling(s) 
is submitted to the service provider. For example, these could include some 
ecology credits or community-based facilities. It is possible to certify the 
first dwellings without certain issues being complete. The details of these 
exceptions are contained within the relevant issues, but are also highlighted 
in table 2.1 below. This is not intended to be a comprehensive list; its 
purpose is to provide guidance to assessors on the type of exceptions that 
are acceptable. 




Obtaining a Code rating – The Process | 23

Table 2.1: Post Construction Stage Assessment Exceptions

Categories Issues Exception

Energy and CO2 
Emissions

Ene 1: 
Dwelling emission rate

Centralised energy supply infrastructure on multi-phase 
developments may not be commissioned in the first phase but 
should be operational before more than 60 per cent of the 
dwellings are completed/certified. This requirement is variable 
where there is an alternative statutory requirement in place for 
the system to be operational at a different stage.

For community heating systems; the infrastructure to allow a 
future connection must be provided to each dwelling for credits 
to be awarded, regardless of the percentage of total dwellings 
completed.

Note: Where exemption from SDLT Regulations is sought in 
addition to a Code rating, these exceptions do not apply.

Ene 4: 
Drying space

Provision of external drying fittings or footings for later parts of 
the development, as this would form part of the ‘externals’ and 
be one of the last finishes.

Ene 5:  
Energy labelled white 
goods

White goods may not be fitted owing to security risk until just 
prior to handover to new residents. Orders must be in place.

Ene 6:  
External lighting

External light fittings may be in place but may not have bulbs 
until handover. This is acceptable.

Ene 7:  
Low and zero carbon 
technologies

Centralised energy supply infrastructure on multi-phase 
developments may not be commissioned in the first phase but 
should be operational before more than 60 per cent of the 
dwellings are completed/certified. This requirement is variable 
where there is an alternative statutory requirement in place for 
the system to be operational at a different stage.

For community heating systems; the infrastructure to allow a 
future connection must be provided to each dwelling for credits 
to be awarded, regardless of the percentage of total dwellings 
completed.

Note: Where exemption from SDLT Regulations is sought in 
addition to a Code rating, these exceptions do not apply.

Ene 8: Cycle storage Some cycle storage may not be in place in later stages of the 
development as this would form part of the ‘externals’ and be 
the last of the finishes installed.

Water Wat 1:  
Indoor water use

Communal grey water or rainwater systems may not be installed 
yet but should be operational before more than 60 per cent of 
the dwellings are completed/certified. 

Wat 2: 
External water use

Communal rainwater collection systems may not be installed 
yet but should be operational before more than 60 per cent 
of the dwellings are completed/certified. (Water butts should 
be installed although they are often left until just before 
completion.)

continued




24 | Code for Sustainable Homes

Table 2.1: Post Construction Stage Assessment Exceptions

Categories Issues Exception

Surface Water 
Run-off

Sur 1: Management of 
surface water run-off 
from developments

Specific infiltration measures, such as soakaways and permeable 
paving, may not be fully installed when initial phases are 
released, but evidence of the devices to be used and any relevant 
calculations need to be available. They need to be operational 
before more than 60 per cent of the dwellings are completed/
certified.

Sur 2:  
Flood risk

All of the flood protection measures should be planned and a 
programme for their construction finalised which indicates that 
they will be operational before more than 60 per cent of the 
dwellings are completed/certified.

Waste Was 1: Storage of  
non-recyclable 
waste and recyclable 
household waste 

Local authority collection schemes, kitchen waste collection 
schemes and private recycling schemes will need to be 
operational within one year of the completion date of this 
dwelling.

Was 3: Composting A communal/community composting service will need to be 
operational within 18 months of completion.

Pollution Pol 2:  
NOx emissions

Centralised energy supply infrastructure on multi-phase 
developments may not be commissioned in the first phase but 
should be operational before more than 60 per cent of the 
dwellings are completed/certified. This requirement is variable 
where there is an alternative statutory requirement in place for 
the system to be operational at a different stage.

For community heating systems; the infrastructure to allow a 
future connection must be provided to each dwelling for credits 
to be awarded, regardless of the percentage of total dwellings 
completed.

Ecology Eco 1: Ecological value 
of site

It will not be possible to check that all features outside of the 
construction zone have been undisturbed until construction is 
completed.

Eco 2: Ecological 
enhancement

Features are often not in place until the whole site is complete or 
until the appropriate planting season. A design and programme 
are required; demonstrating that all such enhancement works 
will be completed normally within a single annual cycle from the 
completion of construction works on the site’s final dwellings.

Eco 3:  
Protection of ecological 
features

It will not be possible to confirm that the credit has been 
achieved for an individual plot being assessed until the entire 
development site has been assessed to confirm all features have 
been protected. The assessor should check that features relating 
to areas of the site where construction has been completed 
have been protected. For areas where construction is not yet 
complete, it should be checked that protection measures are in 
place to protect features during construction works as detailed at 
design stage.

Eco 4:  
Change in ecological 
value of site

Planting is often delayed until the whole site is complete. A 
design and programme are required; demonstrating that all such 
enhancement works will be completed normally within a single 
annual cycle from the completion of construction works on the 
site’s final dwellings.




Obtaining a Code rating – The Process | 25

2.3 Evidence Requirements

 The information within this section will clarify how the evidence requirements 
tables should be used, the roles and responsibilities of individuals involved 
and the definitions of the terminology used within the tables. Clarification 
of the routes to certification has also been provided to emphasise the 
importance of the design stage assessment.

2.4 Using the Schedule of Evidence Required 

 The Schedule of Evidence Required lists the basic information that is needed 
to demonstrate compliance for certification. They are not exhaustive lists 
of every document necessary to conduct the assessment or calculate 
performance. 

 Assessors will need to consider what information to request during the 
assessment to enable them to fulfil the requirement for an audit trail.

2.5 Roles and Responsibilities

2.5.1	 Role	of	the	Code	Assessor

 The role of the Code assessor is to undertake credit score calculations and 
verify the validity and authenticity of evidence provided. The assessor will 
also carry out calculations which are pertinent only to the Code assessment, 
where these are not undertaken by a professional under an appropriate 
regulatory requirement, competent persons scheme or specialist requirement. 
At the post construction stage, the assessor is required to carry out sufficient 
site inspections to audit the as-built evidence. At least one visit will be 
required for all sites. Each specification employed to meet the criteria at the 
design stage and/or post construction stage must be reviewed or assessed as 
appropriate, and detailed documentary evidence recorded, to confirm that it 
complies with the requirements for post construction assessment given in the 
Technical Guidance manual. The Code assessor is at all times responsible for 
the content and scoring within the assessment report.

 It may be that assessors have competencies in other disciplines and as 
such are employed to undertake additional tasks that feed into the Code 
assessment, but these fall outside their role as an assessor. 

2.5.2	 Role	of	the	Code	Service	Provider

 The Code service provider operates the UKAS Accredited Product Scheme for 
the Code to ensure that assessors are technically competent, accurate and 
professional when carrying out assessment services on behalf of their clients. 
The service provider will audit assessment services for quality assurance (QA) 
purposes. The QA process is in place to help protect the credibility of both 




26 | Code for Sustainable Homes

the Code scheme and the assessor, as well as to safeguard the interests of 
developers and their customers. Through a process of random checking, the 
QA audit will provide a reasonable degree of confidence that assessment 
reports correctly reflect the requirements of the scheme, so allowing a 
certificate to be issued. The QA process will not seek to check every aspect of 
a Code assessment. 

2.5.3	 Role	of	the	Developer

 The developer is responsible for providing accurate evidence as required by 
the assessor to carry out their assessment. At post construction stage, the 
developer must confirm which dwellings are built to the same specification as 
those types inspected by the assessor on site. 

 At post construction stage, written confirmation from the developer must 
be in the form of a letter on company headed paper and must be signed by 
a senior individual who is deemed responsible for the development by the 
board of directors or equivalent senior management group of that developer. 
The letter must refer to specific criteria within the issues and explain how the 
criteria or design stage commitment have been satisfied. The letter must be 
explicit in terms of the assessment and the site under development, and must 
confirm which dwellings are built to the same specification as those types 
inspected by the assessor on site.

2.6  Definitions of Terminology Used in the Evidence 
Requirements Tables

2.6.1	 Definition	of	‘Developer’

 This is an organisation or individual(s) with the responsibility for delivering the 
dwelling being assessed.

2.6.2	 Definition	of	‘Detailed	Documentary	Evidence’

 ‘Detailed documentary evidence’ may be any written documentation 
confirming compliance. Across the assessment, evidence will include a mix 
of letters, the site inspection report, and specification text or drawings as 
appropriate. The assessor must satisfy themselves that the evidence is robust 
and traceable. A letter of intent from the developer is not acceptable where 
the requirement is for ‘detailed documentary evidence’.

2.6.3	 Site	inspection	report

 Assessors may ask others to complete the site inspection on their behalf, 
in which case the assessor will be responsible for ensuring that their 
representative is competent and able to carry out the task.

 A ‘Site Inspection Report Template’ is available from the Code service 
provider to assist site inspectors during their visit and to clarify the detail 




Obtaining a Code rating – The Process | 27

that must be provided in the report. The report must include sufficient 
information to create an audit trail that justifies the conclusions reached, 
particularly where the site report is the only evidence supplied at post 
construction stage. A simple statement confirming compliance will not 
be sufficient. Photographs may be useful as supporting evidence in a 
report, though it is unlikely that a photograph on its own will demonstrate 
compliance. The report template allows the assessor to reference 
photographs should they choose to provide them.

 As many issues as possible should be checked during the site inspection. 
However, it is unlikely that all issues will be checked during one site visit. 
Different specifications of the dwelling will be completed at different times, 
so the site inspection will need to be planned during discussion with the 
client to identify the most appropriate time. At least one site visit must be 
carried out for every assessment.

2.6.4	 Written	Confirmation	from	the	Developer	

 At post construction stage, written confirmation from the developer must 
be in the form of a letter on company headed paper and must be signed by 
a senior individual who is deemed responsible for the development by the 
board of directors or equivalent senior management group of that developer. 
The letter must refer to specific criteria within the issues and explain how the 
criteria or design stage commitment have been satisfied. The letter must be 
explicit in terms of the assessment and the site under development. 

2.7 Assessment Routes

 There are two routes to certification:

1. Complete both the design stage (DS) assessment and the post 
construction stage (PCS) assessment. An interim certificate will be issued, 
followed by the final certificate.

2. Complete the post construction stage (PCS) assessment only. Only the 
final certificate will be issued.

 QA audits will cover both the DS and PCS. 

 Assessors must be aware of the pros and cons of the routes to certification 
and advise their clients accordingly. Completing both the DS and PCS should 
be the preferred route to assessment as it offers two significant benefits.

 Firstly, where DS assessments have been carried out and the requirements 
have been fulfilled, completion and QA of the subsequent PCS assessment 
report should take less time. This is of significant benefit to the client who is 
likely to need the final certificate as soon as the dwellings are complete.

 Secondly, completing the DS assessment will help to identify opportunities 
for redesign in order to maximise the number of credits achieved. It is much 




28 | Code for Sustainable Homes

easier to alter designs at the DS than at the PCS when some of the dwellings 
may already have been built.

 Any pre-assessment estimate of the rating a dwelling may achieve should 
be informed by a licensed Code assessor who understands the full details 
of the process where this is used to inform business, funding or contractual 
decisions.

2.8 Certifying Code for Sustainable Homes assessments

 All requests for certification (both design stage or interim, and post 
construction stage or final) are logged on the service provider database under 
the site registration number. Certificates are issued on behalf of Communities 
and Local Government. BRE Global’s UKAS Accredited Competent Persons 
Scheme requires that suitable procedures are in place for all service providers 
to monitor the quality of reports. Currently, this involves:

• A basic administrative check on every report submitted for certification

• A technical audit of assessments and assessors on a regular basis.




Keeping This Guide up to Date | 29

3 Keeping This Guide up to Date
 This technical guide will be updated at intervals if standards change or are 

introduced, or if technologies or processes change.

 The Communities and Local Government website will always contain the 
latest version at www.communities.gov.uk/thecode 




30 | Code for Sustainable Homes

  Organisations delivering the 
Code for Sustainable Homes

 The Code for Sustainable Homes service provision is managed by BRE 
Global under contract to Communities and Local Government. Under these 
arrangements, all Code assessments are carried out under licence by a wide 
range of organisations. The role of BRE Global is to ensure that Communities 
and Local Government’s requirements are met through the provision of:

• Assessor training

• Registration and monitoring

• Quality assurance of assessments

• Certification

• Investigation and resolution of complaints

• Maintenance of records.

 BRE Global’s operating systems are accredited by UKAS under BS EN 
45011 (General Requirements for Bodies Operating Product Certification 
Systems) and ISO 17024 (General Requirements for Bodies Operating 
Certification of Persons) to ensure independence, competence, impartiality 
and confidentiality with transparency in records, complaints procedures, 
documentation and maintenance of certification.

 BRE Global currently does not carry out assessments and provides clear 
separation between the roles of training and assessor qualifications to 
avoid potential conflicts of interest. Under the terms of its agreement with 
Communities and Local Government, BRE Global will licence:

• Independent assessors to conduct assessments to the requirements of the 
Code for Sustainable Homes, and;

• Other organisations to provide training and certification service provision.

 For further information see:

 http://www.breeam.org/filelibrary/CSH_Guidance_Notes_for_Prospective_
Service_Providers.pdf 

 This document sets out the basic requirements for organisations wishing 
to carry out these activities. Any organisation wishing to offer these 
services would have to operate to the same high standards that BRE 
Global is required to reach under its contract with Communities and Local 
Government, and with mechanisms that clearly demonstrate the avoidance 
of conflicts of interest.

http://www.breeam.org/filelibrary/CSH_Guidance_Notes_for_Prospective_Service_Providers.pdf
http://www.breeam.org/filelibrary/CSH_Guidance_Notes_for_Prospective_Service_Providers.pdf




Organisations delivering the Code for Sustainable Homes | 31

 There are two options for organisations wishing to offer some or all of these 
services: 

• A sub-licence agreement to provide an independent certification service 
covering assessor training and testing; assessor registration; quality 
assurance, technical support and certification of assessments, or; 

• A sub-contract agreement for partial services working within the 
parameters of BRE Global’s existing accredited services.

 BRE Global will maintain a central database in which all the assessed 
dwellings will be registered, regardless of the organisation providing the 
Code assessment. This will allow statistics to be reported to Communities 
and Local Government. Sub-licensees will be supplied with the necessary 
formatting and access rights to lodge their registrations. Where necessary, 
interfaces with databases in other organisations can be developed. A fee will 
be charged at BRE Global’s commercial rates for time spent on this activity.

 Code assessors must be members of an organisation that pays fees covering:

• Management of the system

• A free telephone helpline

• Regular updates 

• Access to a private extranet

• Certification of the assessment.




32  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Ene

Category 1: Energy and Carbon 
Dioxide Emissions

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Ene 1  Dwelling Emission Rate 10 Yes


Aim


To limit CO2 emissions arising from the operation of a dwelling and its services in line 
with current policy on the future direction of regulations.

Assessment Criteria

Criteria

% Improvement 2010 DER/TER*1 Credits*2 Mandatory Requirements

≥ 8%   1
≥ 16%   2
≥ 25%  3 Level 4
≥ 36%   4
≥ 47%   5
≥ 59%   6
≥ 72%   7
≥ 85%   8
≥ 100%  9 Level 5
Zero Net CO2 Emissions 10 Level 6

Default Cases



None


*1  Performance requirements are equivalent to those in previous scheme versions but are now measured using the 
AD L1A 2010 TER as the baseline. 

*2  Up to nine credits are awarded on a sliding scale. The scale is based on increments of 0.1 credits, distributed 
equally between the benchmarks defined in this table.

Note:  A definition of a zero carbon home is omitted from this document as it will 
be defined by future legislation. The requirements of this issue will be updated to 
align with this legislation once it is set.




Ene 1: Dwelling Emission Rate  |  33


Ene

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance 

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

Detailed documentary evidence 
confirming the TER, DER and percentage 
improvement of DER over TER based on 
design stage SAP outputs*


OR

Where applicable:

A copy of calculations as detailed in 
the assessment methodology based on 
design stage SAP outputs*


AND


Confirmation of FEE performance where 
SAP section 16 allowances have been 
included in the calculation

*Dated outputs with accredited energy 
assessor name and registration number, 
assessment status, plot number and 
development address.

If not produced by an accredited 
energy assessor additional verification is 
required as detailed in the assessment 
methodology.

Detailed documentary evidence 
confirming the TER, DER and percentage 
improvement of DER over TER based on 
As Built SAP outputs*


OR

Where applicable:

A copy of revised/final calculations as 
detailed in the assessment methodology 
based on as built SAP outputs

Confirmation of FEE performance where 
SAP section 16 allowances have been 
included in the calculation

*Dated outputs with accredited energy 
assessor name and registration number, 
assessment status, plot number and 
development address.

If not produced by an accredited 
energy assessor additional verification is 
required as detailed in the assessment 
methodology.

Definitions

Accredited Energy Assessor

A person registered with an accredited energy assessment scheme provider. The 
scheme provider will be licensed by Communities and Local Government to accredit 
competent persons to assess the CO2 emission rates of domestic buildings for the 
purposes of demonstrating compliance with Building Regulations.

Additional Allowable Electricity Generation

Site-wide electricity generation from the following technologies not included in the 
DER calculation:

•  Wind generators




34  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Ene

•  Photovoltaic panels

•  Hydro-electric generators,

These installations can be located on/off-site provided that the connection 
arrangements meet the requirements defined in Appendix M of SAP.

Additional allowable electricity can be utilised to reduce dwelling CO2 emissions 
and achieve the mandatory Ene 1 requirements set at all Code levels. For additional 
allowable electricity to be included in the Ene 1 calculation, the dwelling(s) must at 
least meet the minimum FEE standard required to achieve 5 credits.

CO2 emissions reductions from additional allowable electricity must be calculated in 
accordance with the methodology defined in table Cat 1.1.

(AD L1A) Approved Document L1A

The Building Regulations for England and Wales Approved Document L1A: 
Conservation of Fuel and Power in New Dwellings (2010 Edition).

Building Control Body

This is the body responsible for ensuring that construction works are according to 
plan and compliant with applicable requirements through periodic inspection.

Building Regulations

Building Regulations apply in England and Wales and promote:

•  Standards for most aspects of a building’s construction, including structure, fire 
safety, sound insulation, drainage, ventilation and electrical safety 

•  Energy efficiency 

•  The needs of all people, including those with disabilities, in accessing and 
moving around buildings. 

(DER) Dwelling Emission Rate

The DER is the estimated CO2 emissions per m
2 per year (KgCO2/m

2/year) for the 
dwelling as designed. It accounts for energy used in heating, fixed cooling, hot water 
and lighting. 

Energy Averaging

Where a building contains multiple dwellings, it is acceptable to assess this issue 
based on the average energy performance of all dwellings within the building. The 
area weighted average DER and TER and must be calculated in accordance with the 
block averaging methodology defined in clauses 4.6 and 4.14 of AD L1A. 

(EPC) Energy Performance Certificate

This is a certificate that confirms the energy rating of the dwelling from A to G, 
where A is the most efficient and G is the least efficient. The better the rating, the 




Ene 1: Dwelling Emission Rate  |  35


Ene

more energy efficient the dwelling is, and the lower the fuel bills are likely to be. The 
energy performance of the building is shown as a carbon dioxide (CO2) based index. 
EPCs are generated using approved software by accredited energy assessors.

Where energy averaging is carried out for the purposes of a Code assessment, 
it is possible to use better fabric and systems performance in some dwellings to 
offset worse performance in others. This is not possible for the purposes of the EPC 
calculation and as such Code energy performance may differ from that indicated on 
the EPC.

Where energy averaging has been used, performance against the requirements of 
this issue is not indicative of individual dwelling performance or running costs.

(FEE) Fabric Energy Efficiency

Energy demand for space heating and cooling expressed in kilowatt-hours of energy 
demand per square metre per year (kWh/m2/year). 

Fabric energy efficiency is calculated according to the conditions defined in Section 
11 of SAP.

See Ene 2.

Net CO2 Emissions

The annual dwelling CO2 emissions (KgCO2/m
2/year) from space heating and cooling, 

water heating, ventilation and lighting, and those associated with appliances and 
cooking.

To achieve Code level 6, net CO2 emissions must be zero when calculated according 
to the methodology defined in table Cat 1.1.

Residual CO2 Emissions Offset from Biofuel CHP

Where community biofuel CHP systems are specified it is possible for SAP to calculate 
negative total CO2 emissions associated with the system. For the purposes of the 
DER calculation SAP does not account for the negative figure. Instead, it defaults to a 
value of zero and the benefit is omitted.

Residual CO2 emissions offsets from biofuel CHP can be utilised to reduce dwelling 
CO2 emissions and achieve the mandatory Ene 1 requirements set at all Code levels. 
For the offset to be included in the Ene 1 calculation, the dwelling(s) must at least 
meet the minimum FEE standard required to achieve 5 credits.

CO2 emissions offsets from biofuel CHP must be calculated according to the 
methodology defined in table Cat 1.1.

SAP Output (design & as built stage)

This is a dated output from accredited SAP software produced by an accredited 
energy assessor. The output must summarise the data necessary to determine 
performance against the requirements of this issue and include the name and 




36  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Ene

registration number of the accredited energy assessor, the assessment status, plot 
number and development address. It is not necessary to produce individual SAP 
outputs for identical dwellings for the purposes of a Code assessment.

The output will be based on either design stage information or on the dwelling as 
constructed. Design stage outputs must be used when assessing design stage Code 
performance and as built outputs for post construction Code assessments.

Where SAP outputs are not produced by an accredited energy assessor they must be 
verified by either an accredited energy assessor or a member of the building control 
body responsible for assessing the dwelling for compliance with Part L of the Building 
Regulations.

For the purposes of assessing this issue the applicable SAP outputs are:

•  SAP DER Worksheet

•  AD L1A Building Regulations Compliance Checklist

(SAP) Standard Assessment Procedure for Energy Rating of Dwellings

The Government’s approved methodology for assessing the energy performance of 
new dwellings. The current version is SAP 2009 version 9.90, dated March 2010, rev 
October 2010. The procedure accounts for energy used in:

•  Space heating and cooling

•  Hot water provision

•  Fixed lighting.

The indicators of energy performance are energy consumption per unit floor area, 
energy cost rating (SAP rating), environmental impact rating based on CO2 emissions 
(EI rating) and dwelling CO2 emission rate (DER). They are used in the production of 
energy performance certificates (EPCs) and to demonstrate compliance with AD L1A 
and the Code for Sustainable Homes.

To contribute to reducing CO2 emissions as calculated by SAP, heat and power must 
be generated either on or in the home, on the development or through other local 
community arrangements (including district heat and power).

Stamp Duty Land Tax (Zero Carbon Homes Relief) Regulations 2007

Regulations defining the conditions to be met for a dwelling to achieve exemption 
from the applicability of Stamp Duty Land Tax (S.I. 2007 No. 3437). 

The conditions imposed by the regulations do not apply to dwellings seeking a Code 
rating alone. For this reason, Code level 6 dwellings will not necessarily be exempt 
from Stamp Duty Land Tax. Where Stamp Duty Land Tax exemption is sought in 
addition to a Code rating, the additional conditions defined in the regulations must 
also be met.




Ene 1: Dwelling Emission Rate  |  37


Ene

(TER) Target Emission Rate

The target emission rate is the maximum allowable CO2 emissions per m
2 (KgCO2/

m2/year) arising from energy used in heating, cooling, hot water and lighting which 
would demonstrate compliance with Criterion 1 of AD L1A.

The TER is calculated using the SAP methodology according to the requirements 
defined in AD L1A.

Assessment Methodology

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Mandatory requirements are met and credits are awarded where the 
performance requirements (set out in the assessment criteria table) have been met.

Design Stage 

Confirm that the SAP output for each dwelling being assessed meets the criteria set 
out in the definitions section.

For Code Levels 1–5:

•  Calculate the percentage improvement in DER over TER for each dwelling being 
assessed.

For Code Level 6:

•  Calculate net CO2 emissions.

In all cases where additional allowable electricity or residual emissions offsets from 
biofuel CHP are included in the calculation ensure the minimum FEE performance 
requirement has been achieved in accordance with the criteria set out in the 
definitions section.

In the case of a building containing multiple dwellings, it is acceptable to award 
credits based on the average percentage improvement of DER over TER for all 
dwellings. Energy averaging must be calculated in accordance with the criteria set out 
in the definitions section.

Post Construction Stage 

Either:

•  Confirm that no changes have been made to the design during construction 
that impact on energy performance.

Or, where changes have been made during construction:

•  As for design stage, but based on as built SAP outputs.




38  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Ene

Calculation Procedures

For Code Levels 1–5 the percentage improvement in DER over TER must be calculated 
according to the methodology defined in table Cat 1.1.

For Code level 6, net CO2 emissions must be calculated according to the 
methodology defined in table Cat 1.1.

Table Cat 1.1: Dwelling Emission Rate

Value Required Data Source Guidance  
(See note [1])

Unit Required Value

Levels 1–5

(1) DER  SAP Worksheet: 
[SAP box 273 for systems assessed 
under section a]
[SAP box 384 for systems assessed 
under section b]


OR 

AD L1A Building Regulations 
Compliance Checklist 

+/– KgCO2/m


2/yr


(2) TER AD L1A Building Regulations 
Compliance Checklist 

+ KgCO2/m


2/yr


(3) CO2 emissions offset 
from additional allowable 
electricity generation

See notes [3] and [4]

SAP Section 16: 
[SAP box ZC7]

– KgCO2/m


2/yr


(4) Residual CO2 emissions 
offset from biofuel CHP

See notes [3] and [4]

SAP Section 16: 
[SAP box ZC5] 

– KgCO2/m


2/yr


(5) Total CO2 emissions offset 
from SAP Section 16 
allowances

Value at step (3) + Value at step (4) – KgCO2/m


2/yr


(6) DER accounting for SAP 
Section 16 allowances

Value at step (1) + Value at step (5) +/– KgCO2/m


2/yr


(7) % improvement DER/TER

See note [5]

100 × (1–(Value at step (6) ÷ Value at 
step (2)))


+ %


Level 6 Only

(8) Net CO2 emissions

See notes [2] and [4]

SAP Section 16: 
[SAP box ZC8]

+/– KgCO2/m


2/yr


Notes to table Cat 1.1:

[1]  The data sources in this calculation correspond with SAP and are intended as 
supplementary guidance to assist in identifying the values required. It is the 
responsibility of the assessor to ensure that the correct value is identified and 
entered into the calculation as the data source may vary dependant on the 
type of accredited SAP software used to assess energy performance.




Ene 1: Dwelling Emission Rate  |  39


Ene

[2]  Section 16 of SAP extends the calculation to account for CO2 emissions 
from appliances and cooking and to allow for site-wide electricity generating 
technologies. Follow the procedure set out in Section 16 of SAP 2009 to 
calculate Net CO2 emissions for the dwelling.

  To achieve the mandatory Ene 1 requirement at Code level 6, no specific 
conditions are imposed that preclude the use of Section 16 of SAP to 
calculate net CO2 emissions apart from those detailed in note [3]. However, 
it should be noted that to achieve an overall rating of Code level 6 the 
dwelling(s) must also meet the minimum FEE performance requirement at the 
7 credit benchmark.

[3]  The allowances included in Section 16 of SAP for site-wide electricity 
generating technologies and CO2 emissions offsets from biofuel CHP 
systems can be applied to achieve the mandatory Ene 1 requirements set 
at all Code levels. For the associated emissions offsets to be included in the 
Ene 1 calculation, the dwelling(s) must meet the minimum FEE performance 
requirement at the 5 credit benchmark.

  For details of acceptable technologies, configurations, output calculations 
and of how to apportion the output to individual dwellings, refer to 
Appendix M and Section 16 of SAP.

[4]  Where centralised energy supply infrastructure is in place that services other 
users (e.g. mixed use developments) the output must be allocated between 
all users in relation to their proportional net floor area. 

[5]  The calculated percentage reduction must rounded to 1 decimal place 
e.g. 94.8750% becomes 94.9%. This figure is then used to determine 
the number of credits and mandatory level achieved for Code level 1 – 
5 dwellings, in line with the performance requirements defined in the 
assessment criteria table.

Checklists and Tables 

None.

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

Green tariffs cannot be used to offset CO2 emissions. They do not guarantee 
increased renewable capacity in line with the increased demand arising from new 
development and are also not legally binding on occupiers.

Special Cases 

None.




40  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Ene

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Ene 2 Fabric Energy Efficiency 9 Yes


Aim


To improve fabric energy efficiency performance thus future-proofing reductions in 
CO2 for the life of the dwelling. 

Assessment Criteria

Criteria

Dwelling Type*1

Apartment Blocks, 
Mid-Terrace

End Terrace, Semi- 
Detached & Detached

Fabric Energy Efficiency kWh/m2/year Credits*2 Mandatory Levels

≤ 48 ≤ 60 3
≤ 45 ≤ 55 4
≤ 43 ≤ 52 5*3

≤ 41 ≤ 49 6
≤ 39 ≤ 46 7 Levels 5 & 6

≤ 35 ≤ 42 8
≤ 32 ≤ 38 9

Default Cases



None


*1  To determine the applicable performance scale the dwelling type under assessment must be accurately defined 
according to the guidance at www.zerocarbonhub.org 

*2  Credits are awarded on a sliding scale. The scale is based on increments of 0.1 credits, distributed equally 
between the benchmarks defined in this table.

*3  This is the level being considered for Part L of the Building Regulations in 2013 on which a public consultation is 
expected in late 2011/early 2012. 

http://www.zerocarbonhub.org




Ene 2: Fabric Energy Efficiency  |  41


Ene

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

Detailed documentary evidence 
confirming fabric energy efficiency 
based on Design Stage SAP outputs


OR

Where applicable:

A copy of calculations as detailed in 
the assessment methodology based on 
design stage SAP outputs

*Dated outputs with accredited energy 
assessor name and registration number, 
assessment status, plot number and 
development address.

If not produced by an accredited 
energy assessor additional verification is 
required as detailed in the assessment 
methodology.

Detailed documentary evidence 
confirming fabric energy efficiency 
based on as built SAP 2009 outputs


OR

Where applicable:

A copy of calculations as detailed in the 
assessment methodology based on as 
built SAP outputs

*Dated outputs with accredited energy 
assessor name and registration number, 
assessment status, plot number and 
development address.

If not produced by an accredited 
energy assessor additional verification is 
required as detailed in the assessment 
methodology.

Definitions

Accredited energy assessor

A person registered with an accredited energy assessment scheme provider. The 
scheme provider will be licensed by Communities and Local Government to accredit 
competent persons to assess the CO2 emission rates of domestic buildings for the 
purposes of demonstrating compliance with Building Regulations.

(AD L1A) Approved Document L1A

The Building Regulations for England and Wales Approved Document L1A: 
Conservation of Fuel and Power in New Dwellings (2010 Edition).

Building Control Body

This is the body responsible for ensuring construction works are according to plan 
and compliant with applicable requirements through periodic inspection 

Building Regulations

Building Regulations apply in England and Wales and promote:




42  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Ene

•  Standards for most aspects of a building’s construction, including structure, fire 
safety, sound insulation, drainage, ventilation and electrical safety 

•  Energy efficiency 

•  The needs of all people, including those with disabilities, in accessing and 
moving around buildings. 

Dwelling Type

The type of dwelling under assessment determines the applicable FEE and credit 
scale. To define the dwelling type under assessment refer to www.zerocarbonhub.org 

The FEE scale of ≤48 kWh/m2/year to ≤32 kWh/m2/year is applicable to:

•  Apartment blocks*

•  Mid-terrace houses / bungalows**

*  For some apartment blocks the FEE scale of ≤60 kWh/m2/year to ≤38 kWh/m2/
year applies. To define the dwelling type under assessment refer to:  
www.zerocarbonhub.org 

** For stepped and staggered terraced houses/bungalows and houses with an 
internal garage or drive through, refer to special cases.

The FEE scale of ≤60 kWh/m2/year to ≤38 kWh/m2/year is applicable to:

•  End terrace houses / bungalows

•  Semi-detached houses / bungalows

•  Detached houses / bungalows.

Energy averaging

For all apartment blocks, it is acceptable to assess this issue based on the area 
weighted average FEE performance of all dwellings within the building. The 
area weighted average FEE performance must be calculated in accordance with 
methodology defined in clause 4.6 of AD L1A.

Use of energy averaging to assess performance against this issue is at the discretion 
of the developer and assessor.

(EPC) Energy Performance Certificate

This is a certificate that confirms the energy rating of the dwelling from A to G, 
where A is the most efficient and G is the least efficient. The better the rating, the 
more energy efficient the dwelling is, and the lower the fuel bills are likely to be. The 
energy performance of the building is shown as a carbon dioxide (CO2) based index. 
EPCs are generated using approved software by accredited energy assessors.

Where energy averaging is carried out for the purposes of a Code assessment, 
it is possible to use better fabric and systems performance in some dwellings to 
offset worse performance in others. This is not possible for the purposes of the EPC 




Ene 2: Fabric Energy Efficiency  |  43


Ene

calculation and as such Code energy performance may differ from that indicated on 
the EPC.

Where energy averaging has been used, performance against the requirements of 
this issue is not indicative of individual dwelling performance or running costs.

(FEE) Fabric Energy Efficiency

Energy demand for space heating and cooling expressed in kilowatt-hours of energy 
demand per square metre per year (kWh/m2/year). 

Fabric energy efficiency is calculated according to the conditions defined in Section 
11 of SAP. The outputs from FEE calculations should be rounded to 1 decimal place 
prior to determining the number of credits to award.

SAP Output (design & as built stage)

This is a dated output from accredited SAP software produced by an accredited 
energy assessor. The output must summarise the data necessary to determine 
performance against the requirements of this issue and include the name and 
registration number of the accredited energy assessor, the assessment status, plot 
number and development address. It is not necessary to produce individual SAP 
outputs for identical dwellings for the purposes of a Code assessment.

The output will be based on either design stage information or on the dwelling as 
constructed. Design stage outputs must be used when assessing design stage Code 
performance and as built outputs for post construction Code assessments.

Where SAP outputs are not produced by an accredited energy assessor they must be 
verified by either an accredited energy assessor or a member of the building control 
body responsible for assessing the dwelling for compliance with Part L of the Building 
Regulations.

For the purposes of assessing this issue the applicable SAP outputs are:

•  SAP DER Worksheet

(SAP) Standard Assessment Procedure for Energy Rating of Dwellings

The Government’s approved methodology for assessing the energy performance of 
new dwellings. The current version is SAP 2009 version 9.90, dated March 2010, rev 
October 2010. The procedure accounts for energy used in:

•  Space heating and cooling

•  Hot water provision

•  Fixed lighting.

The indicators of energy performance are energy consumption per unit floor area, 
energy cost rating (SAP rating), environmental impact rating based on CO2 emissions 
(EI rating) and dwelling CO2 emission rate (DER). They are used in the production of 




44  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Ene

energy performance certificates (EPCs) and to demonstrate compliance with AD L1A 
and the Code for Sustainable Homes.

To contribute to reducing CO2 emissions as calculated by SAP, heat and power must 
be generated either on or in the home, on the development or through other local 
community arrangements (including district heat and power).

Assessment Methodology

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Mandatory requirements are met and credits are awarded where the 
performance requirements (set out in the assessment criteria table) have been met.

Design Stage

Confirm the dwelling type and FEE scale to apply to the dwelling being assessed 

Confirm that the SAP output for the dwelling being assessed meets the criteria set 
out in the definitions section.

Identify the FEE performance of the dwelling under assessment.

For all apartment blocks, it is acceptable to award credits based on the area weighted 
average FEE for all dwellings in the building. Energy averaging must be calculated in 
accordance with the criteria set out in the definitions section.

Post Construction Stage

Either:

•  Confirm that no changes have been made to the design during construction 
that impact on FEE performance.

Or, where changes have been made during construction: 

•  As for design stage, but based on as built SAP outputs.

Calculation Procedures 

None.

Checklists and Tables 

None.




Ene 2: Fabric Energy Efficiency  |  45


Ene

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

None.

Special Cases 

Terraces of houses/bungalows are often stepped or staggered to account for factors 
such as site topography or local planning requirements. Where this is the case, the 
side walls of mid terrace dwellings become partially exposed, increasing heat loss and 
energy demand. 

As the area of exposed side wall increases, the energy performance characteristics 
of a mid-terrace dwelling become more akin to those of an end terrace dwelling. 
To account for this, and to maintain the logic behind separate FEE targets for mid 
and end terrace dwellings, the standard mid terrace FEE performance requirements 
i.e. those defined in the assessment criteria table, can be reduced for stepped or 
staggered mid terrace dwellings/bungalows and houses with an internal garage or 
drive through.

Where these dwelling types are under assessment, the following formula can be 
applied to adjust the standard mid terrace FEE performance requirements set at each 
credit level; this includes the mandatory Code level 5 and 6 requirements:

Revised FEE Performance Benchmark = BMT + (2 × (BET – BMT) × R)

Where:

BMT = Standard mid-terrace FEE performance benchmark

BET = Corresponding standard end terrace performance benchmark

R = Ratio of exposed/semi exposed side wall to total wall area

Note: This formula is only applicable where 0 < R < 0.5. Where R ≥ 0.5 standard end 
terrace performance benchmarks apply.

To calculate R:

R  = 
Exposed Side Wall Area m2 + Semi-exposed side wall Area m2

Total Side Wall Area m2

R should be rounded to 2 decimal places.

For guidance on determining the exposed side wall and semi-exposed side wall area 
refer to www.zerocarbonhub.org




46  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Ene

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Ene 3 Energy Display Devices 2 No



Aim 


To promote the specification of equipment to display energy consumption data, thus 
empowering dwelling occupants to reduce energy use.

Assessment Criteria 

Criteria Credits 

Where current electricity OR primary heating fuel consumption data are displayed to 
occupants by a correctly specified energy display device. 


1

Where current electricity AND primary heating fuel consumption data are displayed to 
occupants by a correctly specified energy display device.


2

Default Cases 

Where electricity is the primary heating fuel and current electricity consumption data are 
displayed to occupants by a correctly specified energy display device. 


2


Ene 3: Energy Display Devices  |  47


Ene

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

Detailed documentary evidence 
confirming:

That the correctly specified energy 
display device is dedicated to the 
dwelling


AND


The consumption data displayed by the 
correctly specified energy display device 

For post construction stage only 
assessments, provide detailed 
documentary evidence (as listed for the 
design stage) representing the dwellings 
as built


OR

Provide written confirmation from the 
developer that the energy display device 
has been installed as specified in the 
design stage detailed documentary 
evidence


OR

Where only a specification/letter of 
instruction is provided at the design 
stage, provide detailed documentary 
evidence (as listed for the design stage) 
representing the dwellings as built 


OR

Where different from the design 
stage, provide detailed documentary 
evidence (as listed for the design stage) 
representing the dwellings as built


OR

Provide a site inspection report 
confirming compliance

Where detailed documentary evidence 
cannot be produced at this stage: 

A specification can be allowed as 
evidence of intent to meet specific 
requirements


OR

A letter of instruction to a contractor/
supplier or a formal letter from 
the developer giving the specific 
undertaking can be allowed

Definitions

Correctly Specified Energy Display Device

This is a system comprising a self-charging sensor(s) fixed to the incoming mains 
supply/supplies, to measure and transmit energy consumption data to a visual 
display unit. As a minimum the visual display unit must be capable of displaying the 
following information:

•  Local time




48  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Ene

•  Current mains energy consumption (kilowatts and kilowatt hours)

•  Current emissions (g/kg CO2) 

•  Current tariff 

•  Current cost (in pounds and pence). For pre-payment customers this should be 
‘real time’ data and for ‘credit’ paying customers cost should be displayed on a 
monthly basis

•  Display accurate account balance information (amount in credit or debit)

•  Visual presentation of data (i.e. non-numeric) to allow consumers to easily 
identify high and low level of usage

•  Historical consumption data so that consumers can compare their current 
and previous usage in a meaningful way. This should include cumulative 
consumption data in any of the following forms day/week/month/billing period. 

Primary Heating Fuel

The fuel used to provide the majority of heat to the dwelling under assessment.

Site Inspection Report

This is a report prepared by the Code assessor during a post construction stage 
assessment and issued as evidence with the assessment.

Assessment Methodology 

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met. 

Design Stage 

•  Confirm whether a correctly specified energy display device has been provided.

•  Confirm whether the specified device displays electricity consumption data and/
or primary heating fuel consumption data.

Post Construction Stage 

Either:

•  Confirm that no changes have been made to the design during construction 
that impact on the energy display device specification.

Or, where changes have been made during construction: 

•  As for the design stage, but based on as built information. 




Ene 3: Energy Display Devices  |  49


Ene

Calculation Procedures 

None.

Checklists and Tables 

None.

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

None. 

Special Cases 

None. 




50  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Ene

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Ene 4 Drying Space  1 No



Aim 


To promote a reduced energy means of drying clothes.

Assessment Criteria 

Criteria Credits

Where space and equipment are provided for drying clothes:

•   For 1 – 2 bedroom dwellings, the drying equipment must be capable of holding 4m+ of 
drying line

•   For 3+ bedroom dwellings, the drying equipment must be capable of holding 6m+ of drying 
line 

The drying space (internal or external) must be secure


1

Default Cases

None 




Ene 4: Drying Space  |  51


Ene

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance 

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

For internal drying space, detailed 
documentary evidence confirming:

•  The location of drying fixings

•  Details/location of ventilation 
provided

•  The length of drying line

•  Details of the lock provided (for 
communal drying space only)

For post construction stage only 
assessments, provide detailed 
documentary evidence (as listed for the 
design stage) representing the dwellings 
as built


OR

Written confirmation from the 
developer that the fittings have been 
installed as specified in the design stage 
detailed documentary evidence


OR

Where only a specification/letter of 
instruction is provided at the design 
stage, provide detailed documentary 
evidence (as listed for the design stage) 
representing the dwellings as built 


OR

Where different from the design 
stage, provide detailed documentary 
evidence (as listed for the design stage) 
representing the dwellings as built


OR

A site inspection report confirming 
compliance

For external drying space, detailed 
documentary evidence confirming:

•  The location of fixings/footings or 
posts

•  The length of drying line

•  Details of the lock provided (for 
communal drying space only)

Where detailed documentary evidence 
cannot be produced at this stage: 

A specification can be allowed as 
evidence of intent to meet specific 
requirements


OR

A letter of instruction to a contractor/
supplier or a formal letter from 
the developer giving the specific 
undertaking

Definitions

(AD F) Approved Document F1

The Building Regulations for England and Wales Approved Document F1: Means of 
Ventilation (2010 Edition).




52  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Ene

Drying space

A heated space with controlled intermittent extract ventilation. Extract ventilation 
must achieve a minimum extract rate of 30l/s and be controlled according to the 
requirements for intermittent extract ventilation defined in AD F.


OR 


An unheated outbuilding may also be acceptable, where calculations by an 
appropriate member of the Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers 
(CIBSE), or equivalent professional, confirms that ventilation is adequate to allow 
drying in normal climatic conditions and to prevent condensation/mould growth.


OR

An external secure space with access restricted to occupants of the dwelling(s). The 
space should be accessed directly from an external door.

Any fixings/fittings must be a permanent feature of the room or space. 

Secure entrance lock

A permanent mortice deadlock or mortice sash lock that conforms to BS 3621:2007.

Secure space

This is an enclosed space accessible only to the residents of an individual dwelling. 
For dwellings with communal drying space, this is an enclosed space with a secure 
entrance lock, accessible only to the residents of the dwellings.

Site Inspection Report

A report prepared by the Code assessor during a post construction stage assessment 
and provided as evidence with the assessment.

Assessment Methodology

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met.

Design Stage 

•  Confirm whether internal or external drying space will be provided and whether 
it is of adequate and secure provision.

•  Confirm whether adequate drying equipment will be provided and that it is 
located appropriately. 




Ene 4: Drying Space  |  53


Ene

Post Construction Stage 

Either:

•  Confirm that no changes have been made to the dwelling design during 
construction that impact on the specification of drying facilities.

Or, where changes have been made during construction:

•  As for the design stage, but based on as-built information. 

Calculation Procedures 

None.

Checklists and Tables 

None.

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

Internal drying spaces are not allowed in living rooms, kitchens, dining rooms, main 
halls or bedrooms. 

Special Cases 

None. 




54  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Ene

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Ene 5  Energy Labelled White Goods  2 No


Aim


To promote the provision or purchase of energy efficient white goods, thus reducing 
the CO2 emissions from appliance use in the dwelling. 

Assessment Criteria 

Criteria Credits

Where the following appliances are provided and have an A+ rating under the EU Energy 
Efficiency Labelling Scheme: 

•  Fridges and freezers or fridge-freezers


1

Where the following appliances are provided and have an A rating under the EU Energy 
Efficiency Labelling Scheme:

•  Washing machines and dishwashers 

AND EITHER

•   Tumble dryers or washer dryers have a B rating (where a washer dryer is provided, it is not 
necessary to also provide a washing machine)


OR

•   EU Energy Efficiency Labelling Scheme Information is provided to each dwelling in place of a 
tumble dryer or a washer dryer


1

Where no white goods are provided but EU Energy Efficiency Labelling Scheme Information is 
provided to each dwelling

Note: To obtain this credit, any white goods available to purchase from the developer must be 
compliant with the above criteria.


1

Default Cases

None 




Ene 5: Energy Labelled White Goods  |  55


Ene

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance 

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

If any white goods are to be provided, 
detailed documentary evidence 
confirming:

The appliances to be provided with their 
applicable ratings under the EU Energy 
Efficiency Labelling Scheme 

For post construction stage only 
assessments, provide detailed 
documentary evidence (as listed for the 
design stage) representing the dwellings 
as built


OR

Written confirmation from the 
developer that the appliances/fittings 
have been installed as specified in the 
design stage detailed documentary 
evidence


OR

Where only a letter of instruction is 
provided at the design stage, provide 
detailed documentary evidence (as listed 
for the design stage) representing the 
dwellings as built 


OR

Where different from the design 
stage, provide detailed documentary 
evidence (as listed for the design stage) 
representing the dwellings as built

Where washer dryers or tumble dryers 
will not be provided and the second 
credit is sought, provide detailed 
documentary evidence as follows:

•  A copy of the EU Energy Efficiency 
Labelling Scheme Information 


AND


•  Confirmation that the information 
will be provided to all dwellings

If no white goods are provided, detailed 
documentary evidence as follows:

•  A copy of the information that will be 
provided on the EU Energy Efficiency 
Labelling Scheme 


AND


•  Confirmation that the information 
will be provided to all dwellings


AND


•  Confirmation that all appliances 
available for purchase with the 
dwelling are compliant with the 
assessment criteria

Where details cannot be produced at 
this stage: 

•  A formal letter from the developer 
giving the specific undertaking




56  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Ene

Definitions

EU Energy Efficiency Labelling Scheme

The EU energy label rates products from A (the most efficient) to G (the least 
efficient). For refrigeration, the scale now extends to A++. It is a legal requirement 
for the label to be shown on all refrigeration and laundry appliances, dishwashers, 
electric ovens and light bulb packaging at point of sale.

EU Energy Efficiency Labelling Scheme information

An information leaflet explaining the EU Energy Efficiency Labelling Scheme and the 
benefits of purchasing appliances with higher ratings.

Assessment Methodology

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met.

Design Stage 

•  Confirm the EU Energy Efficiency Labelling Scheme rating for specified 
appliances covered by the assessment criteria. 

•  Where appliances are not being provided, confirm that EU Energy Efficiency 
Labelling Scheme Information will be provided.

Post Construction Stage 

Either:

•  Confirm that no changes have been made to the dwelling design during 
construction that impact on the appliances’ specification.

Or, where changes have been made during construction:

•  As for the design stage, but based on as-built information. 

Calculation Procedures 

None.

Checklists and Tables 

None.




Ene 5: Energy Labelled White Goods  |  57


Ene

Common Cases of Non-Compliance

None.

Special Cases

Where appliances included in the assessment criteria for this issue are not covered 
by the EU Energy Efficiency Labelling Scheme (e.g. gas-powered tumble dryers), 
recognition under the Energy Saving Trust’s Energy Saving Recommended scheme 
(http://www.energysavingtrust.org.uk/business/Business/Energy-Saving-Trust-
Recommended) is deemed to demonstrate compliance. Evidence should be provided 
confirming that the make and model of the appliance meets the requirements of 
the scheme and is permitted to display the Energy Saving Recommended logo. The 
evidence must be dated to show that the endorsement is current. 

http://www.energysavingtrust.org.uk/business/Business/Energy-Saving-Trust-Recommended
http://www.energysavingtrust.org.uk/business/Business/Energy-Saving-Trust-Recommended




58  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Ene

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Ene 6 External Lighting  2 No



Aim 


To promote the provision of energy efficient external lighting, thus reducing CO2 
emissions associated with the dwelling.

Assessment Criteria 

Criteria Credits

Space Lighting

Where all external space lighting, including lighting in common areas, is provided by dedicated 
energy efficient fittings with appropriate control systems.

Note: Statutory safety lighting is not covered by this requirement

Security Lighting

Where all security lighting is designed for energy efficiency and is adequately controlled such 
that:

All burglar security lights have: 

•  A maximum wattage of 150 W 


AND


•  Movement detecting control devices (PIR) 


AND


•  Daylight cut-off sensors

All other security lighting:

•  Is provided by dedicated energy efficient fittings


AND


•  Is fitted with daylight cut-off sensors OR a time switch


1 1

Default Cases

If no security lighting is installed, the security lighting credit can be awarded by default, 
provided all of the requirements related to the specification of space lighting have been met.

Dual lamp luminaires with both space and security lamps can be awarded both credits 
provided they meet the above criteria for energy efficiency 


1 

Ene 6: External Lighting  |  59


Ene

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

Relevant drawings clearly showing the 
location of all external light fittings


AND


Detailed documentary evidence 
confirming:

•  The types of light fitting and efficacy, 
in lumens per circuit watt, for all 
lamps

•  The control systems applicable to 
each light fitting or group of fittings

For post construction stage only 
assessments, provide drawings and 
detailed documentary evidence (as listed 
for the design stage) representing the 
dwellings as built


OR

Written confirmation from the 
developer that the external light fittings 
have been installed as specified in 
drawings and the design stage detailed 
documentary evidence


OR

Where only a letter of instruction is 
provided at the design stage, provide 
calculations and detailed documentary 
evidence (as listed for the design stage) 
representing the dwellings as built 


OR

Where different from the design stage, 
provide revised drawings and detailed 
documentary evidence (as listed for the 
design stage) representing the dwellings 
as built


OR

A site inspection report confirming 
compliance

Where detailed information is not 
available at this stage:

A letter of instruction to a contractor/
supplier or a formal letter from 
the developer giving the specific 
undertaking

Definitions

Control systems

A method for controlling the external lighting to ensure that it will not operate 
unnecessarily, e.g. during daylight hours or when a space is unoccupied. Control 
systems that can be considered are passive infra red (PIR), ‘dusk to dawn’ daylight 
sensors and time switches.




60  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Ene

Daylight sensors (dusk to dawn)

A type of sensor that detects daylight and switches lighting on at dusk and off at 
dawn.

Dedicated energy efficient light fittings

Fittings that comprise the lamp, base, control gear and an appropriate housing, 
reflector, shade or diffuser. The fitting must be dedicated in that it must be capable 
of only accepting lamps having a luminous efficacy greater than 40 lumens per circuit 
watt. A light fitting may contain one or more lamps.

Tubular fluorescent and compact fluorescent light fittings would typically meet this 
requirement. Light fittings for GLS tungsten lamps with bayonet cap or Edison screw 
bases, or tungsten halogen lamps would not comply.

Dual-level lighting

Artificial lighting, specified with appropriate control systems, which operates at 
different levels of illuminance to provide an adequate maintained level of lighting to 
internal spaces.

Dual-level lighting must be specified to reduce levels of illuminance when spaces are 
less likely to be occupied, in accordance with the minimum maintained illuminance 
levels defined in CIBSE LG9: 1997 Lighting for Communal Residential Buildings.

Movement detecting control devices (PIR)

A type of motion detector that uses infra red radiation to detect movement and 
switches lighting on.

Pin-based compact fluorescent lamp (CFL)

A type of fluorescent lamp that plugs into a small dedicated lighting fixture. CFLs 
have a longer rated life and use less electricity than conventional incandescent light 
bulbs. Conventional bayonet or screw (Edison) CFL fittings are not acceptable under 
the Code. 

Security lighting 

Security lighting is provided to protect property. There are two types of security 
lighting commonly used in dwellings – high wattage intruder lights that are operated 
via PIR sensors which only switch on for a short time, and low wattage lighting that is 
controlled by time switches and daylight sensors. 

Site Inspection Report

A report prepared by the Code assessor during a post construction stage assessment 
and provided as evidence with the assessment.




Ene 6: External Lighting  |  61


Ene

Space lighting 

The normal lighting required to illuminate a space when in use. It can be used outside 
the entrance to the home, in outbuildings such as garages and cycle stores, and for 
external spaces such as paths, patios, decks, porches, steps and verandas. 

Space lighting must be designed with appropriate control systems to ensure it is 
switched off during daylight hours.

Statutory safety lighting 

Safety lighting is usually provided in multi-residential buildings such as blocks of flats 
to illuminate stairwells and exit routes when the main lighting system fails. Its design 
is specified by regulation (BS 5266) and is therefore outside the scope of the Code.

Time switch

A switch with an in-built clock which will allow lighting to be switched on and off at 
programmed times.

Tubular fluorescent and compact fluorescent lamp (TFL/CFL)

A type of fluorescent lamp that is named after its shape. These lamps have their own 
range of dedicated fittings, and have a longer rated life and use less electricity than 
conventional incandescent light bulbs.

Assessment Methodology

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met. 

Design Stage 

•  Confirm whether the external space and security lighting specification meets 
the requirements set out in the assessment criteria.

•  For houses, fittings serving the following areas should be included in the 
assessment: external door, front porch, steps/pathways, patio, garage, garden, 
carports and any other outbuildings. 

•  For flats, fittings serving the following areas should be included in the 
assessment: external steps and pathways, main external entrances and all 
communal internal spaces. 

Post Construction Stage 

Either:

•  Confirm that no changes have been made to the dwelling design during 
construction that impact on the external space and security lighting 
specification.




62  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Ene

Or, where changes have been made during construction:

•  As for the design stage, but based on as-built information. 

Calculation Procedures 

None.

Checklists and Tables 

None. 

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

Credits cannot be awarded by default if no space lighting is installed, even in cases 
where all security lighting requirements are met. 

Special Cases

On a privately managed site, external lighting managed by a Local Authority may be 
excluded from this issue.

Where a site is redeveloped and existing external lighting remains, the lighting that 
is retained has to comply with the requirements of the issue. Replacement of the 
fittings may be necessary.

Any fitting that consumes less than 5 W may be excluded from the requirements set 
out in this issue. This is to allow for the specification of innovative light sources, such 
as LEDs.

Where permanent space lighting is required for safety reasons, or for the purpose of 
meeting other applicable design standards (normally in internal communal corridors 
or stairwells that receive no daylight), dual-level lighting is acceptable. 




Ene 7: Low and Zero Carbon Technologies  |  63


Ene

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Ene 7 Low and Zero Carbon Technologies 2 No



Aim 


To limit CO2 emissions and running costs arising from the operation of a dwelling and 
its services by encouraging the specification of low and zero carbon energy sources to 
supply a significant proportion of energy demand.

Assessment Criteria

Criteria Credits

Where energy is supplied by low or zero carbon technologies 


AND


There is a 10% reduction in CO2 emissions as a result 1


OR

There is a 15% reduction in CO2 emissions as a result 2

Default Cases



None

64  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Ene

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

A copy of calculations as detailed in 
the assessment methodology based on 
design stage SAP outputs


AND


Detailed documentary evidence 
confirming that the specified low or 
zero carbon technologies: 

•  Meet any additional requirements 
defined in Directive 2009/28/EC as 
applicable.

And are:

•  Certified under the Microgeneration 
Certification Scheme*


OR

•  Certified under the CHPQA 
standard*

*As applicable.

A copy of calculations as detailed in the 
assessment methodology based on as 
built SAP outputs


AND


Detailed documentary evidence 
confirming that the specified low or 
zero carbon technologies: 

•  Meet any additional requirements 
defined in Directive 2009/28/EC as 
applicable.

And are:

•  Certified under the Microgeneration 
Certification Scheme*


OR

•  Certified under the CHPQA 
standard*

*As applicable.

Definitions

Accredited energy assessor

A person registered with an accredited energy assessment scheme provider. The 
scheme provider will be licensed by Communities and Local Government to accredit 
competent persons to assess the CO2 emission rates of domestic buildings for the 
purposes of demonstrating compliance with Building Regulations.

Accredited External Renewables

These are renewable energy installations located off site which:

•  Are Renewable Energy Guarantee of Origin (REGO) certified.

•  Create new installed generation capacity designed to meet the demand of the 
dwelling.

•  Are additional to capacity already required under the Renewables Obligation.




Ene 7: Low and Zero Carbon Technologies  |  65


Ene

Actual Case CO2 Emissions

CO2 emissions from the dwelling (Kg CO2/m
2/year) accounting for the input from 

specified/installed low and zero carbon technologies. 

The standard case dwelling model must be used as the basis for the calculation of 
actual case emissions. However, where eligible low or zero carbon technologies are 
specified in the dwelling they can replace the standard systems assumptions from 
table Cat 1.2 for the purposes of the actual case calculation.

Actual case CO2 emissions must be calculated in accordance with the methodology 
defined in table Cat 1.3.

(AD L1A) Approved Document L1A

The Building Regulations for England and Wales Approved Document L1A: 
Conservation of Fuel and Power in New Dwellings (2010 Edition).

Building Control Body

The body responsible for ensuring that construction works are according to plan and 
compliant with applicable requirements through periodic inspection.

Building Regulations

Building Regulations apply in England and Wales and promote:

•  Standards for most aspects of a building’s construction, including structure, fire 
safety, sound insulation, drainage, ventilation and electrical safety 

•  Energy efficiency 

•  The needs of all people, including those with disabilities, in accessing and 
moving around buildings. 

Direct Supply

The carbon benefit of energy generated by low or zero carbon technologies can only 
be allocated to dwellings that are directly supplied by the installation via dedicated 
supplies.

Where electricity is generated which is surplus to the instantaneous demand of 
the dwelling(s), it may be fed back to the National Grid. The carbon benefit of 
any electricity fed back to the grid can be allocated as if it were consumed in the 
dwelling(s) when assessing performance against the requirements of this issue.

For communal PV arrays in buildings with multiple dwellings, the obligations of this 
definition are satisfied where the requirements of Appendix M of SAP are met.

Low and Zero Carbon Technologies

Technologies eligible to contribute to achieving the requirements of this issue must 
produce energy from renewable sources and meet all other ancillary requirements as 
defined by Directive 2009/28/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 




66  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Ene

23 April 2009 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources and 
amending and subsequently repealing Directives 2001/77/EC and 2003/30/EC.

The following requirements must also be met:

•  Where not provided by accredited external renewables there must be a direct 
supply of energy produced to the dwelling under assessment.

•  Where covered by the Microgeneration Certification Scheme (MCS), 
technologies under 50kWe or 300kWth must be certified.

•  Combined Heat and Power (CHP) schemes above 50kWe must be certified 
under the CHPQA standard.

•  All technologies must be accounted for by SAP.

CHP schemes fuelled by mains gas are eligible to contribute to performance against 
this issue. Where these schemes are above 50kWe they must be certified under the 
CHPQA. 

(MCS) Microgeneration Certification Scheme

The Microgeneration Certification Scheme (MCS) is an independent scheme that 
certifies microgeneration products and installers in accordance with consistent 
standards. It is designed to evaluate microgeneration products and installers 
against robust criteria, and provides consumers with an independent indication of 
the reliability of products, assurance that the installation will be carried out to the 
appropriate standard and a route for complaints should there be any issues.

The MCS is a United Kingdom Accreditation Service (UKAS) accredited certification 
scheme covering all microgeneration products and services. It has support from the 
Department of Energy and Climate Change (DECC), industry and non-governmental 
groups as a prime method for making a substantial contribution to cutting the UK’s 
dependency on fossil fuels and carbon dioxide emissions.

SAP output (design & as built stage)

This is a dated output from accredited SAP software produced by an accredited 
energy assessor. The output must summarise the data necessary to determine 
performance against the requirements of this issue and include the name and 
registration number of the accredited energy assessor, the assessment status, plot 
number and development address. It is not necessary to produce individual SAP 
outputs for identical dwellings for the purposes of a Code assessment.

The output will be based on either design stage information or on the dwelling as 
constructed. Design stage outputs are normally used when assessing design stage 
Code performance and as built outputs for post construction Code assessments. 
However, for the purposes of assessment against the requirements of this issue ‘draft’ 
SAP outputs are acceptable.

Where SAP Outputs are not produced by an accredited energy assessor they must be 
verified by either an accredited energy assessor or a member of the building control 




Ene 7: Low and Zero Carbon Technologies  |  67


Ene

body responsible for assessing the dwelling for compliance with Part L of the Building 
Regulations.

For the purposes of assessing this issue the applicable SAP outputs are:

•  SAP DER worksheet

(SAP) Standard Assessment Procedure for Energy Rating of Dwellings

The Government’s approved methodology for assessing the energy performance of 
new dwellings. The current version is SAP 2009 version 9.90, dated March 2010, rev 
October 2010. The procedure accounts for energy used in:

•  Space heating and cooling

•  Hot water provision

•  Fixed lighting.

The indicators of energy performance are energy consumption per unit floor area, 
energy cost rating (SAP rating), environmental impact rating based on CO2 emissions 
(EI rating) and dwelling CO2 emission rate (DER). They are used in the production of 
energy performance certificates (EPCs) and to demonstrate compliance with AD L1A 
and the Code for Sustainable Homes.

To contribute to reducing CO2 emissions as calculated by SAP, heat and power must 
be generated either on or in the home, on the development or through other local 
community arrangements (including district heat and power).

Standard Case CO2 Emissions

CO2 emissions from the dwelling (Kg CO2/m
2/year) assuming a standard systems 

specification, based on the Domestic Building Services Compliance Guide 2010 
Edition. 

Standard case CO2 emissions create the baseline against which the contribution 
of low and zero carbon technologies is measured. They represent the common 
scenario where a gas boiler is installed and ensure a ‘level playing field’ to allow a fair 
comparison of the contribution of low and zero carbon technologies, regardless of 
the carbon intensity of the actual heating fuel specified.

The assumptions to be included in the calculation of standard case CO2 emissions are 
included in table Cat 1.2.

Standard case CO2 emissions must be calculated in accordance with the methodology 
defined in table Cat 1.3.




68  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Ene

Assessment Methodology 

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met.

Design Stage 

Confirm that the SAP output for each dwelling being assessed meets the criteria set 
out in the definitions section.

Calculate the standard case CO2 emissions.

Calculate the actual case CO2 emissions.

Calculate the reduction in actual case CO2 emissions compared to standard case CO2 
emissions.

Post Construction Stage 

Either:

•  Confirm that no changes have been made to the dwelling design during 
construction that impact on the low and zero carbon technologies specification.

Or, where changes have been made during construction:

•  As for design stage, but based on as built SAP outputs.

Calculation Procedures 

1. Standard Case CO2 Emissions:

Standard case CO2 emissions must be calculated according to the methodology 
defined in table Cat 1.3. 

The specification assumptions included in table Cat 1.2 must replace those of the 
actual dwelling in the calculation of standard case CO2 emissions. 

Where elements or systems are not listed in table Cat 1.2 they should be included in 
the calculation of standard case CO2 emissions as specified/constructed. 




Ene 7: Low and Zero Carbon Technologies  |  69


Ene

Table Cat 1.2: Standard CO2 Emissions Calculation - Specification Assumptions 

Element or System Value

[1] Main heating fuel (space and water) Mains gas

[2] Main heating system (and second main heating 
system where specified)

Boiler and radiators

Fully pumped circulation

Water pump in heated space

[2a] Boiler SEDBUK (2009) 88%

Room-sealed

Fanned Flue

On/off burner control

[2b] Heating system controls Programmer

Room thermostats



TRVs


Boiler interlock

[3] Secondary heating fuel (where secondary heating 
is specified)

Electricity

[3a] Secondary heating system (where secondary 
heating is specified)

Panel, convector or radiant heaters

[4] Hot water system Stored hot water, heated by boiler only

Separate time control for space and water heating

[4a] Hot water storage 150 litre cylinder insulated with 35mm of factory 
applied foam

[4b] Primary water heating losses Primary pipework insulated

Cylinder temperature controlled by thermostat

[4c] Technologies covered by Appendix H of SAP None specified

[5] Technologies covered by Appendix M of SAP None specified

2. Actual Case CO2 Emissions:

Actual case CO2 emissions must be calculated according to the methodology defined 
in table Cat 1.3. 

The standard case dwelling model must be used as the basis for the calculation of 
actual case emissions. However, where eligible low or zero carbon technologies are 
specified in the dwelling they can replace the standard systems assumptions from 
table Cat 1.2 for the purposes of the actual case emissions calculation.

The reduction in CO2 emissions as a result of the specification of low and zero carbon 
technologies must be calculated according to the methodology defined in table 
Cat 1.3. 




70  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Ene

Table Cat 1.3: Reduction in CO2 Emissions

Value Required
Data Source Guidance

(See note [1])
Unit Required Value

(1) Standard Case CO2 emissions

See notes [2] and [4]

SAP Section 16:

[SAP box ZC8]

+ KgCO2/m


2/yr


(2) Actual Case CO2 emissions

See notes [2], [3] and [4]

SAP Section 16:

[SAP box ZC8]

+/– KgCO2/m


2/yr


(3) Reduction in CO2 emissions

See note [5]

100 × (1–(Value at step (2) ÷ 
Value at step (1)))

+/– %

Notes to table Cat 1.3:

[1]  The data sources in this calculation correspond with SAP and are intended as 
supplementary guidance to assist in identifying the values required. It is the 
responsibility of the assessor to ensure that the correct value is identified and 
entered into the calculation, as the data source may vary dependant on the 
type of accredited SAP software used to assess energy performance.

[2]  Section 16 of SAP extends the calculation to account for CO2 emissions 
from appliances and cooking and to allow for site-wide electricity generating 
technologies. Follow the procedure set out in Section 16 of SAP 2009 to 
calculate standard case CO2 emissions and actual case CO2 emissions for 
the dwelling under assessment. There are no specific conditions imposed 
that preclude the use of section 16 of SAP to calculate standard or actual 
emissions.

[3]  In the calculation of actual case CO2 emissions, there are no specific 
conditions that preclude consideration of the allowances included in Section 
16 of SAP for site-wide electricity generating technologies and CO2 emissions 
offsets from biofuel CHP systems. For details of acceptable technologies, 
configurations, output calculations and of how to apportion the output to 
individual dwellings, refer to Appendix M and Section 16 of SAP.

[4]  Where centralised energy supply infrastructure is in place that services other 
users (e.g. mixed use developments) the output must be allocated between 
all users in relation to their proportional net floor area.

[5]  The calculated percentage reduction must be truncated (not rounded down) 
to an integer percentage e.g. 9.8750% becomes 9%. This figure is then used 
to determine the number of credits achieved, in line with the performance 
requirements defined in the assessment criteria table.




Ene 7: Low and Zero Carbon Technologies  |  71


Ene

Checklists and Tables

None.

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

Energy supplied from remote sources through the National Grid is not eligible to 
contribute towards achieving the requirements set out in this issue. This includes 
electricity procured through ‘green tariffs’. 

Special Cases 

None. 




72  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Ene

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Ene 8 Cycle Storage  2 No



Aim 


To promote the wider use of bicycles as transport by providing adequate and 
secure cycle storage facilities, thus reducing the need for short car journeys and the 
associated CO2 emissions. 

Assessment Criteria 

Criteria Credits

Where individual or communal cycle storage is provided, that is adequately sized, secure and 
convenient, for the following number of cycles: 

Studios or 1 bedroom dwellings – storage for 1 cycle for every two dwellings 

2 and 3 bedroom dwellings –- storage for 1 cycle per dwelling

4 bedrooms and above –- storage for 2 cycles per dwelling 


OR 


Studios or 1 bedroom dwellings – storage for 1 cycle per dwelling

2 and 3 bedroom dwellings – storage for 2 cycles per dwelling 

4 bedrooms and above – storage for 4 cycles per dwelling 

Note: The requirements for secure cycle storage are met where compliance with clause 35 of 
Secured by Design (SBD) New Homes 2010 is achieved. 


 12


Default Cases 

None 




Ene 8: Cycle Storage  |  73


Ene

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

Detailed documentary evidence 
showing: 

•  The number of bedrooms and the 
corresponding number of cycle 
storage spaces per dwelling

•  Location, type and size of storage

•  Convenient access to cycle storage

•  Any security measures

•  Details of the proprietary system (if 
applicable)

•  How the requirements of clause 35 
of Secured by Design – New Homes 
2010 will be met (if applicable)

For post construction stage only 
assessments, provide detailed 
documentary evidence (as listed for the 
design stage) representing the dwellings 
as built


OR

Written confirmation from the 
developer that the cycle storage facilities 
have been installed as specified in the 
design stage detailed documentary 
evidence


OR

Where only a letter of instruction is 
provided at the design stage, provide 
detailed documentary evidence (as listed 
for the design stage) representing the 
dwellings as built 


OR

Where different from the design 
stage, provide detailed documentary 
evidence (as listed for the design stage) 
representing the dwellings as built


OR

A site inspection report confirming 
compliance

Where detailed information is not 
available at this stage:

A letter of instruction to a contractor/
supplier or a formal letter from 
the developer giving the specific 
undertaking

Definitions 

Adequately Sized Cycle Storage

The minimum storage area required to store cycles on the floor, defined by the 
New Metric Handbook, which includes space to allow the cycles to be moved 
independently. 




74  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Ene

•  1 cycle: 2 m long × 0.75 m wide

•  2 cycles: 2 m long × 1.5 m wide

•  4 cycles: 2 m long × 2.5 m wide 


OR 


Where a proprietary storage or hanging system is provided, the space requirements 
are flexible but the system must allow each cycle to be removed independently and 
meet all other criteria. 

Where cycle storage is provided in a shed, a minimum of 1 m2 is required for garden 
tools (in addition to the above dimensions). The shed must be set on a concrete 
foundation and secure fixing needs to be provided. 

Where cycle storage is provided in a garage, adequate space must be provided to 
store both the bicycle(s) and the car(s) at the same time. 

For double garages, it must be assumed that each garage space is occupied by a car. 
Storage areas above must be added to the typical minimum garage sizes below: 

•  2.4 m × 4.9 m for a single garage

•  5 m × 5.2 m for a double garage 

Convenient Cycle Storage

Easy and direct access from/to the dwelling(s) and from/to the cycle store to a public 
right of way. 

Access from the store to a public right of way through the dwelling is not acceptable, 
e.g. where cycles are stored in a shed in the back garden of a mid-terraced home and 
there is no direct access from the garden to a public right of way. 

Communal cycle store(s) must be located within 100 m of the front door or the main 
entrance to a block of flats. 

If, for strategic reasons outside the control of the developer, the store cannot be 
located within the required distance, exceptions to the rule may be allowed. Full 
details must be provided and the Code service provider consulted prior to awarding 
credits.

Lighting in communal cycle stores must comply with the requirements for space 
lighting defined in Ene 6 – External Lighting.

Cycle storage

Cycles may be stored in any of the following:

•  Garage or shed 

•  External or internal communal cycle store 

•  Proprietary system.




Ene 8: Cycle Storage  |  75


Ene

Secure entrance lock

A permanent mortice deadlock or mortice sash lock that conforms to BS 3621:2007 
can be used where the door is at least 44mm thick and is locked to the doorframe. 
Alternatively a ‘sold secure’ Silver Standard padlock with a hasp and staple that are 
coach bolted through the structure is deemed compliant.

Where communal cycle storage will be provided within a block of flats, the entrance 
must be a secure doorset and meet the requirements of clauses 21.2 to 21.6 and 
21.8 to 21.13 of the ‘Secured by Design New Homes 2010’ document. Note that this 
room should have no windows.

Secure fixing

A ground anchor certificated to ‘Sold Secure’ Silver Standard.

Where a communal cycle store will be used, a stand must be provided to support 
the bike, and a secure ground anchor point for each cycle space (certificated to ‘Sold 
Secure’ Silver Standard). Alternatively a secure stand can be provided.

Secure Stand

A stand which allows both wheel and frame to be locked and must, as a minimum, 
be of galvanised steel bar construction (with a minimum thickness of 3mm) and have 
a minimum foundation depth of 300mm with a welded anchor T-bar set in concrete 
to prevent it being easily removed from the ground. 

Secure storage

A fully enclosed structure with a secure entrance lock and/or secure fixings or secure 
stands depending on the situation and solution. 

In individual dwellings:

•  For solid enclosed structures: secure entrance lock or secure fixing(s)

•  For non-solid structures: secure entrance lock and secure fixing(s)

Blocks of flats and multi-dwellings with communal storage areas:

•  Communal halls and solid enclosed structures: secure entrance lock and secure 
fixing(s) for all cycles 

•  For non-solid structures: secure entrance lock and secure fixing(s)

Where an external container specifically designed for the secure storage of cycles will 
be provided, it must be certified to LPS 1175 SR 1. 

Site Inspection Report

This is a report prepared by the Code assessor during a post construction stage 
assessment and provided as evidence with the assessment.




76  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Ene

Assessment Methodology

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met. 

Design Stage 

•  Confirm whether cycle storage is to be provided.

•  Confirm whether any proposed cycle storage is adequately sized, has 
convenient access and is secure. 

Post Construction Stage 

Either:

•  Confirm that no changes have been made to the design during construction 
that impact on the cycle storage specification.

Or, where changes have been made during construction:

•  As for the design stage, but based on as-built information. 

Calculation Procedures 

None.

Checklists and Tables 

None.

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

Where cycles are to be stored inside the dwelling, credits cannot be achieved (unless 
within a porch including adequate storage space as defined above). 

Provision by the developer of a folding cycle to be stored in the dwelling does not 
meet the requirements of this issue or warrant a reduction in the adequate size 
requirements.

Special Cases 

None.




Ene 9: Home Office  |  77


Ene

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Ene 9 Home Office  1 No



Aim 


To promote working from home by providing occupants with the necessary space 
and services thus reducing the need to commute. 

Assessment Criteria 

Criteria Credits 

Where sufficient space and services have been provided which allow occupants to set up a 
home office in a suitable room. 

The space dedicated for use as a home office must have adequate ventilation and achieve an 
average daylight factor of 1.5%.


1

Default Cases 

None 




78  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Ene

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Review Stage 

Detailed documentary evidence 
showing:

•  Location of and sufficient space for 
the home office

•  Location and number of sockets

•  Location of telephone points

•  That adequate ventilation will be 
provided

•  That an average daylight factor of at 
least 1.5% is achieved

•  Confirmation of one of the following:

  –   cable connection 

  –   that broadband is available at 
the site level (not for individual 
dwellings), i.e. a letter from the 
developer confirming that they 
have checked that broadband is 
available 

  –   two telephone points (or double 
telephone point)

For post construction stage only 
assessments, provide detailed 
documentary evidence (as listed for the 
design stage) representing the dwellings 
as built


OR

Written confirmation from the 
developer that the home office and 
related services have been provided as 
specified in the design stage detailed 
documentary evidence


OR

Where only a letter of instruction is 
provided at the design stage, provide 
detailed documentary evidence (as listed 
for the design stage) representing the 
dwellings as built 


OR

Where different from the design 
stage, provide detailed documentary 
evidence (as listed for the design stage) 
representing the dwellings as built


OR

A site inspection report confirming 
compliance

Where detailed information is not 
available at this stage:

A letter of instruction to a contractor/
supplier or a formal letter from 
the developer giving the specific 
undertaking

Definitions

Adequate ventilation

In all cases the room must have an openable window or alternative ventilation e.g. 
passive stack. Where the room has a window, the minimum openable casement 
must be 0.5 m2. A room with only an external door does not meet the minimum 
requirements for adequate ventilation.




Ene 9: Home Office  |  79


Ene

Average daylight factor 

The average daylight factor is the average indoor illuminance (from daylight) on the 
working plane within a room, expressed as a percentage of the simultaneous outdoor 
illuminance on a horizontal plane under an unobstructed CIE ‘standard overcast sky’. 
The average daylight factor can be calculated using the following equation: 

DF  = 


MWu T


A(1 – R2)

Where: 

W = total glazed area of windows or roof lights 

A = total area of all the room surfaces (ceiling, floor, walls and windows)

R = area-weighted average reflectance of the room surfaces

M = a correction factor for dirt

T = glass transmission factor

u = angle of visible sky 

Guide values for a typical dwelling with light-coloured walls are as follows (for more 
accurate values, refer to CIBSE Lighting Guide 10):

R   =  0.5

M   =  1.0 (vertical glazing that can be cleaned easily) 

    0.8 (sloping glazing) 

    0.7 (horizontal glazing) 

T   =  0.7 (double glazing) 

    0.6 (double glazing with low emissivity coating)

    0.6 (triple glazing)

u   =  65˚ (vertical glazing) 

It is advised that this default figure for the angle of visible sky is used with caution; 
the methodology detailed in the angle of visible sky definition must be preferred for 
more accuracy.

Sufficient services

The following services must be provided in the suitable room intended as a home 
office:

•  Two double power sockets




80  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Ene

•  Two telephone points (or double telephone point), or one telephone point 
where cable or broadband is available.

•  A window (Note: The room chosen to be the nominated home office must have 
a daylight factor of at least 1.5%)

•  Adequate ventilation.

Sufficient space

This is defined as the minimum size (1.8 m wall length) to allow a desk, chair and 
filing cabinet or bookshelf to be installed, with space to move around the front and 
side of the desk, use the chair appropriately and operate the filing cabinet safely 
(the 1.8 m wall size requirement can, in some circumstances, be altered if drawings 
can prove that a desk can be fitted in any other type of arrangement, i.e. alcove or 
similar, fulfilling all the above criteria). 

Suitable room

For dwellings with three or more bedrooms, a suitable room is a room other than the 
kitchen, living room, master bedroom or bathroom. 

For dwellings with one or two bedrooms or studio homes, a suitable room is the 
living room, one of the bedrooms or any other suitable area in the home such as a 
large hall or dining area (provided the minimum service requirements defined above 
are met). 

In all cases, the room must be large enough to allow the intended use of that room, 
e.g. if a home office is to be set up in the main bedroom, that room also needs to be 
able to fit in a double bed and other necessary furnishing.

Site Inspection Report

This is a report prepared by the Code assessor during a post construction stage 
assessment and provided as evidence with the assessment.

Assessment Methodology 

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met. 

Design Stage 

•  Confirm whether sufficient space for a home office is to be provided in a 
suitable room.

•  Confirm whether the location for the proposed home office has adequate 
ventilation and is specified with sufficient services.

•  Confirm that the space dedicated for use as a home office achieves a daylight 
factor of at least 1.5%. 




Ene 9: Home Office  |  81


Ene

Post Construction Stage 

Either:

•  Confirm that no changes have been made to the design during construction 
that impact on the home office specification.

Or, where changes have been made during construction:

•  As for the design stage, but based on as-built information. 

Calculation Procedures 

None.

Checklists and Tables 

None.

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

None. 

Special Cases 

None.




82  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Wat

Category 2: Water 

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Wat 1  Indoor water use  5 Yes



Aim 


To reduce the consumption of potable water in the home from all sources, including 
borehole well water, through the use of water efficient fittings, appliances and water 
recycling systems.

Assessment Criteria 

Criteria

Water consumption (litres/person/day) Credits Mandatory Levels

≤ 120 l/p/day

≤ 110 l/p/day

≤ 105 l/p/day

≤ 90 l/p/day

≤ 80 l/p/day


12345

Levels 1 and 2

Levels 3 and 4

Levels 5 and 6

Default Cases



None

Wat 1: Indoor Water Use  |  83


Wat

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

Completed Water Efficiency Calculator 
for New Dwellings internal potable 
water use for each dwelling which has a 
different specification



AND 


Detailed documentary evidence 
showing:

•  Location, details and type of 
appliances/ fittings that use water in 
the dwelling including any specific 
water reduction equipment with the 
capacity / flow rate of equipment. 

•  Location, size and details of any 
rainwater and greywater collection 
systems provided for use in the 
dwelling

Where detailed documentary evidence is 
not available at this stage;

Completed Water Efficiency Calculator 
for New Dwellings internal potable 
water use for each dwelling which has a 
different specification 


AND


A letter of instruction to a contractor/ 
supplier or a formal letter from the 
developer giving a specific undertaking, 
providing sufficient information to allow 
the water calculations to be completed

For post construction stage only 
assessments, provide Water Efficiency 
Calculator for New Dwellings and 
detailed documentary evidence (as 
listed for design stage) representing the 
dwellings as built


OR

Written confirmation from the 
developer that the appliances/fittings 
have been installed as specified in the 
design stage detailed documentary 
evidence


OR

Where only a letter of instruction is 
provided with calculations at design 
stage provide revised calculations and 
detailed documentary evidence (as 
listed for design stage) representing the 
dwellings as built 


OR

Where different from design stage, 
provide revised Water Efficiency 
Calculator for New Dwellings and 
detailed documentary evidence (as 
listed for design stage) representing the 
dwellings as built

Definitions

Delayed inlet valves

Delayed inlet valves prevent water entering the WC cistern until it has completely 
emptied, enabling a precise volume of water to be discharged independent of water 
pressure.




84  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Wat

Flow restrictors

Flow restrictors contain precision-made holes or filters to restrict water flow and 
reduce the outlet flow and pressure. They are typically fitted within the console of the 
tap or shower heads, in pipework or at the mains inlet to the dwelling.

Grey-water recycling 

The appropriate collection, treatment and storage of used shower, bath and tap 
water for use instead of potable water in WCs and/or washing machines. Grey-water 
recycling systems normally collect used shower, bath and tap water and recycle it for 
toilet flushing. 

Ion exchange water softeners

Ion exchange water softeners remove the agents causing hard water by passing 
water from the mains through a resin. The resin must be regenerated regularly. 
Regeneration may occur either at set time intervals, or when a given volume of water 
has passed through the resin. The water consumed during regeneration depends on 
the hardness of the water (this varies geographically) and the efficiency of the water 
softener.

Low flush WCs

Low flush WCs are specifically designed to reduce the volume of water consumed 
during flushing. There are various systems that can be specified to achieve a 
reduction in flush volume, such as low single flush cisterns, delayed action water inlet 
valves, and dual-flush cisterns which provide a part flush for liquids and a full flush 
for solids. Such systems must be matched to suitable WC pans and must pass the 
discharge performance requirements of BS EN 997:2003 for Class 2 WC suites.

Mains potable water 

Drinking quality water taken from a connection to the mains water supply. 

Potable water 

Drinking quality water that is taken from a connection to the mains water supply in 
the dwelling, which may be from the public water supply or a private supply such as 
from groundwater via a borehole. 

Rainwater recycling 

The appropriate collection and storage of rain from hard outdoor surfaces for 
use instead of potable water in WCs and/or washing machines. In some cases, 
rainwater could also be used to contribute towards Wat 2 for irrigation and possibly 
large water-consuming fittings such as hot tubs or swimming pools. In such cases, 
reference should be made to the relevant definition for sufficient size, as set out in 
Wat 2. 




Wat 1: Indoor Water Use  |  85


Wat

Water Efficiency Calculator for New Dwellings

The Water Efficiency Calculator for New Dwellings is the Government’s national 
calculation method for the assessment of water efficiency in new dwellings in support 
of Building Regulations Part G 2009 and the Code for Sustainable Homes, May 2009 
and subsequent versions. The calculator assesses the contribution that each internal 
water fitting (micro component) has on the water consumption of the whole house, 
measured in litres per person per day based on research into typical water use.

Water reduction equipment

Fittings such as flow restrictors may be fitted in taps and showers and delayed inlet 
valves may be fitted in WCs.

Assessment Methodology 

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Mandatory requirements are met and credits are awarded where the 
performance requirements (set out in the assessment criteria table) have been met.

Design Stage

•  Calculate the water consumption for each dwelling using the methodology set 
out in the Water Efficiency Calculator for New Dwellings.

•  In all cases, a risk assessment of microbial contamination (i.e. Legionella) must 
be carried out on the hot and cold water systems. Action must be taken to 
avoid any risks of contamination (e.g. through location and labelling of pipes). 
This is particularly important where rainwater and greywater are to be used. The 
risk assessment and action taken should be in accordance with guidance from 
HSE ACoP and/or CIBSE TM13. While these guidance documents refer to non-
domestic situations, similar principles apply to domestic use.

•  If water is extracted locally from a borehole, it should be treated as potable 
water from the mains supply because using water from a borehole well will not 
reduce the burden on drainage and treatment systems.

•  Swimming pools or other large water consuming features (where the water is 
replaced over a greater time interval), whether internal or external, are assessed 
in the following issue, Wat 2. An internal hot tub should be assessed as a bath.

•  Where an instantaneous water heater is specified/intended, problems may occur 
when low flow rate taps are fitted as such systems vary in their trigger flow 
rates. In such cases, confirmation should be sought that the specified fittings 
are compatible.

Post Construction Stage 

•  Confirm which specifications and evidence provided at the design stage are still 
valid.

•  Assess all the new specifications and evidence provided at the post construction 
stage.




86  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Wat

Calculation Procedures

The calculation procedures must be carried out in line with the Water Efficiency 
Calculator for New Dwellings:  
www.communities.gov.uk/publications/planningandbuilding/watercalculator

Checklists and Tables

None.

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

•  The credit will not be awarded where requirements for provision of better than 
typical practice white goods have only been set within tenancy agreements. It is 
unlikely such a requirement would be enforced.

•  The Code recognises only fixed fittings and fixtures such as low-flush WCs 
and flow restrictors. Devices that can be retrofitted to WCs, such as cistern 
displacement and flushing reduction, are not recognised by the Code. Such 
devices may provide reduced water use in existing dwellings, but can be easily 
removed.

Special Cases 

None.

http://www.communities.gov.uk/publications/planningandbuilding/watercalculator




Wat 2: External Water Use  |  87


Wat

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Wat 2 External Water Use  1 No



Aim 


To promote the recycling of rainwater and reduce the amount of mains potable 
water used for external water uses. 

Assessment Criteria 

Criteria Credits

Where a correctly specified and sufficient sized system to collect rainwater for external/internal 
irrigation/use has been provided to a dwelling with a garden, patio or communal garden space 
(examples of such systems include rainwater butts and central rainwater collection systems)


1

Default Cases 

If no individual or communal garden spaces are specified or if only balconies are provided, the 
credit can be awarded by default


1


88  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Wat

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction stage 

Detailed documentary evidence stating 
type, size and location of any rainwater 
collection systems

For post construction stage only 
assessments, provide detailed 
documentary evidence (as listed for 
design stage) representing the dwellings 
as built


OR

Written confirmation from the 
developer that the rainwater collection 
system has been installed as specified in 
the design stage detailed documentary 
evidence


OR

Where only a letter of instruction 
is provided at design stage provide 
detailed documentary evidence (as 
listed for design stage) representing the 
dwellings as built 


OR

Where different from design stage, 
provide detailed documentary evidence 
(as listed for design stage) representing 
the dwellings as built


OR

Site Inspection Report confirming 
compliance

Where detailed documentary evidence is 
not available;

A letter of instruction to a contractor 
/ supplier or a formal letter from the 
developer giving a specific undertaking

Definitions

Central rainwater collection system 

A system which will collect and store rainwater for use across the development. This 
could be a large storage tank or other form of surface water system.

Correctly specified 

The specification of the rainwater collector must meet the following criteria:




Wat 2: External Water Use  |  89


Wat

•  No open access at the top of the collector (a child-proof lid is allowed)

•  Provision of a tap or other arrangement for drawing off water

•  Connection to the rainwater downpipes with an automatic overflow into the 
conventional rainwater drainage system

•  A means of detaching the rainwater downpipe and access provision to enable 
the interior to be cleaned

•  Where the collection system is to be sited outside, and not buried, it must be 
stable and adequately supported; the material used for the container shall be 
durable and opaque to sunlight

•  Where the system is part of a rainwater collection system providing internal 
water, water for external use may be provided in a separate tank to water 
required for internal use. This could be an overflow pipe leading from the main 
tank to a correctly specified water butt for external water use. 

Garden 

An area where irrigation is required which is normally an external space but may be 
an internal atrium. This may be a private or communal space. 

Rainwater butt 

A large cask or barrel which is set up on end to collect and store rainwater for 
external irrigation/watering.

Site Inspection Report

This is a report prepared by the Code assessor during a post construction stage 
assessment and provided as evidence with the assessment.

Sufficient size

Storage volume requirements for homes with individual gardens, patios and terraces:

•  Terraces and patios – 100 litres minimum

•  1 – 2 bedroom home with private garden – 150 litres minimum 

•  3+ bedroom home with private garden – 200 litres minimum

The above volume requirements can be halved if there is no planting provided and 
the whole of the external space is covered by a hard surface. 

For houses with front and rear gardens, a rainwater collector is required only in the 
main (i.e. larger) garden but must meet the capacity requirements above. 

Size requirements for communal gardens: 

•  1 litre/m2 of land allocated to the dwelling with a minimum of 200 litres per 
communal garden. Where the communal garden is allocated to more than six 
dwellings, a maximum of 30 litres per dwelling can be applied. The allocated 




90  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Wat

land can be planted (including grass) or left as unplanted soil, and can be split 
into plots or communally maintained 

•  Where planting requiring little water has been specified (following the 
recommendations from a suitably qualified ecologist, see Eco 1 and 2), the 
above requirements can be halved subject to written confirmation from the 
suitably qualified ecologist stating that this is acceptable. 

Where the rainwater collection system is providing internal demand for Wat 1 and 
also for irrigation to achieve credit under this issue, the system can only qualify for 
external use where:

•  The Water Efficiency Calculator for New Dwellings indicates that the demand 
of internal fittings to be supplied with rainwater has been met and where an 
excess volume of water is being collected to meet external water use of 5 litres 
per person per day* (in line with the external water consumption assigned in 
the Water Efficiency Calculator for New Dwellings for compliance with Building 
Regulations Part G).

*Where gardens are covered entirely by hard landscaping, the above requirement can 
be halved.

Where a swimming pool or other large water-consuming feature is present, this must 
be provided with 100 per cent rainwater or grey water. The water must comply with 
appropriate EU bathing water standards.

System to collect rainwater 

Equipment to collect and store rain from hard surfaces (typically roofs) to replace the 
use of potable mains water for external irrigation/watering.

Assessment Methodology

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met.

Design Stage 

•  Check that the specifications and capacity of storage comply with the 
assessment criteria. 

Post Construction Stage 

•  Confirm which specifications and evidence provided at the design stage are still 
valid.

•  Assess all the new specifications and evidence provided at the post construction 
Stage.




Wat 2: External Water Use  |  91


Wat

Calculation Procedures 

•  Where rainwater is collected for irrigation for individual gardens, the size 
requirements are calculated based on the number of bedrooms as defined 
above in the definition of sufficient size. Once this has been determined, it 
should then be confirmed whether the garden provided is made up entirely of 
hard spaces or is provided as a terrace or patio. The size required may then be 
adjusted and this should be in compliance with the definition of sufficient size 
defined above.

•  Where rainwater is collected for irrigation in communal gardens, the size 
requirements are based on the size of the communal gardens provided in m2, 

as detailed in the definition of sufficient size. The size requirements can be 
adjusted where the garden comprises hard landscaping or where the planting 
requires minimal water, as defined in the definition of sufficient size.

•  Where rainwater is collected for both internal and external use, the Water 
Efficiency Calculator for New Dwellings must be used to determine whether 
sufficient volume has been collected for external use. Sufficient volume to meet 
the requirements of this issue can be demonstrated where the demand of 
internal fittings, which are to use rainwater, is met and where the excess water 
collected for external use is of sufficient volume (as defined in the definition of 
sufficient size).

Checklists and Tables 

None. 

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

Pools, hot tubs or other large water-using features which are fed by mains water will 
automatically mean that credits cannot be awarded for this issue. This rule applies 
whether it is an internal or external feature, with the exception of internal hot tubs 
which should be assessed as a bath under the previous issue, Wat 1. Where such 
water features are present, credits can be awarded only where they use appropriately 
treated water from 100% rainwater or 100% greywater and all other criteria for this 
issue are met. 

Special Cases 

None. 




92  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Mat

Category 3: Materials

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Mat 1  Environmental Impact of Materials  15 Yes


Aim


To specify materials with lower environmental impacts over their life-cycle.

Assessment Criteria

Criteria Credits Mandatory 
Levels

Where at least three of the following five key elements of the building 
envelope achieve a rating of A+ to D in the 2008 version of The Green Guide: 

•  Roof 

•  External walls 

•  Internal walls (including separating walls) 

•  Upper and ground floors (including separating floors) 

•  Windows 

All Levels

Where the Code Mat 1 Calculator Tool is used to assess the number of credits 
awarded for the five key elements described above

1 – 15

Default Cases 



None

Mat 1: Environmental Impact of Materials  |  93


Mat

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance 

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

Completed Code Mat 1 Calculator Tool, 
showing building elements at the design 
stage with the relevant Green Guide 
element numbers



AND 


References stating the design or 
specification documentation used to 
complete the tool

For post construction stage only 
assessments, provide;

•  The Code Mat 1 Calculator Tool, 
showing building elements as built 
with the relevant Green Guide 
element numbers

•  References stating the source of data 
used to complete the tool


OR

Written confirmation from the 
developer that the building envelope 
has been constructed as specified in the 
Mat 1 Calculator Tool and references 
provided at design stage 


OR

Where different from design stage, 
provide;

•  The revised Code Mat 1 Calculator 
Tool, showing building elements as 
built with the relevant Green Guide 
element numbers

•  Revised references stating the source 
of data used to complete the tool

Definitions 

Building envelope

For the purpose of issue Mat 1, the building envelope is defined as the overall 
superstructure of the particular building. Each building envelope may contain single 
or multiple dwellings.

Where multiple dwellings are contained within a single envelope, Green Guide 
specifications do not need to be applied to the individual dwellings. In this case, 
the percentages of all individual Green Guide specifications throughout the entire 
building must be included, even where significantly differing construction methods 
are used for different parts of the building.




94  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Mat

The same specification may also be applied in the case where there are several 
identical buildings with identical building envelopes. In this case, there is no need to 
assess the identical buildings separately. For the building envelopes to be identical, 
they must be of the same size and share the same percentages of elements with the 
same Green Guide specifications.

Code Mat 1 Calculator Tool

A spreadsheet-based tool designed to simplify assessment of this issue, available to 
assessors from the Code service provider.

Green Guide Element Number

A unique BRE Global reference number given to a Green Guide rating for any 
particular building element type specification. Both standard Green Guide ratings 
and those calculated using the Online Green Guide Calculator will have an element 
number.

Online Green Guide Calculator Tool

BRE Global have created the Green Guide Calculator tool to enable BREEAM 
and Code assessors to quickly and efficiently generate Green Guide ratings for a 
significant proportion of specifications not listed in the Green Guide Online. The 
Green Guide Calculator database is based on the components currently used to 
create specifications within the Green Guide Online. These components can be 
selected and combined to generate instant Green Guide ratings for a multitude of 
different specifications.

To access the Green Guide Calculator, you must be a licensed BREEAM/EcoHomes/
Code assessor. 

The Green Guide to Specification

The Green Guide to Specification is an easy to use comprehensive reference website 
and electronic tool, providing guidance for specifiers, designers and their clients 
on the relative environmental impacts for a range of different building elemental 
specifications. The ratings within the Guide are based on Life Cycle Assessment, using 
the Environmental Profile Methodology. 

The Green Guide categorises ratings by building type and element. When using the 
Green Guide online, (www.thegreenguide.co.uk), the main page asks the user to 
select a building type. To obtain the appropriate ratings for the assessed building 
elements, select the corresponding building type for this scheme.

Assessment Methodology

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Mandatory requirements are met and credits are awarded where the 
performance requirements (set out in the assessment criteria table) have been met.




Mat 1: Environmental Impact of Materials  |  95


Mat

Design Stage 

•  Confirm that at least three mandatory building elements have achieved a Green 
Guide rating of A+ to D for each building envelope. The mandatory requirement 
applies to 100% of the area for each element. 

•  Where an exact match to a specification cannot be found in the Green Guide, it 
is necessary to find a similar specification. 

•  For specifications that address a function which is not typical for the element, 
e.g. security, severe exposure, unusual loading or structural conditions, refer to 
the Code Service Provider. If in doubt, or if no similar specification is available, 
the assessor should contact the Code service provider for a bespoke rating.

•  Where credits are sought, performance must be calculated using the method 
described in the calculation procedures.

Post Construction Stage 

•  Verify that the evidence provided at the design stage is still valid and that no 
changes have occurred during construction. Where changes have occurred, the 
assessor should reassess the issue as set out for design stage. 

Calculation Procedures 

Design Stage 

Credits are awarded on the basis of the rating in the Green Guide as follows: 

Green Guide Rating Credits 

A+ Rating  3 

A Rating  2 

B Rating  1 

C Rating  0.5 

D Rating  0.25 

E Rating  0 

Where there is more than one specification for an element (e.g. more than one 
type of external wall), Mat 1 performance is calculated based on the area weighted 
Green Guide rating of each specification. For the purpose of this issue, any doors 
with a large expanse of glazing, such as patio doors, should be assessed as windows. 
Similarly, glazed areas of conservatories and rooflights should be assessed as 
windows. 

The Code Mat 1 Calculator Tool allows up to four different specification types per 
element. 

Where there is a close match to a specification in the Green Guide, enter details of 
the specification and its associated Green Guide rating in the appropriate columns. 




96  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Mat

Where a specification does not have a close Green Guide match, the assessor should 
contact the Code service provider for a bespoke rating or use the Online Green Guide 
Calculator to generate a rating. A description of the specification and the bespoke 
rating must then be entered into the Code Mat 1 Calculator Tool and a note made in 
the assessment report to indicate the source of the bespoke rating. 

Calculate and enter the percentage area of each specification type for each element 
in the ‘Percentage’ column. The Green Guide rating for each assessed element must 
also be entered into the Code Mat 1 Calculator Tool. The total credits awarded will 
then be calculated automatically. 

Post Construction Stage 

Confirm that the final building construction matches that specified at design stage. 
Where any design changes have occurred, reassess the element. 

Ensure that the documentary evidence provided meets the requirements as stated in 
the post-construction section of Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance. 

Checklists and Tables 

None.

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

None.

Special Cases 

For mixed use developments, contact the Code Service Provider for advice on how to 
proceed. The following principles will form the basis of guidance given:

•  Where dwellings are located over non-domestic accommodation (e.g. retail 
space or car parking), the lowest residential floor should be assessed as the 
‘ground floor’ using the ‘upper floor’ ratings in the Green Guide.

•  If the external walls, internal walls and/or windows are located over non-
domestic accommodation, only those that relate to the dwellings need to be 
included in the assessment.

•  Where non-domestic accommodation is located between the dwellings and the 
roof, the roof must be assessed as it is protecting the dwellings below. If the 
roof is directly above a commercial use property (e.g. a restaurant or office), 
the equivalent commercial rating for the roof must be used as opposed to the 
ratings for domestic roofs. Roof areas to parts of the building not containing 
dwellings can be omitted from the assessment. 




Mat 2: Responsible Sourcing of Materials – Basic Building Elements  |  97


Mat

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Mat 2  Responsible Sourcing of Materials – 
Basic Building Elements 

6  No 



Aim 


To promote the specification of responsibly sourced materials for the basic building 
elements. 

Assessment Criteria 

Criteria Credits

Where 80% of the assessed materials in the following Building Elements are responsibly 
sourced: 

a)  Frame 

b)  Ground floor 

c)  Upper floors (including separating floors) 

d)  Roof 

e)  External walls 

f)  Internal walls (including separating walls) 

g)  Foundation/substructure (excluding sub-base materials)

h)  Staircase 

Additionally, 100% of any timber in these elements must be legally sourced

1–6 *1

Default Cases 



None


Note: These criteria are assessed at the building envelope level.

*1 See table Cat 3.3 for credit rewards structure 




98  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Mat

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance

Schedule of Evidence Required

Design Stage Post Construction Stage

Completed Code Mat 2 Calculator Tool, 
showing building elements at the design 
stage 



AND 


Detailed documentary evidence stating 
the materials specified in each element

For post construction stage only 
assessments, provide Code Mat 
2 Calculator Tool and detailed 
documentary evidence (as listed 
for design stage) representing the 
dwellings as built


OR

Written confirmation from the 
developer that the materials specified 
in the Code Mat 2 Calculator Tool and 
the detailed documentary evidence 
provided at design stage have been 
used as specified


OR

If different from design stage, provide 
revised Code Mat 2 Calculator Tool 
and detailed documentary evidence (as 
listed for design stage) representing 
the dwellings as built

Where materials are re-used the following 
evidence will be required:

Documentation* stating specific materials 
to be re-used 

*Supplier information or a letter from the 
developer is acceptable

Where materials were re-used the 
following evidence will be required:

Documentation* demonstrating which 
particular materials have been re-used 

*A receipt or letter from the supplier, 
which includes material quantities, is 
acceptable

Where materials are recycled the 
following evidence will be required:

Documentation stating specific recycled 
materials



AND 


A letter of intent to use suppliers who can 
provide an EMS certificate (or equivalent) 
for the recycling process 

Where materials are recycled the 
following evidence will be required:

Documentation stating the particular 
recycled materials used in the 
development 


AND


Documentary evidence confirming the 
key process is certified by EMS




Mat 2: Responsible Sourcing of Materials – Basic Building Elements  |  99


Mat

Where certified materials will be used 
following evidence will be required:

A letter of intent from the developer or 
other detailed documentary evidence 
confirming the product shall be sourced 
from suppliers capable of providing 
certification to the level required for the 
particular tier claimed.


OR

A copy of the relevant certificate(s) as 
appropriate;

•  A copy of the timber scheme certificate 
(including CoC) 

•  BES6001 certificate (or compliant 
sector standard certificate) 

•  EMAS certificate

•  ISO14001 certificate.

•  For small companies, (see Definitions) 
confirmation that the company EMS is 
structured in compliance with  
BS 8555 2003 (or equivalent) and the 
EMS has completed phase audits one 
to four as outlined in BS 8555. This can 
be found in company documentation 
demonstrating the process and typical 
outputs from phase four audits such 
as an EMS manual/ paperwork and 
guidance to staff. Where independent 
certification exists to demonstrate 
these phases, it can be used as 
evidence

Green Dragon Environmental Standard 
® 2006 (Safon Amgylcheddol Y Ddraig 
Werdd ®) completed up to and including 
Level 4. Confirmation is taken from a 
Green Dragon Standard certificate stating 
the company’s achievement of Level 4.  
As company’s achieving Level 4 will 
normally be required to undertake annual 
audits, this certification should be dated 
within 1 year at the point of the last 
purchase made from the company. 

Where certified materials were used 
the following evidence will be required 
(where applicable):

All relevant certificates




100  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Mat

For smaller companies with low 
environmental impacts, a renewal date of 
within 2 years is acceptable.

Where any non-certified timber is used, 
written confirmation from the supplier/s 
confirming that:

•  All timber will come from a legal 
source

•  All timber species and sources to be 
used in the development are not listed 
on any of the CITES appendices for 
endangered or threatened species 
(Appendix I, II, or III*).

* Or in the case of Appendix III of the

CITES list, it will not be sourced from the 
country seeking to protect this species as 
listed in Appendix III.

Where any non-certified timber is used,

written confirmation from the 
supplier(s)

confirming that:

•  All timber comes from a legal 
source.

•  All timber species and sources used 
in the development are not listed 
on any of the CITES appendices for 
endangered or threatened species 
(Appendix I, II, or III*).

* Or in the case of Appendix III of the

CITES list, it has not been sourced from 
the country seeking to protect this 
species as listed in Appendix III.

Where any non-certified timber is 
used, written confirmation from the 
supplier/s confirming that:

•  All timber comes from a legal source

•  All timber species and sources used 
in the development are not listed 
on any of the CITES appendices for 
endangered or threatened species 
(Appendix I, II, or III)

•  Or in the case of Appendix III of the 
CITES list, it has not been sourced 
from the country seeking to protect 
this species as listed in Appendix III.

Definitions

Assessed materials

The following materials are assessed in the calculation of points:

•  Brick (including clay tiles and other ceramics) 




Mat 2: Responsible Sourcing of Materials – Basic Building Elements  |  101


Mat

•  Resin-based composite materials (including GRP and polymeric render, but 
excluding composite which incorporates timber)

•  Concrete (including in situ and pre-cast concrete, blocks, tiles, mortars, 
cementitious renders, etc)

•  Glass 

•  Plastics and rubbers (including EPDM, TPO, PVC, VET, roofing membranes and 
polymeric render)

•  Metals (steel, aluminium etc) 

•  Dressed or building stone including slate

•  Timber, wood panel products and wood-based composites (including cement 
bonded particle board, laminated veneered lumber, glulam)

•  Plasterboard and plaster

•  Bituminous materials, such as roofing membranes and asphalt

•  Other mineral-based materials, including fibre cement and calcium silicate

•  Products with recycled content.

Note: Insulation materials, fixings, adhesives and additives are excluded from the 
assessment. For any other materials which do not fit into the assessed materials or 
the exclusions, please refer to the Code service provider who will identify the relevant 
key processes and supply chain process or processes.

Basic building elements

Basic building elements are defined as follows:

a) Frame 

b) Ground floor 

c)  Upper floors (including separating floors) 

d) Roof (structure and cladding, including any loft boarding) 

e)  External walls (including external cladding) 

f)  Internal walls (including internal partitions and separating walls) 

g) Foundation/substructure 

h) Staircase (includes the tread, risers and stringers).

BES 6001:2008 Framework Standard for Responsible Sourcing of Construction 
Products

BES 6001:2008 is a BRE Global standard that provides a framework for the 
assessment of responsible sourcing schemes and provides a route to certification of 
construction products.

The framework comprises a number of criteria setting out the criteria of an 
organisation in managing the supply of construction products in accordance with a 
set of agreed principles of sustainability. To comply with the standard, a product must 




102  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Mat

meet a number of mandatory criteria, where a product demonstrates compliance 
beyond the mandatory levels, higher levels of performance can be achieved. The 
standard’s performance ratings range from Pass to Good, Very Good and Excellent,

The development of this standard and subsequent certification schemes will, it 
is envisaged, provide construction products, not wholly covered under current 
recognised standards, a means for demonstrating their responsibility sourced 
credentials. In turn this will allow clients, developers and design teams to specify 
responsibly sourced construction products with greater assurance and provide a 
means of demonstrating compliance with the assessment criteria for this BREEAM 
issue.

To view a list of products approved to BES 6001:2008 please visit  
www.greenbooklive.com/page.jsp?id=169

For further information about BES6001:2008, including a copy of the standard itself 
visit: www.greenbooklive.com/page.jsp?id=153 

Chain of custody (CoC)

This is a process used to maintain and document the chronological history of the 
evidence/path for products from forests to consumers. Wood must be tracked from 
the certified forest to the finished product. All the steps, from the transportation 
of wood from the forest to a sawmill until it reaches the customer, must maintain 
adequate inventory control systems that allow for separation and identification of the 
certified product. Chain of custody certification ensures that a facility has procedures 
in place to track wood from certified forests and avoid confusion with non-certified 
wood. Chain of custody is established and audited according to the rules of relevant 
forest certification systems.

CITES

The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and 
Flora.

Code Mat 2 Calculator Tool

A spreadsheet-based tool designed to simplify assessment of this issue, available to 
assessors from the Code service provider.

Composite materials

Composite material can be defined as an engineered material made from two or 
more constituent materials with significantly different physical or chemical properties, 
and which remain separate and distinct on a macroscopic level within the finished 
structure. Resin-based composites (such as GRP and polymeric render) and timber 
composites (such as chipboard/particle board, MDF, OSB, plywood, hardboard, 
laminated veneered lumber, glulam and cement bonded particle board) are required 
to be assessed for responsible sourcing within the Code for Sustainable Homes.

http://www.greenbooklive.com/page.jsp?id=169
http://www.greenbooklive.com/page.jsp?id=153




Mat 2: Responsible Sourcing of Materials – Basic Building Elements  |  103


Mat CPET


Central Point of Expertise on Timber. 


CSA


Canadian Standards Association.


EMS


Environmental management system.



EMAS


Eco-Management and Audit Scheme.



EPDM


Ethylene propylene diene monomer.

Frame

The frame is any of the main structural elements that are not included in the 
roof, external walls and floors. For example, timber or metal studwork within a 
plasterboard partition would be included within the internal walls, and timber joists 
would be included within the floor construction.

Where a concrete or steel frame is used, this would be treated as the frame as it 
would not be integral to the internal walls for example.

Green Dragon Environmental Standard® (Safon Amgylcheddol Y Ddraig 
Werdd®)

A stepped standard used to accredit compliance with the Green Dragon 
environmental management scheme. Depending on the content of the EMS being 
assessed, a level of 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 may be achieved. At level 4 and above, the Green 
Dragon Environmental Standard® can be used as evidence of a compliant EMS for 
small companies being considered under the Mat 2 and Mat 3 issues.

Green Guide Element Number

See Mat 1

Key processes

These are the final major aspects of processing that are carried out. There may be 
a single process or multiple processes requiring assessment, depending on the end 
product. The requirements for each of the assessed materials are detailed in table 
Cat 3.2: EMS Requirements. 




104  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Mat

Legally sourced timber

The definition of legally sourced timber follows the UK Government’s definition of 
legally sourced timber, according to the CPET 2nd Edition report on UK Government 
timber procurement policy. The report states that legal timber and wood derived 
products are those which originate from a forest where the following criteria are met:

1. The forest owner/manager holds legal use rights to the forest

2. There is compliance by both the forest management organisation and any 
contractors with local and national legal criteria including those relevant to:

  a.  Forest management

  b. Environment

  c.  Labour and Welfare

  d. Health and safety

  e. Other parties’ tenure and use rights

3. All relevant royalties and taxes are paid

4. There is compliance with the criteria of CITES

Relevant documentation demonstrating the above must be provided or made 
available on request subject to the availability of such materials in the country 
concerned. Certification against any of the timber certification schemes identified in 
tiers 1, 2 and 4 demonstrates that timber has been legally sourced.


MDF


Medium density fibreboard.



MTCC


Malaysian Timber Certification Council.


OSB


Oriented strand board.



PEFC


Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certification Schemes.

Post-consumer waste stream

Waste material generated by households or by commercial, industrial and institutional 
facilities in their role as end-users of the product, which can no longer be used for its 
intended purpose. This includes returns of material from the distribution chain.




Mat 2: Responsible Sourcing of Materials – Basic Building Elements  |  105


Mat

Pre-consumer waste stream 

Waste material generated during manufacturing processes. Excluded is reutilisation 
of materials such as rework, regrind or scrap generated in a process and capable of 
being reclaimed within the same process that generated it.


PVC


Polyvinyl chloride.

Recycled material

Materials diverted from the pre-consumer and/or post-consumer waste streams that 
require significant processing before they can be used again. For further information 
refer to calculating and declaring recycled content in construction products, ‘Rules of 
Thumb’ Guide (WRAP, 2008). 

Responsible sourcing 

This is demonstrated through auditable third-party certification schemes. 

Re-used materials 

Materials diverted from the waste stream and used again without further processing, 
or with minor processing that does not alter the nature of the material (e.g. cleaning, 
cutting, fixing to other materials). 


SFI


Sustainable Forestry Initiative.


SGS


Société Générale de Surveillance. This is a Swiss-based private monitoring company.

Small company

A company is defined as ‘small’ if it satisfies at least two of the following criteria:

a. A turnover of not more than £5.6 million

b. A balance sheet total of not more than £2.8 million

c.  50 employees or fewer.

This is based on the definition stated in the Companies Act of 1985.

Supply Chain EMS

This covers all the major aspects of processing and extraction involved in the supply 
chain for the end product. Note: Recycled materials are not required to demonstrate 
a supply chain EMS. If EMS certification is provided for the key processes for recycled 
materials, this is assumed by default. 




106  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Mat TFT

The Forest Trust.

Tier levels 

The tier levels are graded on a scale to reflect the rigour of the certification scheme 
used to demonstrate responsible sourcing, forming the basis for awarding points (all 
as detailed in table Cat 3.1). 


TPO


Thermoplastic olefin.

Verified

‘Verified’ is a scheme produced by SmartWood.


VET


(Mat 2 and 3)

Vinyl ethylene terpolymer.

Assessment Methodology

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met.

Design Stage 

•  Where a construction make-up is not specified within the Code Mat 2 
Calculator Tool, confirm the construction details of elements using the 
specification and drawings, or similar (see Information Required to Demonstrate 
Compliance). Obtain a breakdown of volumes and/or percentages of materials 
for each element present. 

•  Obtain the relevant confirmation of tier certification for all* materials, from all 
sources/suppliers. 

  * The following exclusions apply: 

  Material groups not included in the list in Definitions (e.g. insulation materials, 
fixings, adhesives, additives). 

  Materials that account for less than 10% by volume of an element may also be 
excluded (e.g. screws). However, if certification has been provided for materials 
in this category, it may be beneficial to include them in the calculation (e.g. if a 
material type accounting for 9% is placed in a higher tier than other materials 
used to make up the element). 




Mat 2: Responsible Sourcing of Materials – Basic Building Elements  |  107


Mat

•  Assign a tier level to each material based on the level of certification provided 
(see table: Cat 3.1: Tier Levels, and Compliance and Information Required to 
Demonstrate Compliance). 

•  Follow the calculation procedures outlined below. It is recommended that the 
Code Mat 2 Calculator Tool is used to assess the number of points and credits 
to be awarded. 

•  Ensure that all timber is legally sourced and none of the species to be used is 
identified on the CITES list. 

Notes: 

1. For any other materials which do not fit into the assessed materials or the 
exclusion, please refer back to the Code service provider who will identify the 
relevant key processes and supply chain process(es).

2. MDF, chipboard, OSB and cement bonded particle board are all considered as 
timber and therefore must be assessed as timber material.

3. Where a mix of virgin and recycled timber is used, only the virgin timber needs 
to be assessed. Credits can then be awarded based on the certification schemes 
it is under. 

4. Slate is classed as stone and is therefore considered as an assessed material.

Post Construction Stage 

•  Confirm that the final building construction matches that specified at design 
stage. Where any design changes have occurred, reassess the certification tier 
for each element according to the methodology set out for design stage. 

Calculation Procedures 

Points and credits for this issue should be calculated using the Code Mat 2 Calculator 
Tool. The tool will calculate the total number of points awarded to each element 
taking into account the scenarios mentioned above. It will also state the associated 
number of credits. 

Elements should be entered as present or not present and the tool will calculate the 
range of points required to achieve a number of credits in accordance with table: 
Cat 3.3. A minimum of five elements must be assessed. This is the minimum 
number of elements assumed by the calculator tool. Where fewer are indicated, 
the calculator will award zero credits and flag an error message, as it does at other 
stages if there is non-compliance with any of the criteria.

A minimum of 80% of each material assessed must comply with tiers 1 to 4 
(excluding materials not assessed). 

If 80% of an assessed element is compliant with a single tier, the full score available 
for that tier will apply. 




108  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Mat

If 80% of an element is compliant over a number of tiers, the calculator will first 
review the percentage compliant with the highest tier and apportion a score to 
that. If less than 80% is compliant, it will review the percentage of the element in 
the next highest tier and apportion a score to that. This will continue until the 80% 
requirement has been met.

Consequently, it may be beneficial to include even small percentages of materials that 
are in the higher tiers if the majority of the rest of the element would otherwise be 
allocated to a lower tier level.

Checklists and Tables 

Table: Cat 3.1 Tier Levels

Tier 
Level

Issue Assessed Points 
Available 


per 

Element

Evidence /  
Measure 
Assessed

Examples of Compliant Schemes

1 Legality & Responsible 
Sourcing

3 Certification 
Scheme

FSC, CSA, SFI with CoC, PEFC, Reused 
Materials, Schemes compliant with 
BES6001:200861 (or similar) Excellent* 
and Very Good* Performance Ratings 
(Note; the EMS required to achieve 
these ratings must be independently 
certified**)

2a Legality & Responsible 
Sourcing

2.5 Certification 
Scheme

Schemes compliant with BES6001:2008 
(or similar) ‘Good’ Performance Rating 
(Note: the EMS required to achieve 
this rating must be independently 
certified**).

2b Legality & Responsible 
Sourcing

2 Certification 
Scheme

Schemes compliant with BES6001:2008 
(or similar) ‘Pass’ Performance Rating 
(Note: the EMS required to achieve this 
rating must be independently certified).

3 Legality & Responsible 
Sourcing

1.5 Certification 
Scheme / EMS

Timber: MTCC***, Verified****, SGS, 


TFT 


Other materials: Certified EMS for the 
Key Process and Supply Chain

Recycled materials with certified EMS for 
the Key Process

4 Legality & Responsible 
Sourcing

1 Certification 
Scheme / EMS

Certified EMS for the Key Process




Mat 2: Responsible Sourcing of Materials – Basic Building Elements  |  109


Mat

Notes to table Cat 3.1: 

Where any timber is used, it must be legally sourced. Where evidence cannot be 
provided to demonstrate legal sourcing for any element, no points can be awarded 
for the Responsible Sourcing Issue.

Where cement and aggregate, or dry mix concrete are mixed on site, (i.e. not 
concrete previously certified as pre–cast concrete products or wet ready mix 
concrete), certification must cover the manufacture of the cement as the primary 
process, and the extraction of the aggregate and limestone used to make the cement 
as the supply chain process.

* Performance ratings for schemes compliant with BES6001:2008 (or similar) can only 
be used to demonstrate compliance with the assessment criteria for this issue where 
certification covers the key process and supply chain processes for the material being 
assessed.

** In BES6001:2008 to achieve a ‘Pass’, level ‘a’ must, as a minimum, be achieved 
for clauses 3.3.1, 3.3.2 and 3.3.3. Under clause 3.3.2 level ‘a’ requires a documented 
EMS system following the principles of ISO14001, but not formal certification. To 
achieve higher ratings such as ‘Good’, ‘Very Good’ and Excellent a minimum number 
of points from a combination of clauses 3.3.1, 3.3.2 and 3.3.3 must be achieved. It is 
possible therefore to get a ‘Good’ or ‘Very good’ rating by only complying with level 
‘a’ for clause 3.3.2 and levels ‘c’ and ‘d’ for the other two clauses without necessarily 
having in place a formal independently certified EMS (as required above). In 
conducting BES6001 assessment, if the assessor confirms full compliance with clause 
3.3.2 level ‘a’ the requirement for an independently certified EMS has been met.

*** PEFC International has recently endorsed the Malaysian MTCS scheme, as a 
result any MTCC timber certified against the new PEFC endorsed scheme documents 
can be classified as tier 1 for the purposes of the BREEAM assessment. The PEFC 
endorsement only covers certificates issued against the latest MTCC scheme 
documents, it must be stressed therefore that any holders of certifications against 
the previous MTCC scheme documents, including the forest management standard 
MC&I 2001 or any parts thereof, are NOT PEFC endorsed and this timber must still be 
classified as Tier 3.

When seeking the higher tier level for MTCC certified timber the assessor will need to 
verify the above via the scope of the supplier’s certificate.

For further information and guidance please visit the PEFC website: http://www.pefc.
org/internet/html/members_schemes/4_1120_59/5_1246_320/5_1123_1887.htm

*** “Verified” is the name of a scheme produced by SmartWood. 

http://www.pefc.org/internet/html/members_schemes/4_1120_59/5_1246_320/5_1123_1887.htm
http://www.pefc.org/internet/html/members_schemes/4_1120_59/5_1246_320/5_1123_1887.htm




110  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Mat

Table: Cat 3.2 Environmental Management System (EMS) Requirements

Material Key Process Supply Chain Processes 

Brick (including clay tiles and 
other ceramics)

Product manufacture  Clay extraction 

Resin-based composite materials 
(including GRP and polymeric 
render, but excluding composite 
using timber)

Composite product manufacture  •   Glass fibre production (or other 
principal reinforcement material 
if used)

•   Polymer production (or other 
principal matrix material if used)

In situ concrete (including ready 
mix and cementitious mortars and 
renders)

Ready mixed concrete plant •  Cement production

•   Aggregate extraction and 
production

Precast concrete and other 
concrete products (including 
blocks, cladding, precast flooring, 
concrete or cementitious roof 
tiles) 

Concrete product manufacture •  Cement production

•   Aggregate extraction and 
production

Glass  Glass production  •  Sand extraction 

•   Soda ash production or 
extraction 

Plastics and rubbers (including 
polymeric renders, EPDM, TPO, 
PVC and VET roofing membranes)

Plastic/rubber product 
manufacture 

Main polymer production 

Metals (steel, aluminium, etc)  Metal product manufacture – e.g. 
cladding production, steel section 
production 

Metal production: 

•   Steel: electric arc furnace or basic 
oxygen furnace process

•   Aluminium: ingot production 

•   Copper: ingot or cathode 
production 

Dressed or building stone 
(including slate)

Stone product manufacture  Stone extraction 

Plasterboard and plaster Plasterboard or plaster 
manufacture 

•  Gypsum extraction 

•   Synthetic gypsum (from flue 
gas desulphurisation) by default 
(recycled content)

Virgin timber and timber products 
such as laminated veneered 
lumber, glulam, etc

Timber from certified sources  •  Timber from certified sources

Cement bonded particle board Key supply chain process for the 
production of cement bonded 
particle board and the associated 
timber certification(s) are required. 

•  Cement production

•  Timber from certified sources

Wood panel products such as 
oriented strand board, plywood, 
chipboard/particle board, etc)

Wood panel products, including 
those with recycled content, can 
only use the timber certification 
route


    

continued




Mat 2: Responsible Sourcing of Materials – Basic Building Elements  |  111


Mat

Table: Cat 3.2 Environmental Management System (EMS) Requirements

Material Key Process Supply Chain Processes 

Bituminous materials, such as 
roofing membranes and asphalt

Product manufacture •  Bitumen production

•   Aggregate extraction and 
production

Other mineral-based materials, 
including fibre cement and 
calcium silicate

Product manufacture •  Cement production

•  Lime production

•   Other mineral extraction and 
production

Products with 100% recycled 
content

Product manufacture  Recycled input by default

Products with lower percentage of 
recycled content

Product manufacture •   Supply chain process(es) for any 
virgin material in the relevant 
product type above

•  Recycled input by default

Any other product Key process is likely to be product 
manufacture

One or two main inputs with 
significant production or extraction 
impacts should be identified

Excluded products:

insulation materials, fixings, 
adhesives, additives

N/A N/A

Table: Cat 3.3 Credit Structure

Number of Elements Credits Available

6 4 3 2

Range of Points


8765≥ 18


≥ 15.75

≥ 13.5

≥ 11.25



≥ 12


≥ 10.25


≥ 9


≥ 7.5


≥ 9


≥ 7.87

≥ 6.75

≥ 5.625


≥ 6


≥ 5.25

≥ 4.5

≥ 3.75

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

Timber and Environmental Management Schemes (EMS) 

Where an environmental management scheme is used to assess products made from 
recycled timber, 100% of the timber content must be recycled or sourced from one 
of the recognised timber certification schemes in table: Cat 3.1. A timber product 
with 50% recycled timber and 50% legally sourced timber will not comply with the 
criteria and will not be awarded any points. 

Using an EMS for new timber does not demonstrate timber certification and 
therefore does not qualify for points. 




112  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Mat

A statement of intent from a product manufacturer and/or supplier does not meet 
the requirements for this issue.

Special Cases 

If an element is made up primarily of a material not specified in this issue (e.g. straw 
bales), please contact the Code service provider for guidance on how to proceed.

For mixed use buildings, please refer to special cases in issue Mat 1. 




Mat 3: Responsible Sourcing of Materials – Finishing Elements  |  113


Mat

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Mat 3 Responsible Sourcing of Materials – 
Finishing Elements

3 No 



Aim 


To promote the specification of responsibly sourced materials for the finishing 
elements. 

Assessment Criteria 

Criteria Credits 

Where 80% of the assessed materials in the following Finishing Elements are responsibly 
sourced: 

a)  Staircase 

b)  Windows 

c)  External & internal doors 

d)  Skirting 

e)  Panelling 

f)  Furniture 

g)  Fascias 

h)  Any other significant use 

Additionally, 100% of any timber in these elements must be legally sourced



1–3 


Default Cases 

None 




114  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Mat

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance 

Schedule of Evidence Required

Design Stage Post Construction Stage

Completed Code Mat 3 Calculator Tool, 
showing building elements at the design 
stage 



AND 


Detailed documentary evidence stating 
the materials specified in each element 

For post construction stage only 
assessments, provide Code Mat 
3 Calculator Tool and detailed 
documentary evidence (as listed for 
design stage) representing the dwellings 
as built


OR

Written confirmation from the 
developer that the materials specified in 
the Code Mat 3 Calculator Tool and the 
detailed documentary evidence provided 
at design stage have been used as 
specified


OR

Where different from design stage, 
provide revised Code Mat 3 Calculator 
Tool and detailed documentary evidence 
(as listed for design stage) representing 
the dwellings as built

Where materials are re-used the 
following evidence will be required:

Documentation* stating specific 
materials to be re-used 

*Supplier information or a letter from 
the developer is acceptable

Where materials were re-used the 
following evidence will be required:

Documentation* demonstrating which 
particular materials have been re-used 

*A receipt or letter from the supplier, 
which includes material quantities, is 
acceptable

Where materials are recycled the 
following evidence will be required:

Documentation stating specific recycled 
materials



AND 


A letter of intent to use suppliers who 
can provide an EMS certificate (or 
equivalent) for the recycling process 

Where materials were recycled the 
following evidence will be required:

Documentation stating the particular 
recycled materials used in the 
development 


AND


Documentary evidence confirming the 
key process is certified by EMS




Mat 3: Responsible Sourcing of Materials – Finishing Elements  |  115


Mat

Where certified materials will be used 
following evidence will be required:

A letter of intent from the developer or 
other detailed documentary evidence 
confirming the product shall be sourced 
from suppliers capable of providing 
certification to the level required for the 
particular tier claimed.


OR

A copy of the relevant certificate(s) as 
appropriate;

• A copy of the timber scheme 
certificate (including CoC) 

•  BES6001 certificate (or compliant 
sector standard certificate) 

•  EMAS certificate

•  ISO14001 certificate.

•  For small companies, (see Relevant 
Definitions) confirmation that the 
company EMS is structured in 
compliance with BS 8555 2003 
(or equivalent) and the EMS has 
completed phase audits one to four 
as outlined in BS 8555. This can be 
found in company documentation 
demonstrating the process and 
typical outputs from phase four 
audits such as an EMS manual/ 
paperwork and guidance to staff. 
Where independent certification 
exists to demonstrate these phases, it 
can be used as evidence

Green Dragon Environmental Standard 
® 2006 (Safon Amgylcheddol Y 
Ddraig Werdd ®) completed up to 
and including Level 4. Confirmation is 
taken from a Green Dragon Standard 
certificate stating the company’s 
achievement of Level 4. As company’s 
achieving Level 4 will normally be 
required to undertake annual audits, 
this certification should be dated within

Where certified materials were used 
the following evidence will be required 
(where applicable):

All relevant certificates




116  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Mat

1 year at the point of the last purchase 
made from the company. For smaller 
companies with low environmental 
impacts, a renewal date of within 2 
years is acceptable.

Where any non-certified timber is used, 
written confirmation from the supplier/s 
confirming that:

•  All timber will come from a legal 
source

•  All timber species and sources to 
be used in the development are not 
listed on any of the CITES appendices 
for endangered or threatened species 
(Appendix I, II, or III*).

* Or in the case of Appendix III of the

CITES list, it will not be sourced from the 
country seeking to protect this species 
as listed in Appendix III.

Where any non-certified timber is used,

written confirmation from the supplier(s)

confirming that:

•  All timber comes from a legal source.

•  All timber species and sources used 
in the development are not listed 
on any of the CITES appendices for 
endangered or threatened species 
(Appendix I, II, or III*).

* Or in the case of Appendix III of the

CITES list, it has not been sourced from 
the country seeking to protect this 
species as listed in Appendix III.

Where any non-certified timber is used, 
written confirmation from the supplier/s 
confirming that:

•  All timber comes from a legal source

•  All timber species and sources used 
in the development are not listed 
on any of the CITES appendices for 
endangered or threatened species 
(Appendix I, II, or III)

•  Or in the case of Appendix III of the 
CITES list, it has not been sourced 
from the country seeking to protect 
this species as listed in Appendix III.

Definitions

Assessed materials

The following materials are assessed in the calculation of points:

•  Brick (including clay tiles and other ceramics) 




Mat 3: Responsible Sourcing of Materials – Finishing Elements  |  117


Mat

•  Resin-based composite materials (including GRP and polymeric render, but 
excluding composite which incorporates timber)

•  Concrete (including in situ and pre-cast concrete, blocks, tiles, mortars, 
cementitious renders, etc)

•  Glass 

•  Plastics and rubbers (including EPDM, TPO, PVC, VET, roofing membranes and 
polymeric render)

•  Metals (steel, aluminium etc) 

•  Dressed or building stone including slate

•  Timber, wood panel products and wood-based composites (including cement 
bonded particle board, laminated veneered lumber, glulam)

•  Plasterboard and plaster

•  Bituminous materials, such as roofing membranes and asphalt

•  Other mineral-based materials, including fibre cement and calcium silicate

•  Products with recycled content.

Note: Insulation materials, fixings, adhesives and additives are excluded from the 
assessment. For any other materials which do not fit into the assessed materials or 
the exclusions, please refer to the Code service provider who will identify the relevant 
key processes and supply chain process or processes.

BES 6001:2008 Framework Standard for Responsible Sourcing of Construction 
Products

BES 6001:2008 is a BRE Global standard that provides a framework for the 
assessment of responsible sourcing schemes and provides a route to certification of 
construction products.

The framework comprises a number of criteria setting out the criteria of an 
organisation in managing the supply of construction products in accordance with a 
set of agreed principles of sustainability. To comply with the standard, a product must 
meet a number of mandatory criteria, where a product demonstrates compliance 
beyond the mandatory levels, higher levels of performance can be achieved. The 
standard’s performance ratings range from Pass to Good, Very Good and Excellent,

The development of this standard and subsequent certification schemes will, it 
is envisaged, provide construction products, not wholly covered under current 
recognised standards, a means for demonstrating their responsibility sourced 
credentials. In turn this will allow clients, developers and design teams to specify 
responsibly sourced construction products with greater assurance and provide a 
means of demonstrating compliance with the assessment criteria for this BREEAM 
issue.

To view a list of products approved to BES 6001:2008 please visit  
www.greenbooklive.com/page.jsp?id=169

http://www.greenbooklive.com/page.jsp?id=169




118  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Mat

For further information about BES6001:2008, including a copy of the standard itself 
visit: www.greenbooklive.com/page.jsp?id=153 

Chain of custody (CoC)

This is a process used to maintain and document the chronological history of the 
evidence/path for products from forests to consumers. Wood must be tracked from 
the certified forest to the finished product. All the steps, from the transportation 
of wood from the forest to a sawmill until it reaches the customer, must maintain 
adequate inventory control systems that allow for separation and identification of the 
certified product. Chain of custody certification ensures that a facility has procedures 
in place to track wood from certified forests and avoid confusion with non-certified 
wood. Chain of custody is established and audited according to the rules of relevant 
forest certification systems.

CITES

The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and 
Flora.

Composite materials

Composite material can be defined as an engineered material made from two or 
more constituent materials with significantly different physical or chemical properties, 
and which remain separate and distinct on a macroscopic level within the finished 
structure. Resin-based composites (such as GRP and polymeric render) and timber 
composites (such as chipboard/particle board, MDF, OSB, plywood, hardboard, 
laminated veneered lumber, glulam and cement bonded particle board) are required 
to be assessed for responsible sourcing within the Code for Sustainable Homes.



CPET


Central Point of Expertise on Timber. 


CSA


Canadian Standards Association.


EMS


Environmental management system.



EMAS


Eco-Management and Audit Scheme.



EPDM


Ethylene propylene diene monomer.

http://www.greenbooklive.com/page.jsp?id=153




Mat 3: Responsible Sourcing of Materials – Finishing Elements  |  119


Mat

Finishing elements 

For the purpose of this issue, the assessed finishing elements are defined below:

a)  Stair (including handrails, balustrades, banisters, other guarding/rails, excluding 
staircase)

b) Window (including sub-frames, boards, sills) 

c)  External and internal door (including sub-frames, frames, linings, door) 

d) Skirting (including architrave, skirting board and rails) 

e)  Panelling (including any other trim) 

f)  Furniture (including fitted kitchen, bedroom and bathroom units) 

g) Fascias (soffit boards, bargeboards, gutter boards, others) 

h) Any other significant use.


FSC


Forest Stewardship Council.

Green Dragon Environmental Standard® (Safon Amgylcheddol Y Ddraig 
Werdd®)

A stepped standard used to accredit compliance with the Green Dragon 
environmental management scheme. Depending on the content of the EMS being 
assessed, a level of 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 may be achieved. At level 4 and above, the Green 
Dragon Environmental Standard® can be used as evidence of a compliant EMS for 
small companies being considered under the Mat 2 and Mat 3 issues.

Green Guide Element Number

See Mat 1

Key processes

These are the final major aspects of processing that are carried out. There may be 
a single process or multiple processes requiring assessment, depending on the end 
product. The requirements for each of the assessed materials are detailed in table 
Cat 3.2: EMS Requirements. 

Legally sourced timber

The definition of legally sourced timber follows the UK Government’s definition of 
legally sourced timber, according to the CPET 2nd Edition report on UK Government 
timber procurement policy. The report states that legal timber and wood derived 
products are those which originate from a forest where the following criteria  
are met:

1. The forest owner/manager holds legal use rights to the forest




120  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Mat

2. There is compliance by both the forest management organisation and any 
contractors with local and national legal criteria including those relevant to:

  a.  Forest management

  b. Environment

  c.  Labour and Welfare

  d. Health and safety

  e. Other parties’ tenure and use rights

3. All relevant royalties and taxes are paid

4. There is compliance with the criteria of CITES

Relevant documentation demonstrating the above must be provided or made 
available on request subject to the availability of such materials in the country 
concerned. Certification against any of the timber certification schemes identified in 
tiers 1, 2 and 4 demonstrates that timber has been legally sourced.


MDF


Medium density fibreboard.



MTCC


Malaysian Timber Certification Council.


OSB


Oriented strand board.



PEFC


Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certification Schemes.

Post-consumer waste stream

Waste material generated by households or by commercial, industrial and institutional 
facilities in their role as end-users of the product, which can no longer be used for its 
intended purpose. This includes returns of material from the distribution chain.

Pre-consumer waste stream 

Waste material generated during manufacturing processes. Excluded is reutilisation 
of materials such as rework, regrind or scrap generated in a process and capable of 
being reclaimed within the same process that generated it.


PVC


Polyvinyl chloride.




Mat 3: Responsible Sourcing of Materials – Finishing Elements  |  121


Mat

Recycled material

Materials diverted from the pre-consumer and/or post-consumer waste streams that 
require significant processing before they can be used again. For further information 
please see Calculating and declaring recycled content in construction products, ‘Rules 
of Thumb’ Guide (WRAP, 2008). 

Assessment Methodology 

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met.

Design Stage 

•  Where a construction make-up is not specified within the Code Mat 3 
Calculator Tool, confirm the construction details of elements using the 
specification and drawings, or similar (see Information Required to Demonstrate 
Compliance). Obtain a breakdown of volumes and/or percentages of materials 
for each element present. 

•  Obtain the relevant confirmation of tier certification for design stage (see 
Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance) for all* materials, from all 
sources/suppliers. 

  * The following exclusions apply: 

  Material groups not included in the list in Definitions (e.g. insulation materials, 
fixings, adhesives, additives). 

  Materials that account for less than 10% by volume of an element may also be 
excluded (e.g. screws). However, if certification has been provided for materials 
in this category, it may be beneficial to include them in the calculation (e.g. if a 
material type accounting for 9% is placed in a higher tier than other materials 
used to make up the element). 

•  Assign a tier level to each material based on the level of certification provided 
(see table Cat 3.1: Tier Levels, and Compliance and Information Required to 
Demonstrate Compliance). 

•  Follow the calculation procedures outlined below. Ensure that all timber is 
legally sourced and none of the species to be used is identified on the CITES list. 

Notes: 

1. For any other materials which do not fit into the assessed materials or the 
exclusion, please refer back to the Code service provider who will identify the 
relevant key processes and supply chain process(es).

2. MDF, chipboard, OSB and cement bonded particle board are all considered as 
timber and therefore must be assessed as timber material.




122  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Mat

3. Where a mix of virgin and recycled timber is used, only the virgin timber needs 
to be assessed. Credits can then be awarded based on the certification schemes 
it is under. 

4. Slate is classed as stone and is therefore considered as an assessed material.

Post Construction Stage 

•  Confirm that the final building construction matches that specified at design 
stage. Where any design changes have occurred, reassess the certification tier 
for each element according to the methodology set out above. 

Calculation Procedures 

Credits for this issue should be calculated using the Code Mat 3 Calculator Tool. The 
tool will calculate the total number of points awarded to each element taking into 
account the scenarios mentioned above. It will also state the associated number of 
credits. A copy of the tool should be included with the assessment report. 

Elements should be entered as present or not present and the tool will calculate the 
range of points required to achieve a number of credits in accordance with table Cat 
3.3. The calculator is programmed to flag up error messages at stages where there is 
non-compliance with the criteria, which should assist with assessing this issue.

A minimum of 80% of each material assessed must comply with tiers 1 to 4 
(excluding materials not assessed). 

If 80% of an assessed element is compliant with a single tier, the full score available 
for that tier will apply. 

If 80% of an element is compliant over a number if tiers, the calculator will first 
review the percentage compliant with the highest tier and apportion a score to 
that. If less than 80% is compliant, it will review the percentage of the element in 
the next highest tier and apportion a score to that. This will continue until the 80% 
requirement has been met.

Consequently, it may be beneficial to include even small percentages of materials that 
are in the higher tiers if the majority of the rest of the element would otherwise be 
allocated a lower tier level. 




Mat 3: Responsible Sourcing of Materials – Finishing Elements  |  123


Mat

Checklists and Tables 

Refer to Mat 2 for Tier Levels and EMS requirements.

Table Cat 3.4: Credit Structure

Credits Available

3 2 1

No. of Elements Present Points Range


8765= 18


≥ 15.75

≥ 13.5

≥ 11.25



≥ 12


≥ 10.25


≥ 9


≥ 7.5


≥ 6


≥ 5.25

≥ 4.5

≥ 3.75

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

Timber and EMS Schemes 

Where an EMS scheme is used to assess products made from recycled timber, 100% 
of the timber content must be recycled or sourced from one of the recognised timber 
certification schemes in table Cat 3.1. A timber product with 50% recycled timber 
and 50% legally sourced timber will not comply with the criteria and will not be 
awarded any points. 

Using an EMS scheme for new timber does not demonstrate timber certification and 
therefore does not qualify for any points. 

A statement of intent from a product manufacturer and/or supplier does not meet 
the requirements for this issue.

Special Cases 

If an element being considered is made up primarily of a material not specified in this 
issue, please contact the Code service provider for further guidance.

For mixed use buildings refer to special cases in Mat 1. 




124  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Sur

Category 4:  Surface Water Run-off

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Sur 1 Management of Surface Water  
Run-off from Developments

2 Yes



Aim 


To design surface water drainage for housing developments which avoid, reduce and 
delay the discharge of rainfall run-off to watercourses and public sewers using SuDS 
techniques. This will protect receiving waters from pollution and minimise the risk of 
flooding and other environmental damage in watercourses.

Note: This section will be revised when the National Standards for Sustainable 
Drainage and associated regulations come into force. 

Assessment Criteria* 1 2 

Criteria

Credits Mandatory 
Elements

Hydraulic Control Criteria

The SuDS Management Train should be used as a guide to achieve the following:

1) Peak Rate of Run-off

If there is no increase in the man-made impermeable area as a result of the new 
development, then the peak rate of run-off criterion does not apply.

Where there is an increase in impermeable area, ensure that the peak rate of run-
off over the development lifetime, allowing for climate change, will be no greater 
for the developed site than it was for the pre-development site. This should comply 
at the 1 year1 and 100 year2 return period events (see Calculation Procedures).

Where the pre-development peak rate of run-off for the site would result in 
a requirement for the post-development flow rate (referred to as the limiting 
discharge) to be less than 5 l/s at a discharge point, a flow rate of up to 5 l/s may be 
used where required to reduce the risk of blockage.

Note: If as a result of the new development, there is an increase in the volume of 
run-off discharged for the 100 year 6 hour event and section 2A cannot be met 
(see section 2 below), these run-off rates do not apply. 

None All Levels

continued

*  Supplementary guidance will be published by the Welsh Assembly Government to reflect planning policy and practice in 
Wales. The guidance which will not materially affect the aims and objectives of the Surface Water Run Off requirements 
of the Code, will be based on Technical Advice Note 15 (TAN 15) which supplements Planning Policy Wales, and surface 
management techniques currently in force in Wales. 

1  This can also be referred to as the 1 in 1, 1:1 or 100% probability of an event occurring in any year.
2  This can also be referred to as the 1 in 100, 1:100 or 1% probability of an event occurring in any year.




Sur 1: Management of Surface Water Run-off from Developments  |  125


Sur

Criteria

Credits Mandatory 
Elements

2) Volume of Run-off

If there is no increase in the man-made impermeable area as a result of the new 
development, then the volume of run-off criteria does not apply.

If the developed site would otherwise discharge, over the development lifetime 
allowing for climate change, a greater volume of rainwater run-off than the pre-
development site for the 100 year 6 hour event, (see Calculation Procedures) then 
criterion A applies. If A cannot be satisfied then B applies. 

A: Ensure that the post development volume of run-off, allowing for climate 
change over the development lifetime, is no greater than it would have been 
before the development.

The additional predicted volume of run-off for the 100 year 6 hour event must 
be prevented from leaving the site by using infiltration or other SuDS techniques 
(see Definitions).


OR

B: If A cannot be satisfied (full justification must be provided) then reduce the 
post development peak rate of run-off to the limiting discharge.

The limiting discharge is the pre-development flow rate equivalent to the 1-year 
peak flow rate, mean annual flood flow rate (Qbar) or 2 l/s/ha, whichever is the 
highest flow rate. 

For the 1-year peak flow rate the 1 year return period event criterion in section 
1 above, applies. For all other events up to the 100 year return period event, 
the peak rate of run-off for the developed site must not exceed the limiting 
discharge. 

Where the limiting discharge flow rate would require a flow rate of less than 5 
l/s at a discharge point, a flow rate of up to 5 l/s may be used where required to 
reduce the risk of blockage.

Note: Criterion B generally results in more storage than compliance with criterion A.

3) Designing for local drainage system failure.

Demonstrate that the flooding of property would not occur in the event of local 
drainage system failure (caused either by extreme rainfall or a lack of maintenance).

Note: Where the run-off is being discharged into an existing drainage system, the 
responsible body may stipulate a more stringent set of hydraulic flow rate criterion 
which will therefore take precedence.

Water Quality Criteria

1.  One credit can be awarded by ensuring there is no discharge from the 
developed site for rainfall depths up to 5 mm (see Calculation Procedures). 

2.  One credit can be awarded by ensuring that:

•  The run-off from all hard surfaces shall receive an appropriate level of 
treatment in accordance with The SuDS Manual to minimise the risk of 
pollution. 

Note: The SuDS Manual best practice recommendations should be followed where 
there is a risk to groundwater from infiltration (for example contaminated land, 
developments with high risk of pollution incidents) 


1 1 

Default Cases:

The mandatory criteria can be deemed to be met by default if the site discharges rainwater directly to a tidal 
estuary or the sea. Credits cannot be awarded unless the relevant water quality criteria are met.




126  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Sur

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

Mandatory Elements:

Statement from the appropriately qualified 
professional confirming that they are 
qualified in line with the Code definition. 


AND


The appropriately qualified professional’s 
report containing all information necessary 
to demonstrate compliance with the peak 
rate of run-off and volume of run-off 
requirements. The report should include:

•  Areas of permeable and impermeable 
surfaces on the site pre- and 
post- development

Where the impermeable area has increased 
post development the report should also 
include:

•  Details of the permeability characteristics 
of the site pre- and post-development 
(e.g. infiltration tests etc where 
appropriate)

•  Peak rates of run-off (l/s) calculations 
for the 1 year and 100 year events, pre- 
and post-development, including an 
allowance for climate change over the 
development lifetime

•  Detailed documentary evidence showing 
the methods used to reduce the peak 
rate of run-off to pre-development rates

•  The pre- development volume of run-off 
(m3) for the 100 year 6 hour event

•  The additional volume of run-off (m3) 
for the 100 year 6 hour event caused 
by the development without mitigation 
measures

•  The additional volume of run-off (m3) 
with the proposed mitigation

Mandatory Elements:

Written confirmation from the 
developer or appropriately qualified 
professional that the solutions 
designed have been implemented 
as specified in the design stage 
evidence


OR

Where different from the design 
stage, provide the evidence as 
listed for the design stage but 
representing the development as 
built


OR

For post construction stage only 
assessments, provide evidence 
as listed for the design stage but 
representing the development as 
built

Evidence must be provided at 
post construction to confirm that 
maintenance responsibilities have 
been defined for any SuDS solutions 
installed. 

For information: Where SuDS have 
been implemented, the location and 
brief explanation of their purpose 
should be included in the Home 
User Guide (in Code Category 8: 
Man 1) where supplied.

Where more than five years 
have passed since the Flood Risk 
Assessment was carried out: 

•  Confirmation that the basis of 
the Flood Risk Assessment has 
not changed.




Sur 1: Management of Surface Water Run-off from Developments  |  127


Sur

•  Information to demonstrate that the 
hierarchical approach to reducing 
the additional volume of run-off was 
followed

•  Information on the calculation methods 
used, as well as summary results


AND


A Flood Risk Assessment confirming the risk 
of flooding from all sources of flooding (this 
may be contained within the appropriately 
qualified professional’s report)


AND


Drawings showing the pre-development 
drainage for the site (natural or constructed)


AND


Drawings showing the proposed drainage 
solution, system failure flood flow routes, 
potential flood ponding levels and ground 
floor levels


AND


Confirmation from the appropriately 
qualified professional that local drainage 
system failure would not cause an increase 
in the risk of flooding within dwellings 
either on or off site

Where credits are sought:

The appropriately qualified professional’s 
report detailing the design specifications, 
calculations and drawings to support the 
awarding of the credit(s)

Where credits are sought:

Written confirmation from the 
developer or appropriately qualified 
professional that the solutions 
designed have been implemented 
as specified in the design stage 
evidence


OR

Where different from the design 
stage, provide the evidence as 
listed for the design stage but 
representing the development as 
built




128  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Sur OR

For post construction stage only 
assessments, provide evidence 
as listed for the design stage but 
representing the development as 
built

Definitions

Annual flood probability

The estimated probability of a flood of given magnitude occurring or being exceeded 
in any year. Expressed as a 1 in x year event. This is the equivalent to 1-in-x, 1:x or x% 
chance of a flood event occurring in any one year. 

Annual flow rate probability

The estimated probability of a flow rate of given magnitude occurring or being 
exceeded in any year. Expressed as a 1 in x year event. This is the equivalent to 1-in-x, 
1:x or x % chance of the flow rate being exceeded in any one year.

Appropriately qualified professional

A professional or team of professionals with the skills and experience to champion 
the use of SuDS within the overall design of the development at an early stage.

The professional or team of professionals must be capable of understanding the site’s 
particular surface water management needs and opportunities. In addition, they 
must have knowledge and experience in using SuDS-based solutions to influence the 
holistic design of a development’s drainage system and provide the robust hydraulic 
design calculations referred to in key guidance documents such as The SuDS manual 
(CIRIA C697, 2007) and Preliminary rainfall runoff management for developments 
(EA/DEFRA, 2007). 

Suitable professionals may be found in a variety of disciplines, such as engineering, 
landscape design or hydrology or a combination. 

Geotechnical advisers or specialists may be required for SuDS techniques that allow 
infiltration.

Brownfield site

Land which is or was occupied by a permanent structure, including the curtilage of 
the developed land and any associated hard surfaces.

Catchment

The area contributing surface water flow to a drainage point or a point on a 
watercourse. It can be divided into sub-catchments.




Sur 1: Management of Surface Water Run-off from Developments  |  129


Sur

Control devices

Any drainage structure or unit designed to control the runoff of stormwater. 

Examples of SuDS control devices are check dams within swales and basins, and 
combined weir/orifice controls for ponds. Examples of traditional control devices are 
throttles constructed with pipes and vortex controls. The control devices must be 
capable of regular inspection and maintenance, and the system should be fail-safe 
so that upstream flooding does not result from blockage or other malfunction. For 
guidance on control devices, refer to The SuDS manual (CIRIA C697, 2007) and other 
best practice guidelines.

Discharge point

The point of discharge into watercourses and sewers (see definition of ‘Watercourses 
and sewers’)

Flood probability

The estimated probability of a flood of given magnitude occurring or being exceeded 
in any specified time period. For example, the 100-year flood has a 1-in-100 or 1% 
chance of occurring in any given year. 

Flood risk

An expression of the combination of flood probability and the magnitude of the 
potential consequences of the flood. 

Flood Risk Assessment (FRA)

A study to assess the risk of a site flooding and the impact that any changes or 
development on the site will have on flood risk on the site and elsewhere. A flood 
risk assessment must be prepared according to good practice guidance as outlined 
in PPS25 Development and Flood Risk: Practice Guide (available from www.
communities.gov.uk). For developments of less than 1 ha (10,000 m²), the level of 
detail required in an acceptable FRA (for Sur 1) will depend on the size and density 
of build. This will range from a brief report for small, low-density developments, to 
a more detailed assessment for a high-density development of 2000–10,000 m². For 
example, for very small developments (2000 m² and less), an acceptable FRA could be 
a brief report carried out by the contractor’s engineer confirming the risk of flooding 
from all sources of flooding, including information obtained from the Environment 
Agency, water company/sewerage undertaker, other relevant statutory authorities, 
site investigation and local knowledge. 

Flood risk management hierarchy

The hierarchy of flood risk management measures and the role of the planning 
process in reducing flood risk (see PPS25 as applicable).




130  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Sur

Flood storage

The temporary storage of excess run-off or river flow in ponds, basins, reservoirs or 
on a flood plain during a flood.

Greenfield land

Land that has not been previously developed.

Greenfield run-off rate

The rate of run-off that would occur from the site in its undeveloped state.

Impermeable surfaces

Often referred to as impervious or hard surfaces, these are surfaces which do not 
allow water to pass into the ground. 

Infiltration techniques

Techniques which allow the passage of water into the ground. Techniques used 
purely for infiltration purposes would typically involve soakaways or pervious paving. 
Other SuDS techniques, such as swales and filter strips, will also achieve a level 
of infiltration but, unlike soakaways, they also normally function as a conveyance 
mechanism for transporting run-off.

Level of Treatment

When used in the context of one, two or three levels of treatment for surface water, 
treatment level should be regarded as the number of SuDS components in series 
through which run-off passes from the originating surface on which rainfall fell to the 
site discharge point.

Where a SuDS component has more than one treatment process, it might be 
considered to provide more than one level of treatment. In these circumstances 
advice should be sought from the Code service provider.

Limiting discharge 

The limiting discharge is based upon the calculated pre-development flow rate at a 
discharge point, but may be increased to 5 l/s. 

Peak rate of run-off 

Referred to as Qp [m³/sec], this is the highest rate of flow from a defined catchment 
area assuming that rainfall is uniformly distributed over the drainage area, 
considering the entire drainage area as a single unit and estimation of flow at the 
most downstream point only.

Pervious paving 

Also referred to as porous and permeable paving. Pervious pavements are SuDS 
structures and provide a pavement suitable for pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic, 




Sur 1: Management of Surface Water Run-off from Developments  |  131


Sur

while allowing rainwater to infiltrate through the surface and into the underlying 
layers. The water may be temporarily stored before infiltration into the ground, re-use 
or discharge to a watercourse or other drainage system (see CIRIA C697 The SuDS 
manual for additional information).

The design of the pervious pavement will depend on its drained area, climate and 
local geological and hydrological conditions. 

For example, a block paved surface on a permeable sub-base on permeable ground, 
will store the water temporarily and allow it to seep into the soil. 

For less permeable soils, more storage volume may be needed to compensate for 
reduced infiltration rates. For very low permeability areas (e.g. less than 1 × 10–6m/s) 
water may be discharged to a conveyance system, with the pervious paving providing 
attenuation and water treatment. 

Pre-development 

The site’s condition immediately before project commencement, i.e. brownfield or 
greenfield.

Probability of flooding – Low (Zone 1) 

Probability of river and sea flooding, but does not take into account other sources of 
flooding or defences. These are defined in PPS25.

Low annual probability of flooding is an area where the chance of both river and sea 
flooding each year is <0.1% (1 in 1000) or less. 

Probability of flooding – Medium (Zone 2) 

An area where the chance of river flooding in any year is 1% (1 in 100) or less but 
greater than 0.1% (1 in 1000), and the chance of flooding from the sea is 0.5% – 
0.1% (between 1 in 200 and 1 in 1000). 

Probability of flooding – High (Zone 3a) 

An area where the chance of river flooding in any year is >1% (1 in 100) and the 
chance of flooding from the sea is >0.5% (1 in 200) or greater.

Probability of flooding – Functional flood plan (zone 3b) 

The land where water flows or is stored in times of flood.



Qbar


An estimation of the mean annual flood flow rate from a catchment (see Report 
IH124 Flood estimations for small catchments).

Rainfall intensity

Depth of rain falling in a period of time, e.g. mm/hour, sometimes given in l/s/m2. 




132  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Sur

Rainwater discharge

Rainwater discharge is the rainwater which flows from the development site to 
watercourses and sewers. It is also referred to as run-off.

Relevant statutory body

In England and Wales this will in most cases be the Environment Agency, and for 
Northern Ireland will be the Rivers Agency.

Run-off rate

The rate of flow of water from a surface. 

Sewerage undertaker

This is a Body with statutory responsibility for the disposal of foul wastewater and 
also surface water from roofs and hard surfaces.

Sewers for Adoption

A guide agreed between sewerage undertakers and developers (through the Home 
Builders Federation) specifying the standards to which private sewers must be 
constructed to facilitate adoption.

Soakaway

Underground structure designed to permit infiltration into permeable/slightly 
permeable ground. They can be grouped and linked together to drain large areas 
including highways.

Sources of flooding and flood risk

Streams and Rivers: Flooding that can take place from flows that are not contained 
within the channel due to high levels of rainfall in the catchment. 

Coastal or Estuarine: Flooding that can occur from the sea due to a particularly high 
tide or surge, or combination of both.

Groundwater: Where the water table rises to such a height where flooding occurs. 
Most common in low-lying areas underlain by permeable ground (aquifers), usually 
due to extended periods of wet weather.

Sewers and highway drains: Combined, foul or surface water sewers and highway 
drains that are temporarily over-loaded due to excessive rainfall or due to blockage.

Surface water: The net rainfall falling on a surface (on or off the site) which acts as 
runoff which has not infiltrated into the ground or entered into a drainage system. 

Infrastructure failure: canals, reservoirs, industrial processes, burst water mains, 
blocked sewers or failed pumping stations.




Sur 1: Management of Surface Water Run-off from Developments  |  133


Sur Su DS


As defined in the SuDS manual, sustainable drainage systems are an approach to 
surface water management that combines a sequence of management practices and 
control structures designed to drain surface water in a more sustainable fashion than 
some conventional techniques.

These systems infiltrate, store, convey and partially treat surface water runoff, which 
minimises environmental impact and maximises environmental opportunities. SuDS 
should aim to maximise the use of on-the-surface techniques for operational and 
maintenance reasons. 

SuDS Management Train

An approach to drainage design that combines a sequence of appropriate surface 
water drainage structures using SuDS systems for management of the runoff to treat 
the flow, reduce runoff volume and restrain the runoff rate in order to minimise 
man’s impact on the environment. Additional benefits associated with operation 
and maintenance, ecology and amenity are aspects which are considered when 
designing a management system. The management train incorporates a hierarchy of 
techniques:

1. Source control. Examples of SuDS techniques include:

•  Soakaways

•  Porous/pervious paving

•  Roof water directed to garden (rather than piped drains) 

•  Rainwater re-use/harvesting

•  Green roofs

•  Other surface infiltration, attenuation and conveyance techniques that deal 
with run-off at source.

2. Site/local control. Examples of SuDS techniques include:

•  Swales

•  Pond

•  Infiltration basins

•  Detention Basin

•  Larger soakaways

•  Pervious (porous or permeable) paving.

3. Regional control. Examples of techniques include:

•  Balancing ponds

•  Wetlands

•  Large detention basin




134  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Sur

SuDS techniques

One or more components built to manage surface water run-off to prevent flooding 
and pollution, including:

•  Wet ponds

•  Infiltration basins

•  Detention basins

•  Swales

•  Reed beds

•  Pervious (porous or permeable) paving 

•  Soakaways 

•  Rainwater harvesting 

•  Filter strips

•  Filter drains and trenches with or without perforated pipes

•  Green roofs

•  Underground Attenuation storage.

For more information refer to The SuDS manual (CIRIA C697, 2007)

Surface water run-off

Rainfall that flows off the catchment. 

Tidal estuary

A semi-enclosed coastal body of water which has a free connection with the open 
sea and within which seawater is measurably diluted with fresh water derived from 
land drainage.

Tidal rivers (i.e. where no measurable seawater content is present during normal tidal 
movements) cannot be included as part of the estuary. 

Treatment

Improving the quality of water by physical, chemical and/or biological means.

Volume of run-off

The volume of run-off that is generated by rainfall occurring on the site. This is 
typically measured in cubic metres.

Additional predicted volume of run-off is the difference between the volumes of run-
off pre- and post-development, usually calculated for a specific rainfall event. 




Sur 1: Management of Surface Water Run-off from Developments  |  135


Sur

Watercourses and sewers

A term that includes rivers, streams, ditches, drains, cuts, culverts, dykes, sluices, 
sewers and passages through which water flows.

Assessment Methodology

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Mandatory requirements are met and credits are awarded where the 
performance requirements (set out in the assessment criteria table) have been met.

Design Stage

•  Owing to the nature of Issue Sur1, it is critical in all cases that compliance with 
the criteria is clearly demonstrated at this stage.

•  The assessor is not required to perform any calculations. These must be 
provided, with all the necessary supporting information, by the appropriately 
qualified professional.

Mandatory requirements:

•  Check that an appropriately qualified professional has been appointed

•  Check that an appropriate Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) has been carried out

•  Check that allowances have been made for climate change over the lifetime of 
the development in all post-development calculations

•  Where the impermeable area draining to watercourses or sewers has increased, 
check that the appropriately qualified professional’s report contains the 
following:

  Peak rate of run-off calculations:

–  Calculations for the 1 year and 100 year return periods for both pre- and 
post-development, including an allowance for climate change for the post- 
development state.

–  Check that the calculation methodology used complies with the requirements 
in the Calculation Procedures.

  Volume of run-off calculations:

–  The additional volume of run-off for the 100 year 6 hour event including an 
allowance for climate change for the post-development state. The additional 
volume with and without mitigation measures should be provided.

–  Check that the appropriately qualified professional’s report demonstrates 
that the hierarchy specified has been followed and the additional volume 
of run-off is zero in line with criterion A or, if this cannot be satisfied, then 
evidence to demonstrate criterion B has been met and full justification has 
been provided. 

–  Check that the route of water over ground in the event of a local drainage 
system failure (system failure flood flow routes), for whatever reason have 




136  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Sur

been demonstrated, and the possible consequences have been evaluated, 
ensuring that there is no increased risk of flooding to properties either on or 
off site.

  Note: Site drainage design should drain using gravity based systems in 
preference to those which require the use of pumping stations.

Credits:

•  Where credits are sought, check that the report contains the information 
needed to allow the credit(s) to be awarded. 

Post Construction Stage 

•  If a design stage assessment was carried out, the appropriately qualified 
professional should confirm that the design stage solutions have been 
implemented or, if designs have changed, evidence should be supplied showing 
the as-built design and construction. 

•  If a design stage assessment was not carried out, follow the Assessment 
Methodology guidance for the design stage to document the post construction 
evidence representing the development as built. 

•  Check the time elapsed since the FRA was carried out. Where this is significant, 
for example, more than five years (or less if major surface water regulation 
changes have occurred during this period), or it does not include an allowance 
for climate change, ask the appropriately qualified professional to confirm that 
the design basis of the surface water system is still valid.

•  Confirm that the maintenance responsibilities have been defined for any 
SuDS components present, including all necessary control devices, and that 
maintenance regimes have been put in place. 

Calculation Procedures

Assessors are not required to carry out calculations. The information below is for 
the appropriately qualified professional to use when completing calculations. It will 
also be helpful to guide assessors when checking that sufficient evidence has been 
provided to demonstrate compliance.

•  Key publications that should be referred to for guidance include:

–  The SuDS Manual, CIRIA C697 (2007) – Useful Link: 
http://www.ciria.org.uk/suds/publications.htm

–  Preliminary rainfall run-off management for developments, W5-074/A/TR/1 
Revision D, EA/DEFRA (September 2005) – Useful Link: http://www.defra.gov.
uk/environment/flooding/documents/research/sc030219.pdf

–  Development and Flood Risk, Planning Policy Statement 25. Communities 
and Local Government (2006 as revised 2010), along with the latest 
version of the practice guide. Useful Link: http://www.communities.gov.uk/
documents/planningandbuilding/pdf/planningpolicystatement25.pdf 




Sur 1: Management of Surface Water Run-off from Developments  |  137


Sur

Peak rate of run-off:

The peak rate of run-off calculations must be carried out as follows: 

•  Climate change

  An allowance for climate change must be made for all sites in accordance with 
current best planning guidance. The climate change allowance must be added 
to the post-development run-off rate and volume calculations only. Information 
regarding the percentage allowance can be found in PPS25 as applicable.

•  Greenfield sites of less than 50 ha

  The calculation of greenfield run-off rates must be in accordance with IH Report 
124, Flood estimation for small catchments (Marshall and Bayliss, 1994). The 
pro-rata method on the size of catchment detailed in Table 4.2 in The SuDS 
Manual, CIRIA C697 (2007) must be followed.

•  Greenfield sites of 50 ha to 200 ha

  The calculation of greenfield run-off rates must be in accordance with IH Report 
124, Flood estimation for small catchments (Marshall and Bayliss, 1994). FEH 
can be used for these sites as an alternative, where there is a preference to do 
so, but only if the catchment is considered to be suitable for its application. 

•  Greenfield sites of more than 200 ha

  The calculation of greenfield run-off rates must be in accordance with the 
Flood Estimation Handbook (Centre for Ecology & Hydrology, 1999) and any 
subsequent updates. Where the Flood Estimation Handbook is not considered 
appropriate for the development IH Report 124 can be used.

•  Brownfield sites 

  The calculation of brownfield run-off rates should be as follows:

a)  If the existing drainage is known then it should be modelled using best 
practice simulation modelling, to determine the 1 year and 100 year peak 
flow rates at discharge points (without allowing surcharge of the system 
above cover levels to drive greater flow rates through the discharge points). 

b) If the system is not known, then the Brownfield run-off should be calculated 
using the greenfield run-off models described above but with a Soil Type 5. 

•  Limiting discharge rate

  The limiting discharge for each discharge point should be calculated as the flow 
rates from the pre-developed site, as detailed in the calculation procedures 
above. The calculation should include the total flow rate from the total area of 
site feeding into the discharge point (this should include both Code and non-
Code parts of the development, if applicable). The discharge point is defined as 
the point of discharge into the watercourse/sewers (including rivers, streams, 
ditches, drains, cuts, culverts, dykes, sluices, public sewers and passages 
through which water flows, see Definitions). Where this calculation results in a 
peak flow rate of less than 5 l/s, the limiting discharge rate may be increased up 
to a level of no more than 5 l/s at the point of discharge from the site to reduce 
the risk of blockage. 




138  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Sur

  For example, if the flow rate for the 1 year and 100 year events were 4 l/s and 7 
l/s respectively, then the limiting discharges would be 5 l/s and 7 l/s. Similarly, if 
it was calculated to be 2 l/s and 4 l/s, then a maximum of 5 l/s limiting discharge 
rate could be applied to both discharge points.

  Sites should not be subdivided to enable higher overall limiting discharge rates 
to be claimed. It is, however, recognised that some sites may require more than 
one discharge point as a result of the local topography or existing surrounding 
drainage infrastructure, and in such cases the limiting discharge flow rate may 
be increased to a level no more than 5 l/s at each discharge point. The assessor 
should seek evidence that the number of discharge points is necessary due 
to topography and/or infrastructure limitations. Evidence may be in the form 
of a topographical map and an explanation from the appropriately qualified 
professional as to why multiple discharge points are required, stating that it is 
not feasible to have fewer discharge points. 

•  100-year peak rate event: Excess volume of run-off

  The storage of excess flows from the 100-year event does not necessarily have 
to be contained within the drainage system or SuDS features (the features 
designed solely for the purpose of drainage). Where appropriate, storage of 
some or all of this volume can be achieved using temporary surface flooding of 
areas such as a playing field. Specific consideration should be given to overland 
flow routeing. Overland flood flows and temporary storage of flood water on 
the surface must not be so frequent as to unreasonably inconvenience residents 
and other users. 

Volume of run-off:

The volume of run-off calculations must be carried out as follows: 

•  Calculation methodology

  Refer to Chapter 4, Section 4.5.5 of The SuDS Manual (CIRIA C697, 2007) 
for guidance on calculating the additional volume of run-off caused by the 
development. 

•  Allowance for climate change

  An allowance for climate change must be made in accordance with current 
planning guidance. The climate change allowance must be added to the post-
development run-off calculation only. Information regarding the percentage 
allowance can be found in PPS25 as applicable.

•  Criterion A or B

  If the development causes an additional volume of run-off, meeting criterion A 
must be preferred to B. If criterion A cannot be met, the appropriately qualified 
professional must provide evidence within their report to justify the reason(s); 
criterion B must be met through the use of appropriate SuDS techniques. 

•  5 l/s flow rate

  Where criterion B is met, the limiting discharge rate at the discharge point(s) 
may be increased to 5 l/s, as described in the calculation procedures above.




Sur 1: Management of Surface Water Run-off from Developments  |  139


Sur

Designing for system failure:

The consequences of system failure caused by extreme rainfall, lack of maintenance, 
blockage or other causes, should be considered /evaluated fully.

CIRIA publication C635 (2006) Designing for exceedence in urban drainage – good 
practice should be referred to for guidance. 

Water Quality Credits:

•  Where one credit is sought for preventing discharge from the site for rainfall 
depths up to 5 mm

  A range of SuDS techniques can be used to prevent discharge from the site for 
rainfall depths of up to 5 mm, however, end-of-pipe solutions, such as ponds 
and basins, will only be deemed to comply where the principal run-off control 
to prevent discharge from the first 5 mm of a rainfall event, is achieved using 
source control and site control methods.

  Green roofs can be deemed to comply with this requirement for the rain that 
falls onto their surface. However evidence is still required to demonstrate that 
the 5 mm rainfall from all other hard surfaces on site is being dealt with, to 
allow this credit to be awarded.

•  Treatment levels

  Where treatment levels are introduced to gain a credit, section 3.3 and chapter 
5 of The SuDS Manual (CIRIA C697, 2007) should be referred to for guidance. 
The run-off from hard surfaces must receive treatment before being discharged 
from the site. 

General guidance:

•  Using computer software 

  Reputable computer drainage software can be used to demonstrate compliance. 
However, where hydrograph tables are provided as output, the relevant 
calculations should be highlighted.

•  Rainwater harvesting

  BS 8515 Rainwater harvesting systems: Code of Practice, Annex A should be 
followed where rainwater harvesting systems are used for stormwater control. 
To ensure flood risk is not increased if the rainwater harvesting system is, for 
some reason, not utilised, the exceedance flow route capacity provided in 
accordance with CIRIA report C635 should ignore the beneficial effect of the 
rainwater harvesting system.

•  Assessing mixed Code and non-Code dwelling developments

  Where Code dwellings are dispersed throughout a larger development of non-
Code dwellings, there are a number of options for assessment under Sur 1. 

1. Individual dwellings (as part of a larger site) can only be assessed 
independently where the run-off is being dealt with on a dwelling by 




140  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Sur

dwelling basis (i.e. each dwelling has its own dedicated sub-catchment that 
serves only that dwelling).

2. Where assessing groups of Code dwellings within a larger development, the 
drainage assessment must incorporate the local sub-catchment serving all of 
those dwellings.

3. Where assessing the run-off from both Code and non-Code dwellings (or 
Code and non-domestic buildings) the assessment must take into account 
the drainage from the local sub-catchment serving all those dwellings/
buildings. 

  Note that proportioning cannot be used to calculate the percentage of run-
off discharging into the local sub-catchment resulting from just the Code 
dwellings.

4. Alternatively the whole development can be assessed for compliance. 

  Whichever approach is taken to demonstrate compliance, it must be 
consistent when completing both the rate of run-off and volume of run-off 
calculations.

  Note the special case regarding highways and impermeable areas when 
assessing a site.

•  Contaminated sites

  Drainage designs for sites must take into account legislation relating to 
contaminated sites, such as the Water Resources Act 1991, the Environmental 
Protection Act 1990, the Groundwater Directive (2006/118/EC) and, more 
recently, the Groundwater (England and Wales) Regulations 2009. Where 
the site risk assessment confirms that infiltration SuDS techniques are not 
appropriate, SuDS techniques that do not allow infiltration, such as swales 
lined with an impermeable membrane, can be used. It may be the case that 
only some areas of the site are contaminated and therefore infiltration SuDS 
techniques can be used elsewhere on the site. There may also be a requirement 
to remediate the contaminated soils, creating opportunities for the use of 
infiltration SuDS post-remediation.

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

Neither the mandatory element nor credits can be awarded where the assessed 
development has proceeded against the recommendation of the Environment Agency 
regarding surface water drainage.

Special Cases 

Minimum flow rate/maximum storage requirement set by sewerage undertaker (or 
other statutory body)




Sur 1: Management of Surface Water Run-off from Developments  |  141


Sur

Where the statutory authority have exercised their statutory powers and have set 
specific minimum flow rate/maximum storage requirements that are less onerous 
than the specific Sur 1 criterion, the statutory requirements will take precedent over 
the specific Code criterion. All other criteria will still be applicable. Evidence should 
be provided to confirm that this is the case and should be formal documentation 
from the statutory authority. This should include evidence such as planning approvals/
conditions and/or correspondence from a statutory body setting out specific 
requirements, i.e. sewerage undertaker, Environment Agency etc. The Flood Risk 
Assessment may contain some of the evidence required to demonstrate compliance.

Note: Where the statutory authority has approved a design on the basis of a 
minimum discharge rate identified through a FRA, compliance with this minimum 
standard, will be deemed to meet the mandatory peak rate of run-off requirement, 
where supported by the documentary evidence. In all other cases, the approval of a 
specific design feature or the setting of a non-compliant discharge rate will not be 
sufficient to demonstrate compliance.

Maximum flow rate set by sewerage undertaker (or other statutory body)

If a maximum flow rate is set that can be discharged, the peak rate of run-off 
requirement within the Code will still apply unless the maximum flow rate set is more 
rigorous (lower rate) than the Code, in which case compliance with the Sewerage 
Undertaker’s requirements will apply. 

Highways and impermeable areas 

Where new non-adoptable highways are built, including those for developments with 
a mixture of Code and non-Code dwellings, all of the new impermeable surfaces 
must be included in calculations to demonstrate compliance with the peak rate of 
run-off and volume of run-off criteria. 

Where Code dwellings are built beside existing highways or where adoptable 
highways are built, the impermeable area of the highway does not need to be 
included in the calculations. 

Derelict sites

If the site has been derelict for over five years, the appropriately qualified professional 
must assess the previous drainage network and make reasonable assumptions to 
establish probable flow rates and volumes. The Wallingford Procedure Modified 
Rational Method should be used. To complete the calculations, a site visit prior to 
development will be required unless accurate data already exist from a previous 
survey. The resultant professional report can then be used to determine the pre-
development volumes and rates of run-off. Without this professional input, the 
site must be deemed greenfield pre-development, assuming Soil Type 5 for the 
calculation of the pre-development site run-off.

No change or reduction in impermeable area

Where a man-made impermeable surface draining to the watercourse and sewers 
has decreased or remained unchanged post-development, the peak rate of run-off 




142  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Sur

and volume of run-off requirements will be met by default and run-off calculations 
will not be required. Instead, drawings clearly showing the man-made impermeable 
surfaces of the site draining to the watercourse and sewers should be provided for 
the pre- and post-development scenarios. Figures must also be given (ideally on the 
drawings as well) to show a comparison between the areas of drained man-made 
impermeable surfaces pre- and post-development.

Sites with existing infrastructure/planning approval

Some sites may not be in a position to meet the requirements set out in the Code 
owing to existing or approved infrastructure strategies that pre-date the requirement 
for a Code rating. 

a)  For sites where planning approval (covering the detailed drainage strategy for 
the site) has been granted prior to the Code requirement being set for the 
development, the mandatory element of Sur 1 can be met by default. No credits 
for water quality can be awarded if the mandatory element is met using this 
method. Evidence requirements 1, 2 and 3 as listed below.

b) For sites where the assessed dwellings are directly connected to existing 
infrastructure which pre-dates the Code requirement for the site, the 
mandatory element of Sur 1 can be met by default. No credits for water quality 
can be awarded if the mandatory element is met using this method. Evidence 
requirements 3 and 4 as listed below.

Note: The phrase ‘directly connected to existing infrastructure’ should be interpreted 
as individual dwellings being directly connected to the existing sewer without any 
significant shared installation (this Special Case is predominantly only relevant for 
single dwellings). It does not cover instances where an entire site or new shared 
system is being connected into the existing main sewer. It should be a simple 
connection from a dwelling into an existing manhole/sewer rather than a new 
network being created. 

Evidence referred to in a) and b) above is as follows:

1. Planning approvals/conditions.

2. HCA grant approvals or planning conditions which demonstrate the date the 
Code requirement was enforced. 

3. Plans showing coverage of existing and approved drainage designs and the 
connections to them

4. Flood Risk Assessment – this may contain some of the evidence required 
in items 1 to 3 above and therefore, if completed in accordance with the 
Calculation Procedures, may also be provided for any of the above scenarios in 
support of any of the above evidence. 




Sur 2: Flood Risk  |  143


Sur

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Sur 2 Flood Risk  2 No



Aim 


To promote housing development in low flood risk areas, or to take measures to 
reduce the impact of flooding on houses built in areas with a medium or high risk of 
flooding.

Assessment Criteria* 

Criteria Credits

EITHER 

Two credits are available for developments situated in Zone 1 – low annual probability of 
flooding (as defined in PPS25 Development and Flood Risk) and where the site-specific Flood 
Risk Assessment (FRA) indicates that there is low risk of flooding from all sources.


2OR 

One credit is available for developments situated in Zones 2 and 3a – medium and high annual 
probability of flooding where the finished ground floor level of all habitable parts of dwellings 
and access routes to the ground level and the site, are placed at least 600 mm above the 
design flood level of the flood zone.

The Flood Risk Assessment accompanying the planning application must demonstrate to 
the satisfaction of the local planning authority and statutory body that the development is 
appropriately flood resilient and resistant, including safe access and escape routes where 
required, and that any residual risk can be safely managed.


1

Default Cases



None


*  Supplementary guidance will be published by the Welsh Assembly Government to reflect planning policy and practice in 
Wales. The guidance which will not materially affect the aims and objectives of the Surface Water Run Off requirements 
of the Code, will be based on Technical Advice Note 15 (TAN 15) which supplements Planning Policy Wales, and surface 
management techniques currently in force in Wales. 




144  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Sur

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance 

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

For developments situated in Zone 1:

•  A Flood Risk Assessment (prepared 
according to good practice guidance 
as outlined in PPS25 Development 
and Flood Risk) which shows that 
there is a low risk of flooding from all 
sources.

Written confirmation from the 
developer that the evidence submitted 
at the design stage has not changed 


OR

Where different from the design stage, 
provide evidence (as listed for the 
design stage) representing the dwellings 
as built


OR

When at post construction stage 
assessment only, provide evidence (as 
listed for the design stage) representing 
the dwellings as built.

For medium (Zone 2) or high (Zone 3a) 
flood risk areas:

•  A Flood Risk Assessment (prepared 
according to good practice guidance 
as outlined in PPS25 Development 
and Flood Risk) which shows there is 
a medium or high risk of flooding


AND


•  Site plans indicating the design flood 
level, the range of ground levels 
of the dwellings, car parking areas 
and site access (lowest to highest), 
showing that the criteria (finished 
floor levels of all habitable rooms and 
access routes being at least 600 mm 
above the design flood level) are met, 
along with any notes explaining the 
function of any areas lying below the 
design flood level


AND


•  Confirmation from the local planning 
authority that the development 
complies with PPS25 and is 
appropriately flood resilient and 
resistant, and has managed any 
residual risk safely.




Sur 2: Flood Risk  |  145


Sur

Where the site is under the protection 
of flood defences and the flood risk 
category of the site is reduced:

•  Written confirmation from the 
Environment Agency of the reduction 
in flood risk category *.

*Note: There are many defences, 
owned by third parties, which, owing 
to their location, act as a defence by 
default, e.g. motorway and railway 
embankments, walls. Confirmation 
is required that these defences will 
remain in place for the lifetime of the 
development if a significant risk is 
predicted.

Where more than five years have passed 
since the Flood Risk Assessment was 
carried out: 

•  Confirmation that the basis of the 
Flood Risk Assessment has not 
changed.

Definitions

Design flood level

The maximum estimated water level during the design storm event. A site’s design 
flood level can be determined through known historical data or modelled for the 
specific site.

Flood probability

The estimated probability of a flood of given magnitude occurring or being exceeded 
in any specified time period. For example, the 100-year flood has a 1% chance of 
occurring in any given year. 

Flood protection measures

This covers the range of flood protection measures which can be employed to protect 
individual dwellings and developments from the effects of flooding.

Flood resilient construction

Buildings that are designed to reduce the consequences of flooding and facilitate 
recovery from the effects of flooding sooner than conventional buildings.

Flood resistant construction

Buildings that prevent the entry of water or minimise the amount of water that may 
enter a building where there is flooding outside.




146  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Sur

Flood Risk Assessment (FRA)

A study to assess the risk of a site flooding and the impact that any changes or 
development on the site will have on flood risk on the site and elsewhere. A flood 
risk assessment must be prepared according to good practice guidance as outlined 
in PPS25 Development and Flood Risk: Practice Guide (available from www.
communities.gov.uk). 

For developments of less than 1 ha (10,000 m²), the level of detail required in an 
acceptable FRA (for Sur 1) will depend on the size and density of build. This will 
range from a brief report for small, low-density developments, to a more detailed 
assessment for a high-density development of 2000–10,000 m². For example, for 
very small developments (2000 m² and less), an acceptable FRA could be a brief 
report carried out by the contractor’s engineer confirming the risk of flooding from 
all sources of flooding, including information obtained from the Environment Agency, 
water company/sewerage undertaker, other relevant statutory authorities, site 
investigation and local knowledge. 

Flood zones – PPS25

These zones relate to flooding from the sea and rivers only and do not take into 
account flood defences. These are defined in PPS25. 

Zone 1: Low annual probability of flooding 

Zone 2: Medium annual probability of flooding 

Zone 3a: High annual probability of flooding 

Zone 3b: Functional flood plain (where water is stored in times of flood)

Functional flood plain (Zone 3b)

This land is where water flows or is stored in times of flood.

High annual probability of flooding (Zone 3a)

An area where the chance of river flooding in any year is >1% (1 in 100) and the 
chance of flooding from the sea is >0.5% (1 in 200) or greater.

Low annual probability of flooding (Zone 1)

An area where the chance of both river and sea flooding each year is <0.1% (1 in 
1000) or less. 

Medium annual probability of flooding (Zone 2)

An area where the chance of river flooding in any year is 1% (1 in 100) or less but 
greater than 0.1% (1 in 1000), and the chance of flooding from the sea is 0.5% – 
0.1% (between 1 in 200 and 1 in 1000). 




Sur 2: Flood Risk  |  147


Sur

Residual risk

The risk which remains after all risk avoidance, reduction and mitigation measures 
have been implemented.

Sources of flooding and flood risk

Streams and Rivers: Flooding that can take place from flows that are not contained 
within the channel due to high levels of rainfall in the catchment. 

Coastal or Estuarine: Flooding that can occur from the sea due to a particularly high 
tide or surge, or combination of both.

Groundwater: Where the water table rises to such a height where flooding occurs. 
Most common in low-lying areas underlain by permeable rock (aquifers), usually due 
to extended periods of wet weather.

Sewers and highway drains: Combined, foul or surface water sewers and highway 
drains that are temporarily over-loaded due to excessive rainfall or due to blockage.

Surface water: The net rainfall falling on a surface (on or off the site) which acts as 
runoff which has not infiltrated into the ground or entered into a drainage system. 

Infrastructure failure: Canals, reservoirs, industrial processes, burst water mains, 
blocked sewers or failed pumping stations.

Assessment Methodology

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met.

Design Stage 

•  The assessor should confirm that a Flood Risk Assessment has been carried out. 
This is necessary to ensure that other sources of flooding (other than river and 
sea) are also a low risk. For small developments in low flood risk areas, this will 
be a relatively brief report. 

•  If the development is in Zone 1 and the Flood Risk Assessment shows low risk 
overall, two credits can be awarded. It should be noted that the flood map 
accessible from the Environment Agency website gives only a rough estimation 
of flood risk and is not used for planning submission. A Flood Risk Assessment 
requires contact with the local planning authority to discuss the site, and benefit 
from the information available.

•  If the development is in Zone 2 or 3a, the assessor should check that the Flood 
Risk Assessment submitted with the planning application has demonstrated 
to the relevant authorities that the development is appropriately designed, as 
detailed in the criteria. If the evidence shows that the finished floor levels and 




148  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Sur

all access routes comply with the criteria and any residual risks can be safely 
managed, one credit can be awarded. 

Post Construction Stage 

•  For developments in Zone 1, the assessor should simply check that the Flood 
Risk Assessment submitted at the design stage (or, if no design stage report 
was completed, the Flood Risk Assessment used to gain planning consent) still 
represents an accurate assessment of flood risk. Whilst this can be assumed 
in most cases, some sites can take 10 years to build out and during this time 
many factors can change. Where the time lapse since the original report is more 
than five years, or does not include an allowance for climate change, ask the 
consultant to confirm that the basis on which the design was completed has 
not changed. 

•  For developments in Zones 2 and 3a, the assessor should check the Flood Risk 
Assessment as above and ensure that the as-built plans confirm the correct 
levels of the floors and access routes above the design flood levels. 

•  Where applicable, check that the specified flood protection measures have been 
designed and built according to the consultant’s recommendations.

Calculation Procedures 

None.

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

Credits cannot be awarded where the assessed development has proceeded against 
the recommendation of the Environment Agency on the basis that the flooding 
implications are too great.

Credits will also be withheld if flood defence schemes considered for this issue would 
reduce the performance of functional flood plains elsewhere. 

Special Cases 

A site’s flood risk may be downgraded to a lower flood risk category as a result of 
flood defence installations. This may occur in the following circumstances: 

[1]  Where permanent new flood defences are planned* to minimise the risk of 
flooding to the site and its locality.

  * Mentioned in formal planning documents with budgets allocated.


OR

Sur 2: Flood Risk  |  149


Sur

[2]  Where the development is located on a site benefiting from existing 
maintained flood defences.

In these circumstances, flood risk will be downgraded from medium to low flood risk, 
as defined in PPS25, and two credits can be awarded. The following evidence will be 
needed to demonstrate compliance:

a) Confirmation from the flood defence agency (e.g. Environment Agency) that 
the flood risk level for the site will be reduced to less than 0.1% probability of 
flooding in any one year.


AND


b) Confirmation from the flood defence agency that there are plans to maintain 
the defences for the lifetime of the development. (For private flood defences, 
evidence must be provided that there is a contractual agreement to cover the 
maintenance of the defences for the lifetime of the development.)


AND


c)  The Flood Risk Assessment clearly demonstrates that the residual risks have 
been identified and will be managed appropriately.

Where sites are downgraded from high to medium flood risk as a result of flood 
defences, they can only achieve a maximum of one credit. To award that credit, the 
criteria must be met as specified in the criteria table. 




150  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Was

Category 5: Waste

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Was 1  Storage of Non-recyclable Waste and 
Recyclable Household Waste

4 Yes



Aim 


To provide adequate internal and external storage space for non-recyclable waste and 
recyclable household waste.

Assessment Criteria

Criteria Credits Mandatory 
Elements

Storage of household waste

An adequate external space should be allocated for waste storage and sized to 
accommodate containers according to the largest of the following two volumes:

•   The minimum volume recommended by British Standard 5906 (British Standards 
Institution, 2005) based on a maximum collection frequency of once per week. 
This volume is 100 litres for a single bedroom dwelling, with a further 70 litres for 
each additional bedroom.

•   The total volume of the external waste containers provided by the Local 
Authority.

Storage space must provide inclusive access and usability (Checklist IDP). Containers 
must not be stacked.

None All Levels

Storage of recyclable household waste

Dedicated internal storage for recyclable household waste can be credited where 
there is no (or insufficient) dedicated external storage capacity for recyclable 
material, no Local Authority collection scheme and where the following criteria are 


met:


At least three internal storage bins:

•  all located in an adequate internal space

• with a minimum total capacity of 60 litres.


2

Storage of recyclable household waste

A combination of internal storage capacity provided in an adequate internal space, 
with either:

•  a Local Authority collection scheme, or

•  no Local Authority collection scheme but adequate external storage capacity.


4

continued




Was 1: Storage of Non-recyclable Waste and Recyclable Household Waste  |  151


Was

Criteria Credits Mandatory 
Elements

Local Authority collection scheme

In addition to a Local Authority collection scheme (with a collection frequency of at 
least fortnightly), at least one of the following requirements must be met:

•   Recyclable household waste is sorted after collection and a single bin of at least 
30 litres is provided in an adequate internal space.

•   Materials are sorted before collection and at least three separate bins are 
provided with a total capacity of 30 litres. Each bin must have a capacity of at 
least 7 litres and be located in an adequate internal space.

•   An automated waste collection system which collects at least three different 
types of recyclable waste.

No Local Authority collection scheme but adequate external storage 
capacity

For houses and flats there must be at least three identifiably different internal 
storage bins for recyclable waste located in an adequate internal space:

•  with a minimum total capacity of 30 litres

•  with a minimum individual capacity of at least 7 litres.


AND


For houses, an adequate external space must be provided for storing at least three 
external bins for recyclable waste:

•  with a minimum total capacity of 180 litres

•  with a minimum individual capacity of 40 litres.

For flats, a private recycling scheme operator must be appointed to maintain bins 
and collect recyclable waste regularly. Recycling containers must:

•  be located in an adequate external space

•  be sized according to the frequency of collection, based on guidance from the 
recycling scheme operator

•  store at least three types of recyclable waste in identifiably different bins.

Default Cases 



None


Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

Mandatory element:

Provide table: Cat 5.1 – Supplementary 
Information Sheet for Was 1 and 
Checklist IDP

Mandatory element:

For post construction stage only 
assessments, provide table: Cat 5.1 
Supplementary Information Sheet for 
Was 1 and Checklist IDP (as listed for 
design stage) representing the dwellings 
as built




152  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Was OR

Written confirmation from the 
developer that the dwelling has been 
constructed in accordance with the 
evidence provided at design stage and 
that the services outlined at design 
stage will be provided 

Where 2 credits are sought:

Detailed documentary evidence stating:

•  the location of internal storage

•  the number, types and sizes of 
internal storage

Where 2 or 4 credits are sought:

For post construction stage only 
assessments, provide detailed 
documentary evidence (as listed for 
design stage) representing the dwellings 
as built


OR

Written confirmation from the 
developer that the dwelling has been 
constructed in accordance with the 
evidence provided at design stage and 
that the services outlined at design 
stage will be provided


OR

Where different from design stage, 
provide detailed documentary evidence 
(as listed for design stage) representing 
the dwellings as built


OR

Where 4 credits are sought:

Detailed documentary evidence stating:

•  the location of internal and external 
storage

•  the number, types and sizes of 
internal and external storage


AND


A letter, leaflet, website or other 
published information from the Local 
Authority/waste scheme provider* 
describing;

•  the types of waste collected

•  the frequency of collection

•  if there will be pre or post collection 
sorting

* In the case of an automated collection 
system, the waste scheme operator will 
only need to confirm the types of waste 
collected and if there will be pre or post 
collection sorting

Site Inspection Report confirming 
compliance




Was 1: Storage of Non-recyclable Waste and Recyclable Household Waste  |  153


Was

Definitions

Adequate external space

This refers to the outdoor space supplied for storing non-recyclable waste and 
recyclable materials. All bins must be located on level hard-standing and be accessed 
by an inclusive route (Checklist IDP) from the closest external door to the dwelling/
block of flats:

•  For flats: external recycling bins must be covered.

•  For dwellings other than flats: external recycling bins, if not provided by the 
local authority, must be covered

Adequate internal space

This refers to the indoor space supplied for storing non-recyclable waste and 
recyclable materials. Internal recycling bins must be located in a dedicated non-
obstructive position. This must be in a cupboard in the kitchen, close to the non-
recyclable waste bin, or located adjacent (within 10 m) to the kitchen in a utility room 
or connected garage. Free-standing recycling bins that are placed directly on the floor 
or in a cupboard do not comply.

Automated waste collection system

Some companies now offer a fully automated underground system for the collection, 
sorting and transportation of waste. It allows for waste separation at source, for 
different types of waste and from multiple locations, with enhanced hygiene and 
occupational health and safety standards. It also reduces the transport of waste by 
refuse vehicles, reducing nuisance and associated CO2 emissions.

Covered bins

The requirement for bin storage to be covered can be satisfied either by providing an 
enclosed structure (four walls, door and a roof) in which the bins would be placed if 
they do not have lids OR by providing bins with lids.

Frequency of collection

The space required for storage of non-recyclable household waste is determined by 
the calculation methodology included in BS5906:2005. This calculation is based on a 
once weekly collection frequency.

For recyclable waste, the frequency of collection is dependent on the volume and 
nature of the material being collected. Consequently, it is important for the designer 
to contact the local authority at an early stage regarding the space required to store 
recyclable waste.

Inclusive access and usability

The purpose of the Code is not to deliver purpose-designed wheelchair housing but 
rather inclusive general needs housing that caters for the widest possible segment of 




154  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Was

the population (including older people), and which can easily be adapted to meet the 
needs of wheelchair users. The principles of inclusive design are embedded within 
the Was 1, Was 3, Hea 3 and Hea 4 issues of the Code. They aim to prevent barriers 
that create undue effort and separation and enable everyone to participate equally, 
confidently and independently in everyday activities such as taking out rubbish and 
spending time outside.

Local authority collection scheme

Local authorities are responsible for regular collection of waste from dwellings. 
This includes the collection of residual waste (waste not intended for recycling or 
composting) and, in many cases, recyclable household waste. 

Private recycling scheme operator

A private recycling scheme operator can be appointed to collect recyclable materials 
where a local authority collection scheme is not in operation or where a landlord/
occupier elects to go private, e.g. in some apartments. This can be a scheme that 
either collects from bins or uses automated vacuum pipes linked to an automated 
waste collection system managed by a private operator.

Recyclable materials

For the purpose of this issue, the space needs to be compatible with the range of 
recyclable collection provided by the local authority; at least three of the following 
recyclable waste materials must be collected:

•  Paper 

•  Cardboard 

•  Glass 

•  Plastics 

•  Metals (tins and cans) 

•  Textiles (clothes and shoes).

Site Inspection Report

This is a report prepared by the Code assessor during a post construction stage 
assessment and provided as evidence to support the assessment.

Assessment Methodology 

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and definitions in this 
section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met. 




Was 1: Storage of Non-recyclable Waste and Recyclable Household Waste  |  155


Was

Design Stage 

•  Calculate external space volume requirements as per BS 5906:2005 and the 
volume of external containers (for recyclable and non-recyclable waste) provided 
by the Local Authority.

•  Check that external space has been sized to hold the larger of the previous 
two volumes so that containers will not be stacked and it complies with the 
definition of adequate external space.

•  Check that the space provides inclusive access and usability by meeting the 
applicable requirements of Checklist IDP.

•  Check the minimum capacity required for internal and external waste recycling 
storage based on the assessment criteria.

•  Check the types of recyclable waste, frequency and level of separation in 
operation for the locality, now and in the medium term.

•  Check that a letter, leaflet or other published information about the recycling 
scheme is provided.

Post Construction Stage 

•  Confirm which specifications and evidence provided at the design stage are still 
valid.

•  Assess all the new specifications and evidence provided at the post construction 
stage.

Calculation Procedures 

None.

Checklists and Tables 

Calculate the storage of non-recyclable waste, which should be at least the minimum 
recommended by British Standard BS 5906. A Local Authority recycling scheme 
offering containers equal to or greater than this previous capacity would meet the 
requirement, providing adequate external space is allocated to accommodate them. 
If the Local Authority provides less capacity, or if no Local Authority scheme exists, 
the developer will need to ensure and demonstrate that the minimum recommended 
capacity is met. 




156  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Was

Table: Cat 5.1: Supplementary Information Sheet for Was 1 – Storage of Non-recyclable Waste and 
Storage of Recyclable Household Waste 

Development name: 

Dwelling reference: 

NUMBER OF BEDROOMS: 

MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS OF BS 5906:2005 (according to assessment criteria):

Calculation: TOTAL VOLUME:

LOCAL AUTHORITY PROVISION or other (according to assessment criteria):

REFUSE DIMENSIONS: VOLUME:

RECYCLING 1 DIMENSIONS: VOLUME:

RECYCLING 2 DIMENSIONS: VOLUME:

RECYCLING 3 DIMENSIONS: VOLUME:

RECYCLING 4 DIMENSIONS: VOLUME:

TOTAL VOLUME:

SPACE PROVIDED:

Demonstrate (through the use of drawings) how the space allowed for waste storage has been sized to 
accommodate the maximum requirements of either the volume of storage provided by the Local Authority or 
the minimum from BS 5906. 




Was 1: Storage of Non-recyclable Waste and Recyclable Household Waste  |  157


Was

Checklist IDP - Inclusive design principles necessary to provide access and usability to amenities 
recognised under Was 1, Was 3 and Hea 3

Inclusive access 
and usability 
requirement

Specifications and dimensions to meet 
requirement

Applicability Tick

Typology Issue

The following guidelines are drawn from BS 8300:2009, BS 5709:2006, BS 1703:2005, Approved 
Documents Part M and H

1) The distance of 
the inclusive access 
route, taken as the 
route between the 
closest external 
entrance door and 
the external amenity 
(the waste storage 
space, composting 
facility or private 
space for which 
mandatory elements 
or credits are being 
awarded), must be 
kept to a minimum 
and be level or 
gently sloping. In all 
cases, the inclusive 
access route towards 
the waste storage/
composting facility/
private space must 
be from the closest 
external entrance 
door and be direct 
and the shortest 
possible.

Pathways making up any part of the 
inclusive access route must preferably be 
level (no gradient exceeding 1:60 and/
or no crossfall exceeding 1:40) or gently 
sloping. Where topography prevents this, a 
‘gently sloping’ pathway must be provided. 
Maximum gradients permitted dependent 
on the distance are given below:

1:12 on an individual slope up to 2 metres; 

1:13 on an individual slope up to 3 metres;

1:14 on an individual slope up to 4 metres;

1:15 on an individual slope up to 5 metres;

1:16 on an individual slope up to 6 metres; 

1:17 on an individual slope up to 7 metres;

1:18 on an individual slope up to 8 metres;

1:19 on an individual slope up to 9 metres;

1:20 on an individual slope of 10 metres, 
or more than 10 m* 

*Providing there are top, bottom and 
intermediate landings of not less than  
1.2 m excluding the swing of doors and 
gates for each 10 metre length of slope.

Steps specified in accordance with 
section 6 of Approved Document Part 
M are only acceptable on an alternative/
secondary route, this secondary route 
being in addition to the inclusive access 
route provided to the amenity. Where any 
part of the inclusive access route is gently 
sloping (with maximum gradients as set 
out above), a secondary stepped approach 
in accordance with section 6 of Approved 
Document M must also be provided.

Note: All dwellings, regardless of site 
topography, must meet this requirement. 
Allowance is given for walk-up and 
basement flats below.

All forms of dwelling –

For dwellings with 
individual entrance 
doors, an inclusive 
access route must 
be provided from 
the closest entrance 
door to each amenity 
(regardless of whether 
this is a principal or 
secondary entrance). 
For blocks of dwellings 
with communal 
entrances, this 
requirement applies to 
the closest communal 
entrance door to each 
amenity (regardless 
of whether this is a 
principal or secondary 
entrance). For walk-
up or basement 
flats with individual 
external entrances, this 
requirement applies 
from the closest 
external entrance 
door of the flat to the 
amenity, regardless 
of whether the 
entrance is principal 
or secondary. In this 
situation, external stairs 
are permitted provided 
they comply with 
criterion 8.

Was 1, 
Was 3, 
Hea 3 

2) The inclusive 
access route from 
the closest external 
entrance door must 
not exceed:

a) 50 m walking 
distance to the 
private space.

As a principal aim, both private space and 
composting facilities must be as close to 
the dwelling or block as possible. Please 
note that to comply with Part H of the 
Building Regulations, storage areas for 
waste containers and chutes should be 
sited so that the distance householders are 
required to carry refuse does not usually

All forms of dwelling – 
as above.

Hea 3

continued




158  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Was

Checklist IDP - Inclusive design principles necessary to provide access and usability to amenities 
recognised under Was 1, Was 3 and Hea 3

Inclusive access 
and usability 
requirement

Specifications and dimensions to meet 
requirement

Applicability Tick

Typology Issue

b) 30 m walking 
distance to 
composting facilities.

exceed 30 m. It is not the role of the Code 
assessor to confirm this.

3) Any pathways 
making up part of 
the inclusive access 
route must be 
made of a suitable 
surface. Those 
within the curtilage 
of an individual 
dwelling must have 
a minimum width of 
900 mm. Communal 
paths must have a 
minimum width of 
1200 mm. 

Suitable surfaces must be firm, slip-
resistant and reasonably smooth, and must 
contrast visually against adjacent surfaces. 
Surfaces in accordance with section 6 of 
Approved Document Part M can achieve 
this requirement.

All forms of dwelling. Was 1, 
Was 3, 
Hea 3

4) Waste containers 
must be sited on a 
suitable surface.

As above. All forms of dwelling. Was 1

5) There must be 
space for turning a 
wheelchair at the 
amenity.

A turning circle of 1500 mm diameter or 
a 1700 mm x 1400 mm ellipse is required. 
This area must be made of a surface in 
accordance with criterion 3 above.

All forms of dwelling. Was 1, 
Was 3, 
Hea 3

6) The closest 
external entrance 
door to the amenity 
must:

All forms of dwelling.

For dwellings with 
individual entrance 
doors, this requirement 
applies to the closest 
entrance door to each 
facility. For blocks 
of dwellings with 
communal entrances, 
this requirement 
applies to the closest 
communal entrance 
door to each amenity.

Was 1, 
Was 3, 
Hea 3

a) Have level access 
over the threshold.

a) If raised, the threshold must be no 
higher than 15 mm and is to have as few 
upstands and slopes as practicable; any 
upstand in excess of 5 mm in height is to 
be chamfered. 

b) Have a clear 
opening width of 
at least 800 mm 
(including balcony 
and roof terrace 
entrances). The 
minimum clear 
opening width of any 
communal entrances 
along the inclusive 
access route must be 
at least 875 mm. 


  

b) For details of how to measure the clear 
opening width of doors please see Figure 
11 of BS 8300:2009. 

continued




Was 1: Storage of Non-recyclable Waste and Recyclable Household Waste  |  159


Was

Checklist IDP - Inclusive design principles necessary to provide access and usability to amenities 
recognised under Was 1, Was 3 and Hea 3

Inclusive access 
and usability 
requirement

Specifications and dimensions to meet 
requirement

Applicability Tick

Typology Issue

c) Be equipped 
with door opening 
furniture specified 
in accordance with 
section 6.4 of BS 
8300:2009.

c) It must be possible to operate all door 
opening furniture with one hand, without 
the need to grasp or twist. Door opening 
furniture used in conjunction with locks 
and latches must have a lever action.

7) Gates positioned 
along the inclusive 
access route must:

All forms of dwelling. Was 1, 
Was 3, 
Hea 3

a) Have level access 
over the threshold. 

a) As 6a above.

b) Have a clear 
opening width of at 
least 900 mm.

b) As 6b above. Gates must not be spring 
loaded and must be operable from both 
sides. 

Note: Gates specified in accordance with 
Secured by Design will achieve requirement 
7b by default. 

8) Any external stairs 
that form part of 
the inclusive access 
route from walk-up/
basement flats to the 
amenity must provide 
easy access.

A stepped approach in accordance with 
section 6 of Approved Document Part M 
must be provided. The AD sets out the 
following requirements for a staircase: 

1. Has flights whose unobstructed widths 
are at least 900 mm; 

2. The rise of a flight between landings is 
not more than 1.8 m; 

3. Has a top and bottom and, if necessary 
to comply with the AD, intermediate 
landings, each of whose lengths is not less 
than 900 mm; 

4. Has steps with suitable tread nosing 
profiles (see Diagram 27 of Approved 
Document Part M) and the rise of each 
step is uniform and between 75 mm and 
150 mm; 

5. The going of each step is not less than 
280 mm, which for tapered treads, must 
be measured at a point 270 mm from the 
‘inside’ or the tread; and 

6. Where the flight comprises three or 
more risers, there is a suitable continuous 
handrail on at least one side of the flight. 
A suitable handrail should have a grippable 
profile; be between 850 mm and 1000 
mm above the pitch line of the flight; 
and extend 300 mm beyond the top and 
bottom nosings.

Walk-up or basement 
flats (providing 
accommodation above 
or below the ground 
floor of the building 
and with an individual 
external entrance 
accessed by external 
steps).

Was 1, 
Was 3, 
Hea 3

continued




160  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Was

Checklist IDP - Inclusive design principles necessary to provide access and usability to amenities 
recognised under Was 1, Was 3 and Hea 3

Inclusive access 
and usability 
requirement

Specifications and dimensions to meet 
requirement

Applicability Tick

Typology Issue

9) Communal 
waste storage and 
composting facilities 
must be provided 
with:

All forms of dwelling – 
communal bin stores/
composting facilities 
only.

Was 1, 
Was 3

a) Signs and 
information specified 
in accordance with 
section 9.2 of BS 
8300:2009.

a) Visual signs must be provided at the 
communal waste storage and composting 
facility giving instructions on how to use 
the facility (identifying different waste 
types, collection times etc). Signs must 
comprise simple words, clearly separated 
from one another, in short sentences. A 
sans serif typeface with an x height of at 
least 15 mm to 25 mm (lower case letter 
height) to capital height must be used. 
Any symbols or pictograms used on visual 
signs must be at least 100 mm in overall 
height. Letters, symbols and pictograms 
must contrast visually with the signboard. 
Signboards must contrast visually with their 
backgrounds.

b) Lighting specified 
in accordance with 
section 9.4 of BS 
8300:2009 with 
adequately controlled 
dedicated energy 
efficient fittings.

b) Artificial lighting systems should 
be designed to maintain a level of 
illumination that is suitable for blind and 
partially sighted people and is compatible 
with electronic and radio frequency 
installations. Where artificial lighting is 
provided, it should use high frequency 
electronic ballasts to avoid any perception 
of flicker. Space lighting must meet the 
requirements of the Ene 6 Issue (capable 
of only accepting lamps having a luminous 
efficacy greater than 40 lumens per circuit 
Watt and controlled by push button time 
switches/PIR sensors or equivalent).

10) Switches, sockets 
and service controls 
must be at a height 
usable by all.

Any switches, sockets or service controls 
situated along the inclusive access route 
or at the amenity must be located so that 
they are easily reachable and between 450 
mm and 1200 mm from the floor.

All forms of dwelling.

11) Refuse hoppers** 
must be located at a 
height usable by all.

Hoppers must be fixed at a height of 750 
mm, measured from floor level to the 
lower edge of the inlet opening.

All forms of dwelling.

** A fitting into which refuse is placed and from which it passes 
into a chute or directly into a refuse container. The fitting consists 
of a fixed frame and hood unit and a hinged or pivoted combined 
door and receiving unit, as defined in British Standard 1703 (British 
Standards Institution, 2005).




Was 1: Storage of Non-recyclable Waste and Recyclable Household Waste  |  161


Was

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

Bin stores should be positioned so that a level or gently sloping access route, meeting 
criteria 1 of Checklist IDP, can be provided from the closest external entrance door 
of the dwelling. Location should be considered before the plot layout is finalised to 
ensure levels can be managed to achieve this. An exemption for steeply sloping sites 
cannot be applied as it can be for the Hea 4: Lifetime Homes Issue. 

Where Credits in the Security Issue are sought, attention should also be given to the 
requirements of Secured by Design when locating the bin store.

Special Cases 

Credits can be awarded for developments in areas not yet covered by a Local 
Authority recyclable waste collection scheme, or with collection coverage of only 
two recyclable materials. In these circumstances a written statement from the Local 
Authority must be provided stating when the collection will commence (this date 
must be within one year of the completion date of the dwelling), and/or cover all 
three required recyclable materials. 

If no Local Authority collection scheme exists or where the Local Authority does not 
limit the amount of waste collected weekly, the developer will need to ensure and 
demonstrate that the storage space is sized to accommodate the minimum volume 
calculated according to the methodology included in BS 5906:2005. 




162  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Was

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Was 2  Construction Site Waste Management  3 No



Aim 


To promote resource efficiency via the effective and appropriate management of 
construction site waste.

Assessment Criteria

Criteria Credits 

Minimising Construction Waste 

Where there is a compliant Site Waste Management Plan (SWMP) that contains:

a.  Target benchmarks for resource efficiency, i.e. m3 of waste per 100 m2 or tonnes of waste 
per 100 m2 set in accordance with best practice 

b.  Procedures and commitments to minimize non-hazardous construction waste at design 
stage. Specify waste minimisation actions relating to at least 3 waste groups and support 
them by appropriate monitoring of waste.

c.  Procedures for minimising hazardous waste

d.  Monitoring, measuring and reporting of hazardous and non-hazardous site waste 
production according to the defined waste groups (according to the waste streams 
generated by the scope of the works)


1

Diverting Waste from Landfill

Where there is a compliant Site Waste Management Plan (SWMP) including procedures and 
commitments to sort and divert waste from landfill, through either;

a.  Re-use on site (in situ or for new applications)

b.  Re-use on other sites

c.  Salvage/reclaim for re-use 

d.  Return to the supplier via a ‘take-back’ scheme

e.  Recovery and recycling using an approved waste management contractor

f.  Compost

according to the defined waste groups (in line with the waste streams generated by the scope 
of the works). 


AND


One of the following has been achieved:

Where at least 50% by weight or by volume of non-hazardous construction waste 
generated by the project has been diverted from landfill.


OR

Where at least 85% by weight or by volume of non-hazardous construction waste 
generated by the project has been diverted from landfill.


  2  3 


Was 2: Construction Site Waste Management  |  163


Was

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance 

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

A copy of the compliant SWMP 
containing the appropriate benchmarks, 
commitments and procedures for 
waste minimisation and diversion from 
landfill in line with the criteria and with 
Checklists Was 2a, Was 2b and Was 2c


OR

Confirmation from the developer 
that the SWMP includes/will include 
benchmarks, procedures and 
commitments for minimising and 
diverting waste from landfill in line with 
the criteria and with Checklists Was 2a, 
Was 2b and Was 2c 

For post construction stage only 
assessments, confirmation that the 
SWMP implemented meets the criteria


OR

Confirmation from the developer that 
no details specified in the SWMP have 
changed from the evidence provided at 
the design stage 


OR

Where different from the design stage, 
provide confirmation from the developer 
that the SWMP implemented covers all 
the criteria 

Definitions

Best practice

The SWMP should include procedures, commitments for waste minimisation and 
diversion from landfill, as well as setting target benchmarks for resource efficiency in 
accordance with guidance from:

•  DEFRA (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs) 

•  BRE (Building Research Establishment) 

•  Envirowise 

•  WRAP (Waste & Resources Action Programme) 

•  Environmental performance indicators and/or key performance indicators (KPI) 
from Envirowise or Constructing Excellence.

Environmental performance indicators (EPIs)

When operated as part of a measuring-to-manage programme, environmental 
performance indicators allow companies to track how well they are doing and 
to identify opportunities to: save money and increase profits; use resources more 
efficiently; minimise waste (raw materials, product, energy, water, packaging, etc); 
and prevent pollution. For more information see http://envirowise.wrap.org.uk




164  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Was

Site waste management plans regulations

Powers were included in the Clean Neighbourhoods and Environment Act 2005 for 
regulations requiring a SWMP for works involving construction or demolition waste. 
The regulations, which came into force in April 2008, mean that any construction 
project in England costing over £300,000 will require an SWMP. See  
www.environment-agency.gov.uk/business and www.defra.gov.uk.

SMARTWaste

This is a software tool for preparing, implementing and reviewing a SWMP. This tool 
includes an integrated waste measurement tool (SMARTStart which is aligned to 
defined waste groups). SMARTWaste will manage all aspects of creating SWMPs and 
measuring waste generated on projects. This is linked to online waste measurement, 
industry waste benchmarks and a recycling site locator tool (BREMAP). For more 
information see www.smartwaste.co.uk.

Target benchmarks for waste minimisation

These can be set by using best practice and should be reviewed throughout the 
construction process as part of implementing an SWMP. Results are reported in the 
SWMP on completion. Specific quantitative targets are not set within this Technical 
Guide. It is the responsibility of the client and/or the principal contractor (as defined 
by the SWMP regulations 2008) to ensure that appropriate targets are set for the site. 

Waste groups

In a SWMP, details of the amount of waste produced, reduced, re-used, recycled or 
otherwise recovered on or off site need to be monitored and reported according to 
the following list (see also Checklist 2d):

Bricks (170102*)

Concrete (170101*)

Insulation (170604*)

Packaging (15018*)

Timber (170201*)

Electrical and electronic equipment (1602*)

Canteen/office/ad hoc

Asphalt and tar (1703*)

Tiles and ceramics (170103*)

Inert (1705*)

Metals (1704*)

Gypsum (170802*)

Plastics (170203*) 

Floor coverings (soft) 

http://www.environment-agency.gov.uk/business
http://www.defra.gov.uk
http://www.smartwaste.co.uk




Was 2: Construction Site Waste Management  |  165


Was

Soils (1705*)

Hazardous

Architectural features

Other/Mixed**

* From the European Waste Catalogue, codes for waste type

** Efforts should be made to categorise waste into the above categories wherever 
possible

Waste hierarchy

This is a general guide to the relative environmental benefits of different waste 
management options. It is represented by an inverted pyramid – from top to bottom: 
waste prevention, re-use of material, recycling/composting, recovery, and disposal 
(see England’s Waste Strategy 2007 at www.defra.gov.uk)

Assessment Methodology 

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and definitions in this 
section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met.

Design Stage 

•  Use Checklist Was 2a to confirm the criteria to minimise construction waste.

•  Use Checklist Was 2b to identify all waste groups to be monitored.

•  Use Checklist Was 2c to confirm the criteria to divert waste from landfill. 

•  Confirm the percentage of non-hazardous waste generated by the project that 
will be diverted from landfill. 

Post Construction Stage 

•  Verify that if the SWMP was revised during the construction phase, any target 
deviations from the original SWMP have been recorded.

•  Confirm the percentage of non-hazardous waste generated by the project that 
has been diverted from landfill.

Calculation Procedures 

None.




166  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Was

Checklists and Tables 

Checklist Was 2a: Minimising Construction Waste Generated on Site 

Criteria Evidence 
Demonstrating 
how Criteria will 
be Met

Reference Tick

1) Confirmation that target benchmarks are set to reduce 
waste generated on site. These should be reported as part of 
the SWMP implementation and on completion.

Waste minimisation targets during the construction process 
can be set using best practice. 

2) Set procedures and commitments to minimize non-
hazardous construction waste at design stage. Specify waste 
minimisation actions relating to at least 3 waste groups and 
support them by appropriate monitoring of waste.

3) Procedures for minimising hazardous waste.

Checklist Was 2b: Waste Groups 

Actions identified to monitor, reduce, sort and divert from landfill site construction waste (fill in 
where applicable, i.e. waste groups arising on housing project) 

Codes: 
(European 
Waste 
Catalogue)

Key Group Examples All that 
Apply

As Specified in SWMP

Materials 
to be 
Monitored

Materials 
to be 
Reduced

Materials to 
be Diverted 
from Landfill

170102 Bricks  Bricks

170101 Concrete  Pipes, kerb stones, paving 
slabs, concrete rubble, 
precast and in situ 

170604 Insulation  Glass fibre, mineral wool, 
foamed plastic

15018 Packaging  Pallets, cardboard, cable 
drums, wrapping bands, 
polythene sheets 

170201 Timber Softwood, hardwood, 
board products such as 
plywood, chipboard, 
medium density fibreboard 
(MDF)

1602 Electrical and 
electronic 
equipment 

Electrical and electronic 
TVs, fridges, air-
conditioning units, lamp 
equipment 


 

continued




Was 2: Construction Site Waste Management  |  167


Was

Checklist Was 2b: Waste Groups 

Actions identified to monitor, reduce, sort and divert from landfill site construction waste (fill in 
where applicable, i.e. waste groups arising on housing project) 

Codes: 
(European 
Waste 
Catalogue)

Key Group Examples All that 
Apply

As Specified in SWMP

Materials 
to be 
Monitored

Materials 
to be 
Reduced

Materials to 
be Diverted 
from Landfill

Canteen/office Office waste, canteen 
waste, vegetation 

1703 Asphalt and tar  Bitumen, coal tars, asphalt 

170103 Tiles and 
ceramics 

Ceramic tiles, clay roof 
tiles, ceramic sanitary ware 

1705 Inert  Mixed rubble/excavation 
material, glass

1704 Metals  Radiators, cables, wires, 
bars, sheet

170802 Gypsum  Plasterboard, render, 
plaster, cement, fibre 
cement sheets, mortar 

170203 Plastics  Pipes, cladding, frames, 
non-packaging sheet

Floor coverings 
(soft)

Carpets, vinyl flooring

1705  Soils Soils, clays, sand, gravel, 
natural stone

Hazardous Defined in Environment 
Agency technical guidance 
(see www.environment-
agency.gov.uk/subjects/
waste) 

Architectural 
features

Roof tiles, reclaimed 
bricks, fireplaces 

Other/Mixed Try to categorise waste 
into the above categories 
wherever possible.




168  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Was

Checklist Was 2c: Diverting from Landfill Construction Waste Generated on Site

Criteria Evidence 
Demonstrating 
how Criteria will 
be Met

Reference Tick

1) Procedures and commitments to sort and divert waste from 
landfill, either;

a.  Re-use on site (in situ or for new applications)

b.  Re-use on other sites

c.  Salvage/reclaim for re-use 

d.  Return to the supplier via a ‘take-back’ scheme

e.  Recovery and recycling using an approved waste 
management contractor

f.  Compost

according to the defined waste groups (according to the 
waste streams generated by the scope of the works). 

2) Confirmation of the percentage of non-hazardous 
construction waste generated by the project that has been 
diverted from landfill.

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

Where the credit for minimising waste has not been achieved, the credits for 
diversion from landfill cannot be awarded.

Since April 2008, any construction project in England costing over £300,000 requires 
a SWMP. To achieve any of the construction site waste management credits, the 
assessed development, regardless of value or locality, must have a SWMP compliant 
with regulations and best practice.

Hazardous waste should be segregated on site to avoid contaminating non-
hazardous waste streams. This is standard practice and therefore no credits for 
diversion from landfill will be awarded for segregating hazardous waste.

Special Cases 

Where space on site is too limited for waste material segregation, a licensed external 
contractor may be used to separate and process recyclable materials off site or 
the materials can be returned to the supplier via a take-back scheme. In this case, 
sufficient documentary evidence must be produced which demonstrates that material 
segregation is carried out to the correct standards and that materials are re-used/
recycled as appropriate. 




Was 3: Composting  |  169


Was

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Was 3  Composting  1  No



Aim 


To promote the provision of compost facilities to reduce the amount of household 
waste send to landfill. 

Assessment Criteria 

Criteria Credits

•  Individual home composting facilities.


OR 


•   A local communal or community composting service, which the Local Authority runs or 
where there is a management plan in place.


OR

•   A Local Authority green/kitchen waste collection system (this can include an automated 
waste collection system).

All facilities must also:

•  be in a dedicated position

•  provide inclusive access and usability (Checklist IDP)

•  have a supporting information leaflet provided to each dwelling.


1 

Default Cases 

None 




170  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Was

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

Detailed documentary evidence stating:

•  the location and size of internal and 
external storage

•  that an information leaflet will be 
supplied

•  distance of storage from dwelling


AND


Completed Checklist IDP

For post construction stage only 
assessments, provide detailed 
documentary evidence (as listed for 
design stage) representing the dwellings 
as-built


OR

Confirmation that the design stage 
composting solution has been 
implemented demonstrated by: 

•  A letter from the developer 
confirming that the composting 
facility specified at design stage has 
been provided


OR

Where only a letter of instruction 
is provided at design stage provide 
detailed documentary evidence (as 
listed for design stage) representing the 
dwellings as-built 


OR

Where different from design stage, 
provide detailed documentary evidence 
(as listed for design stage) representing 
the dwellings as- built


OR

Site Inspection Report confirming 
compliance

For communal/community composting 
schemes, detailed documentary 
evidence stating;

•  distance of storage from dwelling

•  management arrangements

•  location and size of storage

•  details of the scheme including 
opening times and access restrictions

•  confirmation that an information 
leaflet will be supplied


AND


Completed Checklist IDP

Where applicable, detailed documentary 
evidence stating:

•  Details of the Local Authority kitchen/
garden waste collection scheme

•  Details of the automated waste 
collection system

A copy of the composting information 
leaflet




Was 3: Composting  |  171


Was

Where detailed documentary evidence is 
not available at this stage;

A letter of instruction to a contractor/
supplier, a formal letter from 
the developer giving the specific 
undertaking or the manufacturer’s 
information, for all the above required 
details.

Definitions

Communal/community composting

Communal or community composting is where a group of people share a composting 
system. The raw materials are provided by all who take part in the scheme, and the 
compost is then used in the community, either by individuals in their own gardens, or 
for use on larger projects within the local environment. The distance between the site 
entrance and the communal/community containers must not usually exceed 30 m.

Composting

Composting is a natural process which converts organic waste into an earth-like mass 
by means of bacteria and micro-organisms. The composting process is also supported 
by larvae, wood lice, beetles, worms and other such creatures.

Facilities

All facilities must be in a dedicated position, meet the requirements of Checklist 
IDP and have an information leaflet that is delivered to each dwelling. External 
composting facilities and storage need to be located within a maximum distance of 
30 m from the entrance door of the dwelling and/or the building (if a block of flats). 
The requirements are:

•  Space for a kitchen waste container in the home and for an exterior composter 
accessed by an inclusive route must be provided for home composting.

•  Space for a container in the home and for an exterior composter accessed by an 
inclusive route must be provided for community/communal composting.

•  Space for a container in the home and external storage space accessed by an 
inclusive route, with a local green/kitchen waste collection scheme in operation 
must be provided for green/kitchen waste collection scheme.

The internal kitchen waste container space should be large enough to hold at least a 
7-litre container. 

In all cases, the composting solution/scheme must achieve full compliance with 
the Animal By-products Regulations (2005). If applicable, the composting solution/
scheme must be registered with the Environment Agency (EA), in England and 




172  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Was

Wales and have either a waste management licence, an environmental permit or an 
exemption from the EA.

Home composting facilities

Home composting facilities must consist of an external composting container, 
specifically designed for composting, sited according to the manufacturer’s 
instructions and accessed by route in accordance with the requirement of Checklist 
IDP. Such containers must not be sited in close proximity to windows, doors or 
ventilation intakes for habitable areas within the dwelling or surrounding dwellings.

Inclusive access and usability

The purpose of the Code is not to deliver purpose-designed wheelchair housing but 
rather inclusive general needs housing that caters for the widest possible segment of 
the population (including older people), and which can easily be adapted to meet the 
needs of wheelchair users. The principles of inclusive design are embedded within 
the Was 1, Was 3, Hea 3 and Hea 4 issues of the Code. They aim to prevent barriers 
that create undue effort and separation and enable everyone to participate equally, 
confidently and independently in everyday activities such as taking out rubbish and 
spending time outside.

Information leaflet

The leaflet must provide information on:

•  How composting works and why it is important

•  The materials that can be composted (e.g. raw vegetable peelings and fruit, 
shredded paper, teabags etc)


AND


•  Where home composting facilities are provided, troubleshooting information 
(e.g. what to do if the compost gets too dry or too wet)



AND 


•  Details of the operation and management plan for communal schemes

•  Where a green/kitchen waste collection scheme is in operation, the information 
leaflet provided by the local authority is sufficient to meet the information 
leaflet criteria.

Kitchen waste collection scheme

A kitchen waste collection scheme run by the local authority is an acceptable 
alternative to communal/community composting facilities. Many local authorities 
now offer kitchen waste collection schemes in addition to garden waste collection 
schemes.




Was 3: Composting  |  173


Was

Site Inspection Report

This is a report prepared by the Code assessor during a post construction stage 
assessment and provided as evidence with the assessment.

Assessment Methodology 

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and definitions in this 
section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met.

Design Stage 

•  Confirm the provision of a home composter and internal space for a container, 
communal/community composting service or Local Authority kitchen/garden 
collection service as appropriate.

•  Confirm that the composting facilities are suitable for normal domestic 
green/garden, food and other compostable household waste and cover both 
kitchen and garden waste (see Common Cases of Non-Compliance for further 
information).

•  Check that the facility offers inclusive access and usability by meeting the 
applicable requirements of Checklist IDP.

•  Check that the size of the facility is compliant.

•  Check that an information leaflet will be supplied.

•  Check that details of communal/community composting and Local Authority 
collection schemes are provided (where applicable): management, opening 
times, access restrictions, frequency, etc.

Note: It is acceptable for the bin to be beside other recycling bins in a communal 
collection site providing it is clearly identifiable as being connected to a licensed 
community composting scheme.

Post Construction Stage 

•  Confirm which specifications and evidence provided at the design stage are still 
valid.

•  Assess all the new specifications and evidence provided at the post construction 
stage.

Calculation Procedures

None. 




174  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Was

Checklists and Tables 

Checklist IDP must be used to assess inclusive access and usability.

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

Credits can be awarded only where the collection scheme collects from all dwellings 
seeking this credit.

Where a dwelling is serviced by a kitchen waste collection service, has a garden of its 
own and no individual composting facilities in the garden, credits cannot be awarded.

Special Cases 

Existing and proposed community schemes are acceptable under this issue providing 
they comply with all the specifications in the technical guide.

Where Credits in the Security Issue are sought, attention should also be given to the 
requirements of Secured by Design when locating the external composting facility. 




Pol 1: Global Warming Potential (GWP) of Insulants  |  175


Pol

Category 6: Pollution

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Pol 1  Global Warming Potential (GWP) of 
Insulants 



1 No




Aim 


To promote the reduction of emissions of gases with high GWP associated with the 
manufacture, installation, use and disposal of foamed thermal and acoustic insulating 
materials. 

Assessment Criteria

Criteria Credits

Credits are awarded where all insulating materials in the elements of the dwelling listed below 
only use substances that have a GWP < 5 (in manufacture AND installation): 

•  Roofs: including loft access

•  Walls: internal and external including lintels and all acoustic insulation

•  Floors: including ground and upper floors

•  Hot water cylinder: pipe insulation and other thermal stores

•  Cold water storage tanks: where provided

•  External doors


1

Default Cases 

None 




176  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Pol

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance 

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

Completed Checklist Pol 1 showing the 
proposed insulation materials (or none) 
for each element and whether they are 
foamed using blowing agents or are 
unfoamed (from table Cat 6.1)

For post construction stage only 
assessments, completed Checklist Pol 
1 showing the proposed insulation 
materials (or none) for each element 
and whether they are foamed using 
blowing agents or are unfoamed (from 
table Cat 6.1) 


OR

Written confirmation from the 
developer that all insulants are as 
specified at design stage


OR

Where different from design stage, 
completed Checklist Pol 1 showing the 
proposed insulation materials (or none) 
for each element and whether they are 
foamed using blowing agents or are 
unfoamed (from table Cat 6.1)

Definitions

Blowing agents

Any material used to produce a cellular structure in either a plastic or other foam 
insulation used in either manufacture or installation.

Deemed to satisfy

The blowing agents listed in table Cat 6.2 are deemed to satisfy this credit since their 
GWP is known to be sufficiently low to justify this. All are currently believed to have a 
GWP of less than 5.

Global Warming Potential (GWP)

Global Warming Potential is defined as the potential for global warming that a 
chemical has relative to 1 unit of carbon dioxide, the primary greenhouse gas. In 
determining the GWP of the blowing agent, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) methodology using a 100-year Integrated Time Horizon (ITH) must be 
applied. 




Pol 1: Global Warming Potential (GWP) of Insulants  |  177


Pol

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was established by the 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the World Meteorological 
Organization (WMO) in 1988 to assess the scientific, technical and socio-economic 
information relevant for the understanding of human induced climate change, its 
potential impacts and options for mitigation and adaptation. The IPCC has completed 
three full assessment reports, guidelines and methodologies, special reports and 
technical papers. For more information on the IPCC, its activities and publications see 
www.ipcc-wg2.org

Assessment Methodology

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met. 

Design Stage 

•  Complete Checklist table: Cat 6.1 Pol 1 for all elements.

•  Check drawings and specification clauses for all materials identified.

•  For foamed materials, or propellants used to spray or inject insulation, provide 
manufacturer/installer’s documentation confirming that their product uses 
either blowing agents deemed to satisfy the requirement from table Cat 6.2 in 
isolation or a blowing agent or blend of blowing agents which can be shown to 
have a GWP of less than 5.

Post Construction Stage 

•  Confirm which specifications and evidence provided at the design stage are still 
valid.

•  Assess all the new specifications and evidence provided at the post construction 
stage.

Calculation Procedures 

None. 

http://www.ipcc-wg2.org




178  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Pol

Checklists and Tables

Table: Cat 6.1: Foamed and Non-foamed Insulating Materials

Foamed Insulation Non-foamed Insulation 

Expanded polystyrene  Mineral wool or fibre 

Extruded polystyrene  Glass wool or fibre 

Polyurethane (PU) insulation  Cork 

Cellular glass or foamed glass  Cellulose insulation 

Nitrile rubber or elastomeric insulation  Wood fibre board 

Phenolic insulation  Wool 

Polyisocyanurate foam  Flax 

Icynene foam  Recycled newspaper and jute 

Tripolymer foam  Straw or strawboard 

Foamed polyethylene 

Table: Cat 6.2: Blowing agents deemed to satisfy the issue requirements and/or believed to have a 
GWP of less than 5


Air


Carbon dioxide (CO2)

Pentane (iso-pentane, cyclopentane, n-pentane)

Isobutene




Pol 1: Global Warming Potential (GWP) of Insulants  |  179


Pol Checklist Pol 1: GWP of Insulants Element Proposed Insulation Materials Unfoamed [U]/ Foamed [F]/Installed Using Propellants [P]Manufacturer Product Name GWP  (if foamed)Name of Blowing Agent Used (where installed using a propellant)GWP of Blowing Agent  (if present)Reference to Literature Confirming GWP (if foamed or installed using a propellant)Roofs Roof Type 1 Roof Type 2 Loft Access Walls External Walls Internal Walls Doors Lintels Thermal and Acoustic Insulation continued


180  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Pol Checklist Pol 1: GWP of Insulants Element Proposed Insulation Materials Unfoamed [U]/ Foamed [F]/Installed Using Propellants [P]Manufacturer Product Name GWP  (if foamed)Name of Blowing Agent Used (where installed using a propellant)GWP of Blowing Agent  (if present)Reference to Literature Confirming GWP (if foamed or installed using a propellant)Floors Ground Floor Upper Floors Basement Foundations Thermal Stores Hot Water Cylinder Cold Water Storage Tanks Pipe Insulation Other Thermal Stores Note: The manufacturing process of insulating materials changes regularly. Because of this, this document does not include a complete list of insulating materials that comply and manufacturers should be approached for up-to-date information on their products. 

Pol 1: Global Warming Potential (GWP) of Insulants  |  181


Pol

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

Where any insulation material contains substances which are controlled under the 
Montreal Protocol or where the release of such substances forms a significant part 
of the manufacturing process, this credit should be withheld. Such substances 
are prohibited within the EU and so they could only be contained in products 
manufactured outside the EU. 

Special Cases 

None. 




182  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Pol

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Pol 2  NOX Emissions  3 No



Aim 


To promote the reduction of nitrogen oxide (NOX) emissions into the atmosphere. 

Assessment Criteria 

Criteria

Dry NOX Level (mg/kWh) Boiler Class (BS EN 297: 1994) Credits 

≤ 100 

≤ 70 

≤ 40 


4 5 – 123

Default Cases

Where all space heating and hot water energy requirements are fully met by systems which do 
not produce NOX emissions.


3

Note:

1. No credits may be awarded for open flue space and/or water heating systems. 




Pol 2: NOx Emissions  |  183


Pol

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance 

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

Detailed documentary evidence 
describing:

•  The primary and any secondary 
heating systems and flue type

•  Dry NOX levels and/or boiler class 
of the primary and any secondary 
heating systems

For post construction stage only 
assessments, provide detailed 
documentary evidence (as listed for 
design stage) representing the dwellings 
as built


OR

Written confirmation from the 
developer that heating systems have 
been installed as specified in the design 
stage detailed documentary evidence


OR

Where only a letter of instruction 
is provided at design stage provide 
detailed documentary evidence and 
NOX averaging calculations (as listed for 
design stage but based on as built SAP 
outputs) representing the dwellings as 
built 


OR

Where different from design stage, 
provide detailed documentary evidence 
(as listed for Design Stage) representing 
the dwellings as built


OR

Site inspection report confirming 
compliance

Where NOX averaging is required due 
to multiple heating systems within the 
dwelling: 

Copy of calculations as detailed in the 
methodology based on design stage 
SAP outputs

Where detailed documentary evidence is 
not available at this stage;

A letter of instruction to a contractor/
supplier or a formal letter from the 
developer to the Code assessor giving 
the specific undertaking

Definitions

Accredited energy assessor

A person registered with an accredited energy assessment scheme provider. The 
scheme provider will be licensed by Communities and Local Government to accredit 
competent persons to assess the CO2 emission rates of domestic buildings for the 
purposes of demonstrating compliance with Building Regulations.




184  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Pol

(AD L1A) Approved Document L1A

The Building Regulations for England and Wales Approved Document L1A: 
Conservation of Fuel and Power in New Dwellings (2010 Edition).

Boiler class

An indication of a boiler’s NOX emissions. Boilers are classified on a scale of 1 to 5, 
with 1 indicating high NOX emissions through to relatively low NOX emissions for a 
class 5.

Boiler class (BS EN 297: 1994)

The relevant British Standard that defines and classifies boilers based on their NOX 
emissions. Applies to boilers fitted with atmospheric burners of nominal heat input 
not exceeding 70 kW.

Building Control Body

The body responsible for ensuring that construction works are according to plan and 
compliant with applicable requirements through periodic inspection.

Building Regulations

Building Regulations apply in England and Wales and promote:

•  Standards for most aspects of a building’s construction, including structure, fire 
safety, sound insulation, drainage, ventilation and electrical safety 

•  Energy efficiency 

•  The needs of all people, including those with disabilities, in accessing and 
moving around buildings.

Dry NOX

The NOX emissions (mg/kWh) resulting from the combustion of a fuel at zero per cent 
excess oxygen levels. If electricity is sourced from the national grid, the associate Dry 
NOx emissions are approximately 1200 mg/kWh.

SAP Output (design & as built stage)

This is a dated output from accredited SAP software produced by an accredited 
energy assessor. The output must summarise the data necessary to determine 
performance against the requirements of this issue and include the name and 
registration number of the accredited energy assessor, the assessment status, plot 
number and development address. It is not necessary to produce individual SAP 
outputs for identical dwellings for the purposes of a Code assessment.

The output will be based on either design stage information or on the dwelling as 
constructed. Design stage outputs are normally used when assessing design stage 
Code performance and as built outputs for post construction Code assessments. 




Pol 2: NOx Emissions  |  185


Pol

Where SAP outputs are not produced by an accredited energy assessor they must be 
verified by either an accredited energy assessor or a member of the building control 
body responsible for assessing the dwelling for compliance with Part L of the Building 
Regulations.

For the purposes of assessing this issue the applicable SAP outputs are:

•  SAP DER worksheet

(SAP) Standard Assessment Procedure for Energy Rating of Dwellings

The Government’s approved methodology for assessing the energy performance of 
new dwellings. The current version is SAP 2009 version 9.90, dated March 2010, 
revision October 2010. The procedure accounts for energy used in:

•  Space heating and cooling

•  Hot water provision

•  Fixed lighting.

The indicators of energy performance are energy consumption per unit floor area, 
energy cost rating (SAP rating), environmental impact rating based on CO2 emissions 
(EI rating) and dwelling CO2 emission rate (DER). They are used in the production of 
Energy Performance Certificates (EPCs) and to demonstrate compliance with AD L1A 
and the Code for Sustainable Homes.

To contribute to reducing CO2 emissions as calculated by SAP, heat and power must 
be generated either on or in the home, on the development or through other local 
community arrangements (including district heat and power).

Site inspection report

This is a report prepared by the Code assessor during a post construction stage 
assessment and provided as evidence with the assessment.

Assessment Methodology 

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met. 

Design Stage 

•  Determine the specification and NOX emissions of all heating systems in the 
dwelling. If a secondary space and/or water heating system supplies less than 
8% of the dwelling’s combined space heating and hot water demand, it can be 
omitted from the assessment. 

•  Confirm that NOx emissions are estimated under normal operating conditions 
i.e. dry NOX in mg/kWh. If mains electricity meets some or all of the heating 
demand, assume a NOx emission rate of 1200 mg/kWh supplied.




186  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Pol

•  If the figures are not stated in dry NOX and/or in mg/kWh as required, apply 
any necessary conversion/correction factors to the NOX figure(s) stated for the 
heating system(s). (See Sections A & B in Calculation Procedures below for 
guidance.)

•  Where applicable, calculate the average NOX emissions using the methodology 
detailed in Section C of Calculation Procedures.

Post Construction Stage 

•  Confirm which specifications and evidence provided at the design stage are still 
valid.

•  Assess all the new specifications and evidence provided at the post construction 
stage.

•  Where the heating system has not been commissioned at the time of the post 
construction stage assessment, a contractual commitment must be in place to 
ensure that the heating system will be servicing the dwelling either before more 
than 60% of dwellings on the development are certified or within 18 months of 
the dwelling’s completion.

Calculation Procedures 

A: Conversion Factors 

Manufacturers should supply dry NOX emissions data in mg/kWh. Where this is not 
possible the assessor should use the following conversion factors to convert figures 
in mg/m3, ppm or wet NOX (derived using data from BS EN 297:1994). It should be 
noted that these conversion factors assume worst-case efficiencies and are likely to 
give a high estimate. This could have the effect of lowering the number of credits 
achieved.

1. Figures in mg/m3 should be multiplied by 0.857 in order to show emissions in 
mg/kWh. A conversion may also be necessary for data not calculated at 0% 
excess oxygen (see B below). 

2. Figures in parts per million (ppm) should be multiplied by 1.76 in order to 
show emissions in mg/kWh. A conversion may also be necessary for data not 
calculated at 0% excess oxygen (see B below). 

3. Figures in mg/MJ should be multiplied by 3.6 in order to show emissions in 
mg/kWh (1 kWh = 3.6 MJ). A conversion may also be necessary for data not 
calculated at 0% excess oxygen (see B below).

The assessment criteria are based on dry NOX values – almost all manufacturers quote 
emissions in dry NOX. However if wet NOX figures are supplied, these should be 
converted to dry NOX. This can be done by multiplying wet NOX figures by 1.75. 

B: Excess Oxygen Correction 

If a NOX emission rate is quoted by the manufacturer in mg/m
3 or ppm, then it should 

be established at what % oxygen this emission was made. 




Pol 2: NOx Emissions  |  187


Pol

The greater the amount of excess oxygen in the flue gases at the time of 
measurement, the more ‘diluted’ the NOX. It is therefore important to convert any 
emission rate back to 0% excess oxygen. For the purpose of this assessment, use 
the following conversion factors for the most frequently used rates supplied by 
manufacturers: 

% excess O2 Conversion (c)

  3% × 1.17

  6% × 1.40

15% × 3.54

Conversion factor c = 20.9 / (20.9 – x) 

Where x = % excess O2 (NOT excess air) and 20.9 is the percentage of O2 in the air. 

C: Calculating the average NOx emissions for dwellings with more than one 
heating/hot water system 

Where heat and hot water is provided by more than one system in a dwelling (i.e. 
there is more than one ‘main’ heating system and/or a ‘secondary’ system) it may 
be necessary to calculate the total NOX emissions for the systems combined. For 
the purposes of this assessment, this is only necessary when the secondary system 
satisfies more than 8% of the dwelling’s combined total space heating and hot 
water demand. Where any heating system supplies less than 8% of the combined 
space and water heating demand it can be omitted from the assessment. However, 
including a low NOX heating system that supplies less than 8% of the combined 
demand can lower the average NOX figure. Where this is the case inclusion of the 
secondary system is at the discretion of the developer and assessor. The procedure to 
calculate average dry NOX levels is detailed in tables: Cat 6.1 and 6.2.

D: Calculation method for Combined Heat and Power (CHP) systems

Where CHP systems are specified, it is only necessary to consider the heat related 
NOX emissions for the assessment of this issue. 

NOX emissions are allocated to heat and electricity in line with the respective power 
outputs. A NOx emission rate equivalent to the current rate for grid electricity 
should be assumed for the electrical output (i.e. 1200 mg/kWh supplied) and the 
remaining NOX should be allocated to heat output. Only the heat-related component 
is then compared to the assessment criteria. The following formula must be used to 
determine this:

  X = (A – B)/C 

Where: 

X = NOX emissions per unit of heat supplied (mg/kWh) 

A = NOX emissions per unit of electricity generated (mg/kWh) 




188  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Pol

Note: This is the NOX emitted by the CHP system per unit of electricity generated and 
should be obtained from the supplier. Where data is provided in different units or at 
a level of excess oxygen above zero it must be corrected using the factors above. 

B = NOX emissions per unit of electricity supplied from the grid (mg/kWh). 

Note: this should be assumed to be 1200mg/kWh supplied 

C = Heat to Electricity Ratio of the CHP scheme 

The above methodology determines the net NOX emissions from CHP generated 
electricity compared to central generation of electricity and allocates this amount to 
the heat production. Where X is calculated to be negative it should be assumed to be 
zero. 

Where the CHP system operates in conjunction with other heat sources, the 
calculation methodology outlined in table Cat 6.2 must be used and steps [2] and [4] 
repeated as appropriate.

Table Cat 6.1 Calculation of average NOX emissions

Systems assessed under Section A of SAP

System and Data Source Guidance [See note 1] Energy 
demand 
(kWh/year)


(A)


NOx emission 
rate  
(mg/kWh)


(B)




NOx 

Emissions  
(mg/yr)

(A) × (B) = (C)

(1a) Space heating fuel (main heating system 1) 

[SAP box 211]

(2a) Space heating fuel (main heating system 2) 

[SAP box 213]

(3a) Space heating fuel (secondary) 

[SAP box 215]

(4a) Energy generating technologies

[∑ SAP boxes 233 to 235]

(5a) Energy saving technologies

[(∑ SAP boxes 236a to n) – (∑ SAP boxes 
237a to n)]

(n = all eligible technologies)

[See note [2]]

(6a) Water heating fuel 

[∑ SAP boxes 621 to 12]


OR

[SAP box 62 × 303a or b × 305a × 306 as 
applicable]

For DHW only community schemes continued




Pol 2: NOx Emissions  |  189


Pol

Table Cat 6.1 Calculation of average NOX emissions

Systems assessed under Section A of SAP

System and Data Source Guidance [See note 1] Energy 
demand 
(kWh/year)


(A)


NOx emission 
rate  
(mg/kWh)


(B)




NOx 

Emissions  
(mg/yr)

(A) × (B) = (C)

(7a) Solar DHW input

[∑ SAP boxes 631 to 12]

Totals

(8a) Total Annual NOx Emissions (mg/yr)

[∑ Value at step (1a)(C) to Value at (7a)(C) = (8a)]

(9a) Total Annual Energy Demand (kWh/yr) 

[∑ Value at (1a)(A) to Value at (7a)(A) = (9a)]

(10a) Average NOx Emissions (mg/kWh) 

[Value at (8a) ÷ Value at (9a) = (10a)]

Note: If the value displayed in any of the required SAP boxes is negative, consider it positive when entering in to 
table Cat 6.1 e.g. if –250 is displayed, enter 250 

Table Cat 6.2 Calculation of average NOX emissions for a dwelling

Systems assessed under Section B of SAP

System and Data Source Guidance [See note 1] Energy 
demand  
(kWh/year)


(A)


NOx emission 
rate (mg/


k Wh)(B)




NOx 

Emissions 
(mg/yr)

(A) × (B) = (C)

(1b) Space heat from CHP 

[SAP box 307a]

(2b) Space heat from heat source N 

(N = 2,3,4 or 5)

[SAP box 307b, 307d, 307d or 307e as 
applicable]

(3b) Energy generating technologies

[∑ SAP boxes 333 to 334]

(4b) Energy saving technologies

[(∑ SAP boxes 336a to n) – (∑ SAP boxes 
337a to n)]

(n = all eligible technologies)

[See note [2]]

(5b) Water heat from CHP 

[SAP box 310a] continued




190  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Pol

Table Cat 6.2 Calculation of average NOX emissions for a dwelling

Systems assessed under Section B of SAP

System and Data Source Guidance [See note 1] Energy 
demand  
(kWh/year)


(A)


NOx emission 
rate (mg/


k Wh)(B)




NOx 

Emissions 
(mg/yr)

(A) × (B) = (C)

(6b) Water heat from heat source n 

(n = 2,3,4 or 5)

[SAP box 310b, 310c, 310d or 310e as 
applicable]

(7b) Solar DHW input

[∑ SAP boxes 631 to12]

Totals

(8b) Total Annual NOx Emissions (mg/yr)

[∑ Value at step (1b)(C) to Value at (7b)(C) = (8b)]

(9b) Total Annual Energy Demand (kWh/yr) 

[∑ Value at (1b)(A) to Value at (7b)(A) = (9b)]

(10b) Average NOx Emissions (mg/kWh) 

[Value at (8b) ÷ Value at (9b) = (10b)]

Note: If the value displayed in any of the required SAP boxes is negative, consider it positive when entering in to 
table Cat 6.2 e.g. if –250 is displayed, enter 250 

Notes to tables Cat 6.1 and 6.2:

[1]  The data sources in this calculation correspond with SAP and are intended as 
supplementary guidance to assist in identifying each value required. It is the 
responsibility of the assessor to ensure that the correct value is identified and 
entered into the calculation, as the data source may vary dependant on the 
type of accredited SAP software used.

[2]  Where not accounted for on a monthly basis, energy savings from SAP 
Appendix Q technologies are accounted for in SAP box 236 for section A 
assessments and box 336 for section B assessments. These output boxes are 
repeated for each Appendix Q technology specified. To calculate the annual 
savings from Appendix Q technologies it is necessary to sum the energy 
savings from each system specified. 




Pol 2: NOx Emissions  |  191


Pol

Checklists and Tables 

None.

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

None.

Special Cases 

None. 




192  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Hea

Category 7: Health & Well-being

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Hea 1  Daylighting  3 No



Aim 


To promote good daylighting and thereby improve quality of life and reduce the need 
for energy to light the home. 

Assessment Criteria 

Criteria Credits

Kitchens must achieve a minimum Average Daylight Factor of at least 2% 

All living rooms, dining rooms and studies (including any room designated as a home office 
under Ene 9 – Home Office) must achieve a minimum Average Daylight Factor of at least 1.5% 

80% of the working plane in each kitchen, living room, dining room and study (including any 
room designated as a home office under Ene 9 – Home Office) must receive direct light from 
the sky


1 1  1 

Default Cases 



None

Hea 1: Daylighting  |  193


Hea

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance 

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

Copy of calculations as detailed in the 
methodology to demonstrate:

• Average daylight factor using the 
formula described in the definitions 
section (method described in Littlefair 
(1998) as set out in BS 8206–2) or 
computer simulation or scale model 
measurements

• Position of the no-sky line and 
percentage of area of the working 
plane that receives direct light from 
the sky

Confirmation from the developer that 
the calculations accurately reflect the 
dwelling as designed.

For post construction stage only 
assessments, calculations and additional 
evidence (as listed for design stage) 
representing the dwellings as built or 
on-site measurements as below


OR

A letter from the developer confirming 
that the dwellings have been built as 
detailed at design stage


OR

Where different from design stage, 
calculations verified by the developer for 
all dwellings as built 


OR

On-site measurements (methodology 
detailed in BRE IP 23/93) in the 
same rooms assessed at design 
stage (required when scale model 
measurements were carried out at 
design stage)

Definitions

Angle of visible sky

The angle of visible sky u is the angle subtended, in the vertical plane normal to the 
window, by the visible sky from the centre of the window.

Where:

Hw is the height of the window

Tw is the thickness of the wall

D is the distance from the window to the obstruction

H is the height of the obstruction above the mid-height of the window 

And:  u  =  90 – a – b




194  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Hea

With:

    tan a  = 


HD


    tan b  = 


Tw Hw

Average daylight factor 

The average daylight factor is the average indoor illuminance (from daylight) on the 
working plane within a room, expressed as a percentage of the simultaneous outdoor 
illuminance on a horizontal plane under an unobstructed CIE ‘standard overcast sky’. 
The average daylight factor can be calculated using the following equation: 

    DF  = 


MWu T


A(1 – R2)

Where: 

W = total glazed area of windows or roof lights 

A = total area of all the room surfaces (ceiling, floor, walls and windows)

R = area-weighted average reflectance of the room surfaces

M = a correction factor for dirt

T = glass transmission factor

u = angle of visible sky 

Guide values for a typical dwelling with light-coloured walls are as follows (for more 
accurate values, refer to CIBSE Lighting Guide 10):

R    =  0.5

M    =  1.0 (vertical glazing that can be cleaned easily) 

      0.8 (sloping glazing) 

      0.7 (horizontal glazing) 

T     =  0.7 (double glazing) 

      0.6 (double glazing with low emissivity coating)

      0.6 (triple glazing)

u    =  65˚ (vertical glazing) 

It is advised that this default figure for the angle of visible sky is used with caution; 
the methodology detailed in the angle of visible sky definition must be preferred for 
more accuracy.




Hea 1: Daylighting  |  195


Hea

Commission Internationale de l’Eclairage (CIE)

Commission Internationale de l’Eclairage (CIE) is the international standards body for 
lighting.

Daylight factor

The daylight factor is the ratio between the illuminance (from daylight) at a specific 
point on the working plane within a room, expressed as a percentage of the 
illuminance received on an outdoor unobstructed horizontal plane. This is based on 
an assumed overcast sky, approximated by the CIE ‘standard overcast sky’. 

No-sky line

The no-sky line divides those areas of the working plane which can receive direct light 
from the sky, from those which cannot. It is important as it indicates how good the 
distribution of daylight is in a room. Areas beyond the no-sky line will generally look 
gloomy.

As an approximation, obstructions that are parallel to the window can be considered 
infinite. The no sky-line will then be parallel to the window at a distance ’d’ from the 
window wall, which can be calculated as follows:

    d  = 


xhy

Where:

h = height of the window head above the working plane

y = height of the obstruction above the window head

x = distance from the window to the obstruction

If d is greater than the room depth, then no part of the room lies beyond this no-sky 
line.

Where results using this methodology do not comply with the requirements, more 
accurate calculations can be carried out, as detailed in the Calculation Procedures of 
the issue.

Reasonableness check

A reasonableness check is carried out on daylight factor and no-sky line calculations. 
Checks must be performed on one room per dwelling, in 10 per cent of dwellings, 
up to a maximum of 10 dwellings per development. Different floors and orientations 
are checked, and calculation input details, such as room dimensions, window type, 
sizes and locations and site layout, must be consistent with the specification and the 
drawings.




196  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Hea

Working plane

The working plane is a notional surface, typically at about desk or table height, at 
which daylight factor or the ‘no-sky line’ is calculated or plotted. For the calculations 
required under the Hea 1 issue, it is at 0.85 m above the floor.

Assessment Methodology 

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met.

Design Stage 

•  Confirm the Average Daylight Factor and No-Sky Line.

•  Carry out a reasonableness check on average daylight factor and no-sky line 
calculations provided by the developer/design team. Check the calculations are 
signed off by the developer or a member of the design team.

•  Carry out an internal reasonableness check on calculations performed by the 
appointed assessor. Check that these have been signed off by the developer or 
a member of the design team.

Post Construction Stage 

•  Confirm which specifications and evidence provided at the design stage are still 
valid.

•  Assess all the new specifications and evidence provided at the post construction 
stage.

•  Check that the average daylight factor and no-sky line calculation input details, 
such as room dimensions, window type, sizes and locations, and site layout are 
correct by site inspection. 

•  Where any changes have occurred, seek revised calculations and check these as 
described above. Check the final specification and drawings. 

Calculation Procedures 

It is recommended that calculations are supplied by a daylighting expert:

1. Calculation procedures for daylight factor and typical values are detailed in 
Littlefair (1998): 

  The DF formula can be used to model daylighting conditions in any simple 
rectangular room with a continuous external obstruction or none. For L-shaped 
rooms, it is acceptable to divide the room into two sections and calculate the DF 
for each section based only on the windows present in that section. The DF of 
both sections can then be averaged to give a final result.




Hea 1: Daylighting  |  197


Hea

  Where external obstructions are of complex geometry and cannot be 
approximated by a continuous object, it is advisable to use the methodology in 
Littlefair (1998). Individual trees can be ignored. 

  More complex room geometries can be modelled using computer simulation 
software, physical scale modelling or advanced manual calculations. The Code 
does not specify ‘compliant’ computer software; the daylighting expert must 
select which is most appropriate.

  Where there are two types of room which form part of the same large space, 
for example, an open-plan kitchen-dining room, calculate as one room as there 
is no solid partition present to block the distribution of the daylight. Credits will 
then be awarded on the basis of the DF of the whole space. For example, if the 
space is used as a kitchen, a living room and a dining room, the same DF will be 
used when assessing all these areas against the levels set out above.

  When two or more windows in a room face different obstructions (e.g. vertical 
windows and roof lights) or differ in transmittance, the DF should be found 
separately for each window, and the results summed.

2. Plotting of the no-sky line or estimating the percentage of the working plane 
that receives direct light from the sky can be done using the methodology in 
Annex 3. It must be understood that this methodology will underestimate the 
actual percentage of the working plane that receives direct light from the sky 
because obstructions are unlikely to be infinite. Where obstructions are not 
horizontal, parallel to the window or considered infinite, refer to Littlefair (1998) 
for a more accurate methodology.

3. It is acceptable that daylighting calculations are carried out in selected dwellings 
(or rooms) when the reasoning behind their selection clearly demonstrates 
that the rooms in the dwellings for which the calculations are not provided will 
perform better than those backed up by the calculations.

4. Seeking expert advice is recommended to carry out daylighting calculations 
as mentioned above. However, assessors are not prohibited from performing 
calculations themselves. It is up to the assessor and design team to judge 
whether the assessor has sufficient expertise perform this function. Any 
calculations provided by the assessor should be signed off by the developer or a 
member of the design team before being submitted as evidence. The Technical 
Guide is intended only to provide the information necessary to perform a 
reasonableness check on calculations provided by a competent daylighting 
expert – further guidance on how to complete calculations can be found in BS 
8206-2:2008 Lighting for buildings – Part 2: Code of practice for daylighting.

Checklists and Tables 

None.




198  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Hea

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

None.

Special Cases 

Sun pipes: As a general rule, sun pipes should be treated as roof lights, i.e. if there 
are no obstructions use a u of 180°. There are a wide range of light pipes on the 
market with different reflective linings and some include lenses/mirrors etc. If no 
transmission factor is stated, use T = 0.5 for a 1 m length pipe and T = 0.25 for a 2 m 
length pipe. 




Hea 2: Sound Insulation  |  199


Hea

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Hea 2 Sound Insulation  4 No



Aim 


To promote the provision of improved sound insulation to reduce the likelihood of 
noise complaints from neighbours.

Assessment Criteria 

Criteria Credits

Where:

•  airborne sound insulation values are at least 3dB higher

•  impact sound insulation values are at least 3dB lower


OR

•  airborne sound insulation values are at least 5dB higher

•  impact sound insulation values are at least 5dB lower


OR

•  airborne sound insulation values are at least 8dB higher

•  impact sound insulation values are at least 8dB lower

than the performance standards set out in the Building Regulations approved for England and 
Wales, Approved Document E (2003 Edition, with amendments 2004).

This can be demonstrated through EITHER

A programme of pre-completion testing based on the Normal programme of testing described 
in Approved Document E, for every group or sub-group of houses or flats, demonstrating that 
the above standard or standards are achieved.


OR

Use of constructions for all relevant building elements that have been assessed and approved 
as Robust Details by Robust Details Limited (RDL) and found to achieve the performance 
standards stated above. All relevant dwellings must be registered with RDL.


134


Default cases

Detached dwellings

Attached dwellings where separating walls or floors occur only between non-habitable rooms


43

Note: these criteria apply only to walls, floors and staircases that perform a dwelling to dwelling separating 
function. Internal partitions are beyond the scope of this issue.




200  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Hea

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance 

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

Where pre-completion testing will be 
carried out;

A letter from the developer confirming 
the intent to:

•  Meet the relevant sound insulation 
performance levels 

•  Use a Compliant Test Body to 
complete testing

Where pre-completion testing has been 
carried out:

•  Copies of the sound insulation 
field test results and/or a letter of 
confirmation that the required sound 
insulation performance standards as 
detailed in the assessment criteria 
have been achieved.

•  Evidence that the tests have been 
carried out by a Compliant Test Body 

Where Robust Details will be used;

•  Confirmation that the Robust Details 
chosen will achieve the required 
performance standards for sound 
insulation (as applicable)

•  Confirmation that the relevant plots 
are registered with RDL (the Purchase 
Statement)

Where Robust Details have been used:

•  Completed Robust Details Ltd 
Compliance Certificate signed 
by the developer for all relevant 
constructions relating to the plots 
being assessed

Definitions

Approved Document E (AD E)

The Building Regulations for England and Wales Approved Document E: Resistance to 
the Passage of Sound, 2003 edition incorporating 2004 amendments.

Compliant test body

Those organisations or individuals having UKAS accreditation or accredited by a 
European equivalent of UKAS, as well as organisations or individuals registered with 
the Association of Noise Consultants (ANC) Registration Scheme.

Groups and sub-groups

As defined in the Building Regulations for England and Wales Approved Document E: 
Resistance to the Passage of Sound, Section 1 (paragraphs 1.11 – 1.17). The building 
control body should identify specific plots, groups and sub-groups to be tested. 




Hea 2: Sound Insulation  |  201


Hea

Robust details

Robust details (RDs) are construction solutions that provide an alternative to pre-
completion sound insulation testing as a method of complying with Requirement 
E1 of Approved Document E (2003 Edition) of the Building Regulations (England 
and Wales). Robust details must be approved by Robust Details Ltd (RDL) and all 
development sites must be registered with RDL and built in accordance with the 
RD specification. To give a reasonable level of assurance that these details will 
achieve the required minimum standards, RDL carries out random inspections 
during construction and random sound insulation tests after construction. A robust 
detail is deemed to be approved for Code credits only when it achieves a specified 
performance level when assessed by RDL according to the following criteria: 

1. Mature robust detail (published for over 12 months and at least 100 test results) 
– regular assessment based on the 90th percentile of results from the last 100 
site tests. 

2. Low use robust detail (published for over 12 months but fewer than 100 test 
results) – initial assessment based on the first 30 tests needed to qualify for the 
robust details scheme and the site tests available, and reviewed regularly as 
new test results become available, until it becomes a mature robust detail or is 
rejected.

3. New robust detail (published for less than 12 months and fewer than 100 test 
results) – initial assessment based on the first 30 tests needed to qualify for 
the robust details scheme, and reviewed regularly as new test results become 
available, until it becomes a mature robust detail or is rejected.

It should be noted that not all RDs will necessarily achieve the performance levels 
required for Code credits. If in doubt, check the list of currently approved details with 
RDL directly (0870 240 8210; www.robustdetails.com).

Assessment Methodology 

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met.

Design Stage 

For compliance through sound insulation testing: 

•  Confirm there is a clear distinction between any groups and sub-groups on the 
development, and that there is a commitment made to conduct a programme 
of pre-completion testing, as set out in AD E. The building control body should 
identify specific plots, groups and sub-groups to be tested. In addition, confirm 
that there is a commitment to conduct remediation work should any test fail.

•  Confirm that the Compliant Test Body that will carry out pre-completion testing 
is accredited by UKAS (or a European equivalent) or is covered by a ‘deemed to 
satisfy’ scheme. Members of the Association of Noise Consultants (ANC) that 

http://www.robustdetails.com




202  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Hea

are registered by ANC to perform pre-completion testing meet this criterion 
(note: not all ANC members are registered to perform pre completion testing). 
If a Compliant Test Body has yet to be appointed, a commitment to employ one 
that fulfils one of the criteria will be sufficient. Lists of acoustic consultants by 
geographical location can be found at: www.ioa.org.uk and www.association-
of-noise-consultants.co.uk.

•  Confirm that evidence of the potential for the construction to meet the relevant 
performance standards has been provided (e.g. a design statement from an 
acoustic consultant with appropriate experience in building acoustics).

For compliance using robust details:

•  Confirm that the robust detail(s) specified can achieve the sound insulation 
levels required for the number of credits sought (see table Cat 7.1: Credit 
Summary – Improvement on Approved Document E under Checklists and 
Tables below). This information is available on the Robust Details website 
(www.robustdetails.com).

Post Construction Stage 

•  Confirm which specifications and evidence provided at the design stage are still 
valid.

•  Assess all the new specifications and evidence provided at the post-construction 
stage.

•  Verify that specific post-construction stage evidence provided demonstrates that 
all the assessment criteria have been met. 

Calculation Procedures 

None.

Checklists and Tables 

A commitment to achieve sound insulation values that are better than the 
performance standards for sound insulation in Approved Document E (2003 Edition 
with amendments 2004) by the stated amount in table: Cat 7.1. 

Table: Cat 7.1: Credit Summary – Improvement on Approved Document E

Credits Improvement on Approved Document E (dB) 

Airborne Sound 

DnT,w + Ctr 

Impact Sound 

L’nT,w 

1  +3  –3 

3  +5  –5 

4  +8  –8 

http://www.association-of-noise-consultants.co.uk
http://www.association-of-noise-consultants.co.uk
http://www.robustdetails.com




Hea 2: Sound Insulation  |  203


Hea

The number of credits awarded to a dwelling is determined by the lowest performing 
separating wall or floor, regardless of whether the assessment is based on pre-
completion testing, the use of robust details, or a mixture of both. 

The dwellings in a group or sub-group that have been tested are awarded credits 
appropriate to their measured performance. Other dwellings in the group or sub-
group that were not tested are awarded the same number of credits as the lowest 
performing separating walls or floors in the same group or sub-group that was 
tested.

For the purposes of the two paragraphs above, the performance of the lowest 
performing separating wall or floor must be clearly identified by the Compliant Test 
Body.

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

None.

Special Cases

It is considered good acoustic design not to have habitable rooms on one side of a 
separating wall or floor and non-habitable rooms on the other side.

If there are no habitable rooms with separating walls or floors no testing is needed 
and 3 credits can be awarded by default, to allow for the small amount of sound 
nuisance that can occur in such cases. 

Where there are insufficient suitable separating walls or floors in a development to 
carry out the number of tests specified in AD E, all of the available suitable separating 
walls or floors must be tested according to the requirements of the Building Control 
body. Credits will then be awarded as appropriate. 

The performance requirements set out in table 1a of AD E are appropriate for the 
walls, floors and stairs that separate spaces used for normal domestic purposes. A 
higher standard of sound insulation may be required between spaces used for normal 
domestic purposes and communal or non-domestic purposes. In these situations, 
the appropriate level of sound insulation will be set by the building control body 
or other appropriate party; Hea 2 credits can then be achieved by exceeding these 
requirements, as detailed in the assessment criteria table. 




204  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Hea

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Hea 3 Private Space  1 No



Aim 


To improve quality of life by promoting the provision of an inclusive outdoor space 
which is at least partially private. 

Assessment Criteria 

Criteria Credits

Where outdoor space (private or semi-private) has been provided that is: 

•  Of a minimum size that allows all occupants to use the space. 

•  Provided with inclusive access and usability (Checklist IDP).

•  Accessible only to occupants of designated dwellings.


1

Default Cases



None

Hea 3: Private Space  |  205


Hea

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance 

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

Detailed documentary evidence 
confirming: 

•  The number of bedrooms served by 
the outdoor space

•  That the outdoor space meets the 
minimum size requirements


AND


Completed Checklist IDP

For post construction stage only 
assessments, provide detailed 
documentary evidence (as listed for 
design stage) representing the dwellings 
as built


OR

Written confirmation from the 
developer that the dwellings have been 
constructed as specified in the design 
stage detailed documentary evidence


OR

Where only a letter of instruction 
is provided at design stage provide 
detailed documentary evidence (as 
listed for design stage) representing the 
dwellings as built 


OR 


Where different from design stage, 
provide detailed documentary evidence 
(as listed for design stage) representing 
the dwellings as built


OR

Site Inspection Report confirming 
compliance

Where a shared outdoor space is 
provided, detailed documentary 
evidence demonstrating:

•  The private space is accessible only to 
occupants of designated dwellings

Where detailed documentary evidence is 
not available at this stage;

A letter of instruction to a contractor/
supplier or a formal letter from the 
developer to the assessor giving a 
specific undertaking

Definitions

Accessible only to occupants of designated dwellings

The space must be designed in a way that makes it clear that the space is to be used 
only by occupants of designated dwelling(s). This could be achieved by using the 
buildings themselves, or fencing, planting or other barrier to seal off the space.




206  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Hea

Inclusive access and usability

The purpose of the Code is not to deliver purpose-designed wheelchair housing but 
rather inclusive general needs housing that caters for the widest possible segment of 
the population (including older people), and which can easily be adapted to meet the 
needs of wheelchair users. The principles of inclusive design are embedded within 
the Was 1, Was 3, Hea 3 and Hea 4 issues of the Code. They aim to prevent barriers 
that create undue effort and separation and enable everyone to participate equally, 
confidently and independently in everyday activities such as taking out rubbish and 
spending time outside.

Minimum size for outdoor space

Minimum space requirements:

•  Private space: 1.5 m2 per bedroom

•  Shared space: minimum 1 m2 per bedroom.

Outdoor space

An outdoor space could be:

•  A private garden

•  A communal garden or courtyard

•  Balconies

•  Roof terraces

•  Patios

Site Inspection Report

This is a report prepared by the Code assessor during a post construction stage 
assessment and provided as evidence with the assessment.

Assessment Methodology 

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met.

Design Stage 

•  Measure the area of the outdoor space and check it is of a sufficient size for the 
number of bedrooms.

•  Check that the facility offers inclusive access and usability by meeting the 
applicable requirements of Checklist IDP.

•  Where a shared space is provided, check the features make clear that the space 
is private and only to be used by occupants of designated dwelling(s).




Hea 3: Private Space  |  207


Hea

Post Construction Stage 

•  Confirm which specifications and evidence provided at the design stage are still 
valid.

•  Assess all the new specifications and evidence provided at the post construction 
stage.

Calculation Procedures

None. 

Checklists and Tables 

Use Checklist IDP to assess inclusive access and usability.

Common Cases of Non-Compliance

‘Juliet’ balconies generally do not comply with the criteria, as they are normally too 
small.

Conservatories and other enclosed areas do not comply with the criteria. 

Winter gardens will comply with the criteria only if at least one side can be fully 
opened to the exterior (using e.g. shutters, sliding walls, or wing or terrace doors). 
Without this feature, winter gardens are regarded as a conservatory and do not 
comply with the criteria.

Special Cases

Balconies must meet criterion 6 of Checklist IDP only. Roof terraces or balconies over 
habitable rooms, which require a step up to increase slab thickness (e.g. for thermal 
insulation to the accommodation below), are exempt from requirement 6a. 




208  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Hea

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Hea 4  Lifetime Homes  4  Yes  
(For level 6)



Aim 


To promote the construction of homes that are accessible and easily adaptable to 
meet the changing needs of current and future occupants.

Assessment Criteria 

Criteria Credits Mandatory Levels

Where all principles of Lifetime Homes, applicable to the dwelling being 
assessed, have been complied with.


OR

4 Level 6

Where an exemption from Lifetime Homes criteria 2 and/or 3 is applied 
to selected pathways subject to a steeply sloping plot gradient, but all 
other principles of Lifetime Homes, applicable to the dwelling being 
assessed, have been complied with. 


3

Default Cases 



None

Hea 4: Lifetime Homes  |  209


Hea

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

Confirmation from the developer that 
all 16 of the Lifetime Homes design 
criteria are met


OR

Where an exemption from Lifetime 
Homes criteria 2 and/or 3 is sought: 

•  Confirmation from the developer that 
all other design criteria are met


AND


Detailed documentary evidence 
demonstrating access routes subject 
to steeply sloping gradients at pre 
development and completion

For Post Construction Stage only 
assessments, evidence as listed for 
Design Stage but based on the dwelling 
as built.


OR

Where different from design stage 
written confirmation that the dwellings 
as built meet all 16 of the Lifetime 
Homes design criteria (aside from 
criteria 2 and/or 3 where an exemption 
is applied) 

Where an exemption from criteria 2 
and/or 3 is sought 

Detailed documentary evidence 
describing the alternative access route 
as built 


OR

Site Inspection Report confirming that 
an alternative access route meeting 
the requirements of the exemption 
framework has been provided

Definitions

Inclusive access and usability

The purpose of the Code is not to deliver purpose-designed wheelchair housing but 
rather inclusive general needs housing that caters for the widest possible segment of 
the population (including older people), and which can easily be adapted to meet the 
needs of wheelchair users. The principles of inclusive design are embedded within 
the Was 1, Was 3, Hea 3 and Hea 4 issues of the Code. They aim to prevent barriers 
that create undue effort and separation and enable everyone to participate equally, 
confidently and independently in everyday activities such as taking out rubbish and 
spending time outside.




210  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Hea

Lifetime Homes

Lifetime Homes was developed by the Habinteg Housing Association, the Helen 
Hamlyn Foundation and the Joseph Rowntree Foundation in the early 1990s. The 
scheme involves the incorporation of 16 design features that together create a 
flexible blueprint for accessible and adaptable housing in any setting. 

Site Inspection Report

This is a report prepared by the Code assessor during a post construction stage 
assessment and provided as evidence with the assessment.

Assessment Methodology 

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Mandatory requirements are met and credits are awarded where the 
performance requirements (set out in the assessment criteria table) have been met.

Design Stage 

•  Confirm that the developer/designer has completed the Lifetime Homes 
checklist. Four credits are awarded where the developer/designer confirms that 
all 16 criteria have been met by the dwelling as designed. 

•  Obtain comparative plans from the developer/designer to demonstrate that 
an exemption from meeting Lifetime Homes criteria 2 and/or 3 (as set out in 
Special Cases) can be applied at steeply sloping plots. Three credits are awarded 
where the developer/designer confirms that all other criteria have been met by 
the dwelling as designed.

•  Where issues arise regarding the applicability of criteria (other than 2 and 3) 
to specific developments, guidance must be sought from Habinteg Housing 
Association which owns and manages the Lifetime Homes standard as well as 
the checklist published in the Code Technical Guidance. For more information 
visit: www.lifetimehomes.org.uk.

Post Construction Stage 

•  Confirm that the developer/designer has completed a Lifetime Homes checklist 
for the dwelling as built.

•  Verify that the Lifetimes Homes criteria are achieved by the dwelling as built, 
either by a site inspection or as built drawings. 

•  If not provided at the design stage, obtain comparative plans from the 
developer/designer to demonstrate that an exemption from meeting Lifetime 
Homes criteria 2 and/or 3 (as set out in Special Cases) can be applied to 
steeply sloping plots. Verify through site inspection or as built drawings that an 
alternative access route meeting the requirements of the exemption framework 
has been provided. 

http://www.lifetimehomes.org.uk




Hea 4: Lifetime Homes  |  211


Hea

Calculation Procedures 

None. 

Checklists and Tables 

The Lifetime Homes checklist must be used by the developer/designer to demonstrate 
whether the assessment criteria have been met. Additional useful guidance can be 
found at: www.lifetimehomes.org.uk/codeassessors 

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

None. 

Special Cases 

For dwellings on plots with topography exceeding 1:15, an exemption from meeting 
criteria 2 and/or criteria 3 of Lifetime Homes can be applied, where requested by the 
developer. Subject to all other Lifetimes Homes criteria applicable to the dwelling 
being achieved, this exemption will allow for three credits and the mandatory 
element of Hea 4 to be awarded. [Where an exemption is applied to either criterion, 
under no circumstances shall the dwelling be marketed or classified as meeting the 
Lifetime Homes standard and neither must the Lifetime Homes logo be used in any 
advertising/promotional material.]

Plot gradients must be measured between two points according to the table below: 

LTH criterion Start Finish

2 Car parking spaces or drop-off 
points (subject to criterion 1 of 
Lifetime Homes)

The finished floor level at: 

a.   The principal or secondary entrance doors to an 
individual dwelling (where a footpath link exists) 

b.   The main communal entrance door to a block of 
dwellings 

c.   In the case of basement parking, the entrance door 
to the lift core

3 The start of all footpath approach 
routes leading to the dwelling, 
taken from the plot boundary

All individual or communal entrances where a footpath 
link to the plot boundary exists.

Any pathways identified in the table above, that are subject to a pre-development or 
finished plot gradient of less than 1:15, will need to meet the full requirements of the 
relevant Lifetime Homes criterion for credits to be awarded. An exemption would not 
apply in these cases.




212  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Hea

Where only certain sections of the route have gradients exceeding 1:15 but the 
whole plot gradient is less than 1:15, an exemption cannot be applied. Designers 
must manage the existing gradient so that a level or gently sloping route is achieved 
(i.e. the gradients must comply with criterion 3).

For this exemption to apply, gradients must exceed 1:15 owing to pre-development 
topography and not due to re-grading carried out at any stage in the project. 
Exemptions can not be granted where; as a result of earth movement undertaken 
throughout the project, pre-development gradients are reduced so that finished levels 
give gradients shallower than 1:15. 

Exemptions are considered on a dwelling-by-dwelling basis.

Evidence required to demonstrate compliance with this exemption includes the 
following:

•  Comparative plans that adequately demonstrate gradients for the site at pre-
development and completion.

  –   Plans must be drawn to an identified scale and give levels (at both project 
stages)

  –   Plans must highlight all routes subject to Lifetime Homes criteria 2 and 3 with 
plot gradients exceeding 1:15 (at both project stages)

Where an exemption is approved, a stepped route according to Section 6 of 
Approved Document Part M may be provided in place of a gently sloping pathway. 

Approved Document Part M sets out the following requirements for a staircase 
(section 6.17): 

1. Has flights whose unobstructed widths are at least 900 mm; 

2. The rise of a flight between landings is not more than 1.8 m; 

3. Has a top and bottom and, if necessary to comply with the AD, intermediate 
landings, each of whose lengths is not less than 900 mm; 

4. Has steps with suitable tread nosing profiles (see Diagram 27 of the AD) and the 
rise of each step is uniform and between 75 mm and 150 mm; 

5. The going of each step is not less than 280 mm, which for tapered treads, must 
be measured at a point 270 mm from the ‘inside’ or the tread; and 

6. Where the flight comprises three or more risers, there is a suitable continuous 
handrail on at least one side of the flight. A suitable handrail should have a 
grippable profile; be between 850 mm and 1000 mm above the pitch line of 
the flight; and extend 300 mm beyond the top and bottom nosings. 




Man 1: Home Use Guide  |  213


Man

Category 8: Management

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Man 1  Home User Guide  3 No



Aim 


To promote the provision of guidance enabling occupants to understand and operate 
their home efficiently and make the best use of local facilities. 

Assessment Criteria

Criteria Credits

Provision of a Home User Guide, compiled in accordance with Checklist Man 1, Part 1, 
together with confirmation that the guide is available in alternative formats.

Where the guide includes additional information relating to the site and its surroundings and is 
compiled in accordance with Checklist Man 1, Part 2.


2 1

Default Cases



None

214  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Man

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

Where a home user guide will be 
supplied covering operational issues 
only:

Confirmation in the form of a 
letter from the developer or in the 
specification that the guide will be:

•  Supplied to all dwellings within the 
development

•  Be developed to the required 
standards (as a minimum including 
a list of contents showing that the 
guide will cover all of the issues 
required in Checklist Man 1 Part 1)

The provision of:

•  A sample copy of the home user 
guide covering all the issues required 
in Checklist Man 1 Part 1 or Parts 1 
and 2



AND 


•  Confirmation that the home user 
guide has been supplied to all 
home(s)

NOTE: Where home user guides are 
to be provided on the internet or 
CD occupants must be given a letter 
regarding the home user guide and 
a hard copy of the home user guide 
contents page

Where a home user guide covering 
operational issues and issues relating 
to the site and surroundings will be 
supplied:

As above and including information 
covered in Checklist Man 1 Part 2

Definitions

Alternative formats for a home user guide 

The home user guide must be provided in an appropriate format for users. This might 
include translation into foreign languages, Braille, large print or audio cassette/CD.

Home user guide 

A guide to occupants of the dwelling that contains necessary details about the 
everyday use of the home in a form that is easy for users to understand.

Volatile organic compound (VOC)

VOC’s are emissions from furnishings and some structural materials which may have 
a deleterious effect on occupants. VOCs are commonly found in the solvents of glues 
and non-water-based paints and varnishes, and in some preservative treatments.




Man 1: Home Use Guide  |  215


Man

Assessment Methodology 

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met.

Design Stage 

•  Confirm whether the home user guide has been compiled in accordance with 
Checklist Man 1, Part 1. 

•  Confirm whether the home user guide includes additional information 
regarding the site and surroundings in accordance with Checklist Man 1, Part 2. 

•  Confirm whether the home user guide will be provided to all dwellings and that 
there is a process in place to make the guide available in alternative formats.

Post Construction Stage 

•  Confirm that a home user guide has been provided and the contents have been 
compiled in accordance with Checklist Man 1, Parts 1 and/or 2.

•  Confirm that the home user guide will be provided to all dwellings or that a 
hard copy of the contents page will be provided to all dwellings where the 
guide is being provided in an alternative medium, e.g. via the internet or on CD. 

Calculation Procedures 

None.

Checklists and Tables

Checklist Man 1 – Home User Guide YES/NO

Part 1 – Operational Issues

The list below indicates the type of information that should be included

a. Environmental 
strategy/design 
and features

•   Details of any specific environmental/energy design strategy/features 
including an overview of the reasons for their use (e.g. environmental 
and economic savings and restrictions on making alterations) and how 
they should best be operated (where they are not passive features such 
as insulation and SUDS). Strategies/features could include passive solar 
design, super insulation, energy efficient timber windows, heat recovery 
systems, solar hot water systems, photovoltaics, passive vents or the use 
of certified timber or SUDS within the boundary of individual properties. 
(Each dwelling will in any case be issued with a copy of the Code 
Certificate.)

b. Energy •   Information as described in the Building Regulations ADL1A (Schedule 1 
requirement c) i.e. Sufficient information about the building, the fixed  
building services (this should include things like the implication of covering  

continued




216  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Man

Checklist Man 1 – Home User Guide YES/NO

Part 1 – Operational Issues

The list below indicates the type of information that should be included

   heating outlets with bags etc and other hazards) and their maintenance 
requirements so that the building can be operated in such a manner as to 
use no more fuel and power than is reasonable in the circumstances

•   A way of complying would be to a provide suitable set of operating and 
maintenance instructions aimed at achieving economy in the use of fuel 
and power in a way that householders can understand. The instructions 
should be directly related to the particular system/s installed in the 
dwelling

•   The instructions should explain to the occupier how to operate the 
system(s) efficiently. These should include: the making of seasonal 
adjustments to control settings and what routine maintenance is needed 
to enable operating efficiency to be maintained at a reasonable level 
through the service live/s of the system/s

•   Details of any renewable system/s and how it/they operate/s

•   Details of low-energy light fittings, their use and their benefits, e.g. how 
much energy they save compared to traditional light fittings and what this 
can mean in terms of reduced energy bills 

•   Information should also be provided explaining lamp efficacy and the 
benefits of purchasing high efficacy lamps.

•   Details of the EU labelling scheme for white goods

•   General information on energy efficiency

c. Water Use  •   Details of water-saving measures and tips

•   External water use and efficiency, e.g. the use of water butts or other 
type of rainwater recycling systems

d. Recycling & 
Waste 

•   Information about the Local Authority collection scheme (if applicable)

•   If the home is not covered by a Local Authority collection scheme, details 
and location of communal recycling bins/skips/facilities

•   Information on the location and use of any recycling bins

•   Information on the location and use of any compost bins 

•   Information on WRAP which can offer guidance on recycling and 
sustainable waste disposal

e. Sustainable DIY  •   Environmental recommendations for consideration in any home 
improvement works, such as the use of low VOC products or the 
purchase of certified timber

f. Emergency 
Information 

•   Information on smoke detector/s 

g. Links, 
References 
& Further 
Information

•   Include references/links to other information including websites, 
publications and organisations providing information on how to run 
the home efficiently and in the best environmentally sound way. As a 
minimum, this should include links to:

  –   The Energy Saving Trust good practice guidance (www.
energysavingtrust.org.uk) 

  –   The Local Authority 

  –   The company responsible for the construction of the property 
continued




Man 1: Home Use Guide  |  217


Man

Checklist Man 1 – Home User Guide YES/NO

Part 1 – Operational Issues

The list below indicates the type of information that should be included

  –   The company responsible for the management of the home (where 
applicable) 

•   In all instances both an address/telephone contact number and a web link 
will need to be provided

h. Provision of 
Information 
in Alternative 
Formats 

•   Include details of the procedure for obtaining a copy of the guide in 
alternative formats, including foreign languages, Braille, large print or 
audio cassette / CD. It should include the contact details of the person/
organisation responsible for producing the guide

Part 2 – Site and Surroundings

The list below indicates the type of information that should be included

a. Recycling & 
Waste 

•   Information on what to do with waste not covered by the standard weekly 
Local Authority collection scheme for example fridges/freezers, computer 
equipment, batteries and other potentially hazardous equipment. In some 
areas the Local Authority will collect these items. If this is the case details 
and information of such a collection should be provided 

•   Information and location of local recycling facilities and waste tips

b. Sustainable 
(Urban) Drainage 
Systems (SUDS)

•   Details of SUDS within the site boundary including an overview of the 
reasons and benefits behind their use (e.g. prevention of localised 
flooding) and advice on maintenance and operation

c. Public 
Transport 

•   Details of local public transport facilities including maps and timetables 
and the location of nearby bus stops and/or train/tube stations

•   Details of cycle storage and cycle paths in the area including, if available, 
cycle path network maps for the whole town/local area

•   Details of car parking and information on available park and ride, car 
sharing schemes and/or car pools/car hire in the area

•   Details on how to get to local amenities in the area by public transport or 
cycling 

d. Local 
amenities 

•   The location of food shops, post boxes, postal facilities, bank/cash points, 
pharmacies, schools, medical centres, leisure centres, community centres, 
places of worship, public houses, children’s play areas, outdoor open 
access public areas

•   Other local amenities such as places of interest/cultural value, areas of 
beauty / wildlife / conservation / allotments etc.

e. Responsible 
Purchasing 

•   Include information about the purchasing of:

  –   Low energy/low water white goods 

  –   Electrical equipment, including light fittings and bulbs 

  –   Timber products from sustainable sources 

  –   Organic food procurement/food growing/local produce/local food 
provision, e.g. farmers markets, organic box schemes etc 

f. Emergency 
Information 

•   Contact details for emergency services including: 

•   Location of local minor injuries clinics and A&E departments 

•   Location of nearest police/fire station 
continued




218  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Man

Checklist Man 1 – Home User Guide YES/NO

Part 1 – Operational Issues

The list below indicates the type of information that should be included

g. Links, 
References 
& Further 
Information. 

•   This should include references/links to other information including 
websites, publications and organisations providing information on how 
to reduce the environmental impact in terms of transport, the use of local 
amenities, responsible purchasing etc. Such links/references may include 
links to: 

  –   Sustrans (for cycle networks, www.sustrans.org.uk) 

  –   The local authority (including information about recycling and waste 
tips) 

  –   Local transport providers (e.g. bus or train companies) 

  –   Local amenities 

•   In all instances both an address/telephone contact number and a web link 
will need to be provided

Developer Confirmation

By entering a ‘YES’ against the criteria above, I confirm that all dwellings of this specification type 
on the ENTER SITE NAME site meet the stated criteria.

Signature:  


 

Date:    Print Name:  

Common Cases of Non-compliance 

None.

Special Cases 

It is acceptable for a home user guide to be provided on the internet or CD. Where 
this is the case, all occupants:

•  Must be given a hard copy of the home user guide contents page and a letter 
explaining the benefits of using the guide.


AND


•  Must be given a contact number and the address of where they can obtain a 
hard copy of the home user guide, if they request this. These contact details 
must remain current for at least 12 months from handover.

A system must be in place to provide a hard copy of the home user guide to 
occupants on request. 




Man 2: Considerate Constructors Scheme  |  219


Man

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Man 2  Considerate Constructors Scheme  2 No



Aim 


To promote the environmentally and socially considerate, and accountable 
management of construction sites.

Assessment Criteria 

Criteria Credits

Where there is a commitment to meet best practice under a nationally or locally recognised 
certification scheme such as the Considerate Constructors Scheme

Where there is a commitment to go significantly beyond best practice under a nationally or 
locally recognised certification scheme such as the Considerate Constructors Scheme


1 2

Default Cases 



None

220  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Man

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

For Considerate Constructors Scheme: 

Specification clause or other 
confirmation of commitment from the 
contractor or developer to comply with 
the Considerate Constructors Scheme 
and achieve formal certification under 
the scheme with either a pass score or a 
score of 32 points and above


AND


Confirmation that registration with 
the Considerate Constructor Scheme 
has taken place no later than the 
commencement of the construction 
phase 

For Considerate Constructors Scheme:

•  A copy of the Considerate 
Constructors Certificate


AND


•  The final Considerate Constructors 
Monitor’s report highlighting the 
total score and the sub-scores in each 
section

NOTE: Where developments are phased 
and the Considerate Constructor 
Certificate is not yet available the 
intermediate report covering the 
developed site completed by the 
Considerate Constructors Monitor will 
be accepted. Where no inspection has 
yet taken place details of registration 
and a commitment from the contractor 
or developer to achieve either a pass 
score or a score of 32 points and above 
will be accepted until such time as the 
first inspection takes place. 

For an alternative locally or nationally 
recognised scheme:

The independent scheme assessor must 
complete Checklist Man 2 (October 
2010) and provide the assessor with a 
copy as evidence

NOTE: The Assessor must seek 
confirmation from the Code Service 
Provider that an alternative scheme is 
acceptable prior to formal submission of 
an assessment 

For an alternative scheme:

A copy of the alternative scheme’s 
Certificate of Compliance or equivalent 
documentary evidence (from an 
independent third party assessor) 
confirming that all the mandatory 
elements items plus 50% or 80% (as 
applicable) of the optional items have 
been achieved




Man 2: Considerate Constructors Scheme  |  221


Man

Definitions

Alternative locally or nationally recognised schemes 

An alternative scheme may demonstrate compliance by fulfilling the criteria stated in 
Checklist Man 2 (Oct 2010) for other locally and nationally recognised schemes. Any 
such scheme must be approved by the Code service provider prior to assessment. This 
can be achieved by submitting a completed Checklist Man 2 (Oct 2010) – Compliance 
with an Alternative Scheme.

Best practice

Achieving a score of at least 3 in every section, and a total score between 24 and 
31.5, of the Considerate Constructors Scheme’s Code of Considerate Practice 
indicates that a site is being managed in accordance with best practice.

Alternative schemes demonstrate this where, in addition to meeting all the 
mandatory requirements, 50 per cent of the optional items in Checklist Man 2 (Oct 
10) – Compliance with an Alternative Scheme, are addressed. 

Considerate Constructors Scheme (CCS)

The Considerate Constructors Scheme is a UK certification scheme that encourages 
the considerate management of construction sites. The scheme is operated by the 
Construction Confederation and points are awarded in increments of 0.5 over the 
following eight sections:

•  Considerate 

•  Environmentally Aware

•  Site Cleanliness 

•  Good Neighbour

•  Respectful 

•  Safe 

•  Responsible 

•  Accountable.

To achieve certification under this scheme, a score of at least 24 is required.

Alternative locally or nationally recognised schemes 

An alternative scheme may demonstrate compliance by fulfilling the criteria stated in 
Checklist Man 2 (Oct 2010) for other locally and nationally recognised schemes. Any 
such scheme must be approved by the Code service provider prior to assessment. This 
can be achieved by submitting a completed Checklist Man 2 (Oct 2010) – Compliance 
with an Alternative Scheme.




222  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Man

Significantly beyond best practice 

Achieving a score of at least 4 in every section, and a total score of between 32 and 
40 of the Considerate Constructors Scheme’s Code of Considerate Practice indicates 
that a site is being managed significantly beyond best practice. 

Alternative schemes demonstrate this where, in addition to meeting all the 
mandatory requirements, 80 per cent of the optional items in Checklist Man 2 (Oct 
10) – Compliance with an Alternative Scheme, are addressed. 

Assessment Methodology 

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met.

Design Stage 

•  Where the site is being assessed using the Considerate Constructors Scheme, 
confirm the contractor’s commitment as set out in the assessment criteria.

•  Where the site is being assessed using an alternative scheme, the details of that 
scheme should be checked to confirm that it covers equivalent items. This is 
done by completing Checklist Man 2 – Compliance with an Alternative Scheme 
(available from the Code Service Provider). The checklist sets out a number 
of mandatory items and a wider range of issues equivalent to those in the 
Considerate Contractors Scheme. In addition to the mandatory issues:

•  For one credit, 50% of these issues must be achieved to demonstrate 
compliance with best practice standards.

•  For two credits, 80% of these issues must be achieved to demonstrate going 
significantly beyond best practice standards.

Post Construction Stage 

•  Where the site has been assessed using the Considerate Constructors Scheme, 
confirm that certification has taken place and the final score on the monitor’s 
report.

•  Where the site has been assessed using an alternative scheme, confirm that all 
the mandatory items and 50% (or 80%) of the optional items (as applicable) 
have been achieved. Confirm compliance with Checklist Man 2 – Compliance 
with an Alternative Scheme using information provided by the third-party 
certifier of the alternative scheme. 

Calculation Procedures 

None. 




Man 2: Considerate Constructors Scheme  |  223


Man

Checklists and Tables 

Checklist Man 2 – Compliance with an Alternative Scheme is available from the Code 
service provider on request.

Common Cases of Non-Compliance

None.

Special Cases

None. 




224  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Man

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Man 3  Construction Site Impacts  2 No



Aim 


To promote construction sites managed in a manner that mitigates environmental 
impacts.

Assessment Criteria 

Criteria Credits

Where there are procedures that cover two or more of the following items: 

  Monitor, report and set targets for CO2 production or energy use arising from site activities

  Monitor and report CO2 or energy use arising from commercial transport to and from site

  Monitor, report and set targets for water consumption from site activities

  Adopt best practice policies in respect of air (dust) pollution arising from site activities 

   Adopt best practice policies in respect of water (ground and surface) pollution occurring on 
the site

  80% of site timber is reclaimed, re-used or responsibly sourced


OR

Where there are procedures that cover four or more of the items listed above. 


1 2


Default Cases 

None 




Man 3: Construction Site Impacts  |  225


Man

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

Completed copy of Checklist 
Man 3 (signed and dated) 
detailing the procedures that 
will be employed to minimise 
construction site impacts.

Documentary evidence demonstrating that the 
procedures detailed in Checklist Man 3* have 
been achieved. This can take the form of:

•  Measurement/consumption records

•  Target records

•  Graphs comparing consumption with targets

•  Delivery records

•  Site procedures for minimising air/dust and 
water pollution

•  CoC certificates for timber/purchase orders 
confirming re-used/reclaimed timber/letter 
from the developer confirming the materials on 
site that were re-used

* Checklist Man 3 can be completed on a site 
wide basis with monthly reviews.

Definitions 

Key performance indicators (KPI) 

Key performance indicators generated by Constructing Excellence for the construction 
industry. See www.kpizone.com

Assessment Methodology 

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met. 

Design Stage 

•  Confirm whether the developer is committed to achieving any of the 
requirements set out in Checklist Man 3 – Construction Site Impacts under 
Checklists and Tables.

Post Construction Stage 

•  Confirm which commitments and evidence provided at the design stage are still 
valid.

•  Assess all the new evidence provided at the post construction stage.




226  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Man

Calculation Procedures 

None.

Checklists and Tables 

Checklist Man 3: Construction Site Impacts

Criteria Evidence Demonstrating 
how Criteria will be Met

Reference Tick

a. Commitment to monitor, report and set targets for CO2 production or energy use arising from site 
activities

1)   Confirm that monthly measurements of energy use 
will be recorded and displayed on site. 

2)   Set and display appropriate target* levels of energy 
consumption (targets could be annual, monthly or 
project targets). 

3)   As a minimum, monitoring must include checking 
the meters and displaying some form of graphical 
analysis in the site office to show consumption over 
the project duration and how actual consumption 
compares to the targets set. 

4)   The design/site management team is to nominate an 
individual who will be responsible for the monitoring 
and collection of data.

* Targets for energy consumption during the construction process should be set using UK Construction 
Industry KPIs. These documents do not specify targets but facilitate projects in setting appropriate targets (see 
References section of main credit for further details). 

Note: The Code does not require targets to be met but is encouraging the process of setting, monitoring and 
reporting against targets.

b. Commitment to monitor and report CO2 or energy use arising from commercial transport to and 
from the site 

1)   Confirm that a site monitoring system will be in place 
to monitor and record deliveries *. The system will 
need to record: 

•  The number of deliveries.

•  The mode of transport.

•  The kilometres/miles travelled for all deliveries.

•   Where the delivery is specifically for the site, a 
figure of total distance travelled should be used, 
i.e. a round trip (from the point of origin, to the 
site and back to the point of origin).

•   Where the delivery to the site is part of a multiple 
delivery route, the recorded figure should be the 
distance travelled to the site (from the previous 
delivery) plus the distance to the next delivery or 
return.


 

continued




Man 3: Construction Site Impacts  |  227


Man

Checklist Man 3: Construction Site Impacts

Criteria Evidence Demonstrating 
how Criteria will be Met

Reference Tick

This information can then be used to estimate a total 
figure for kg of CO2 for the project. The Code does 
not require this information to be converted to CO2 
but the information must be made available to the 
senior project and site management staff/suppliers to 
establish benchmarks and aid future decision-making 
towards improving site and transport efficiency. If the 
project team wishes to convert this information into 
CO2 emissions, there are tables provided at the end 
of this checklist, which can be used.

2)   If the design team or contractor confirms that 
the project is aiming to achieve the measures in 
Construction Site Transport – measures for traffic 
movements and distances (published April 2003, 
see references) then this aspect has been achieved 
automatically. The information obtained for this 
item can also be used to satisfy the UK Construction 
Industry KPIs on transport.

3)   The design/site management team is to nominate an 
individual who will be responsible for the monitoring 
and collection of data. 

* Please see Tables 8.1–8.4 below on monitoring site transport CO2

c. Commitment to monitor, report and set targets for water consumption arising from site activities

1)   Demonstrate compliance by the design/site 
management team confirming, in writing, that 
monthly measurements of water consumption will be 
recorded and displayed on site.

2)   Set and display appropriate target* levels of water 
consumption (targets could be annual, monthly or 
project targets). 

3)   As a minimum, monitoring must include checking 
the meters and displaying some form of graphical 
analysis in the site office to show consumption over 
the project duration and how actual consumption 
compares to targets set. 

4)   The design/site management team is to nominate an 
individual who will be responsible for the monitoring 
and collection of data.

* Targets for water consumption during the construction process should be set using UK Construction 
Industry KPIs . These documents do not specify targets but facilitate projects in setting appropriate targets (see 
References and Further Information for details). 

Note: The Code does not require targets to be met but is encouraging the process of setting, monitoring and 
reporting against targets.


     

continued




228  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Man

Checklist Man 3: Construction Site Impacts

Criteria Evidence Demonstrating 
how Criteria will be Met

Reference Tick

d. Commitment to adopt best practice policies in respect of air (dust) pollution arising from site 
activities

1)   Confirm the site’s procedures to minimise air (dust) 
pollution. These can include:

•  ‘Dust sheets’

•   Proposals to regularly damp down the site in dry 
weather

•  Covers to skips etc.

2)   The site team must indicate how this information is 
disseminated to site operatives.

Note: Further information can be obtained from DTI/BRE publications Control of Dust from Construction 
and Demolition Activities and Pollution Control Guide Parts 1–5 which provide good practice guidelines on 
construction-related pollution (see References and Further Information for details).

e. Commitment to adopt best practice policies in respect of water (ground and surface) pollution 
occurring on the site

1)   Confirm the site’s procedures to minimise water 
pollution following best practice guidelines outlined in 
the following Environment Agency documents: 

•   PPG 1 – General guide to the prevention of 
pollution. 

•   PPG 5 – Works in, near or liable to affect 
watercourses. 

•   PPG 6 – Working at demolition and construction 
sites.

2)   The site team must indicate how this information is 
disseminated to site operatives.

f. 80% of site timber is reclaimed, re-used or responsibly sourced

1)   80% of timber used during construction, including 
formwork, site hoardings and other temporary 
site timber used for the purpose of facilitating 
construction, is to be procured from sustainably 
managed sources, independently certified by one 
of the top two levels as set out in the Responsible 
Sourcing of Materials Issues (Mat 2 and Mat 3) in the 
Materials section of this document. All timber used 
during construction must be legally sourced.

Re-used timber from off site can be counted as 
equivalent, but re-usable formwork complies only if 
it meets the above criterion. 

This credit can be awarded where all the timber used 
is reclaimed timber.

Signed: 


    

Date:




Man 3: Construction Site Impacts  |  229


Man

Table: Cat 8.1: Standard Road Transport Fuel Conversion Factors

Fuel Used Units Total Units 


Used


x kg CO2 
per Unit

Total kg 


CO2

Petrol Litres x 2.315

Diesel Litres x 2.630

Compressed natural gas (CNG) kg x 2.728

Liquid petroleum gas (LPG) Litres x 1.495

Source: UK Greenhouse Gas Inventory for 2006 (produced for Defra by AEA Energy & Environment), Digest of UK 
Energy Statistics (DTI) and Carbon factors for fuels (UKPIA, 2004)

Table: Cat 8.2: Standard Road Transport Fuel Conversion Factors

Size of Car Units Total Units 
Travelled

x kg CO2 
per Unit

Total kg 


CO2

Small petrol car, up to 1.4 litre

engine

Miles x 0.291

km x 0.181

Medium petrol car, from 1.4 to 
2.0 litres

Miles x 0.344

km x 0.214

Large petrol car above 2.0 litres Miles x 0.476

km x 0.296

Average petrol car Miles x 0.333

km x 0.207

Source: Revised factors developed by AEA Energy & Environment and agreed with the Department for Transport 
(2008)

Table: Cat 8.3: Standard Road Transport Fuel Conversion Factors

Size of Car Units Total Units 
Travelled

x kg CO2 
per Unit

Total kg 


CO2

Small diesel car, up to 1.7 litre 
engine

Miles x 0.244

km x 0.151

Medium diesel car, from 1.7 to 
2.0 litres

Miles x 0.303

km x 0.188

Large diesel car above 2.0 litres Miles x 0.415

km x 0.258

Average diesel car Miles x 0.319

km x 0.198

Source: Revised factors developed by AEA Energy & Environment and agreed with the Department for Transport 
(2008)




230  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Man

Table: Cat 8.4: Van/Light Commercial Vehicle Road Freight Mileage Conversion Factors

Type of Van Gross Vehicle 
Weight 
(tonnes)

Units Total Units 
Travelled

x kg CO2 
per Unit

Total kg 


CO2

Petrol  up to 1.25t Miles x 0.360

km x 0.224

Diesel up to 3.5t Miles x 0.438

km x 0.272

LPG or CNG up to 3.5t Miles x 0.438

km x 0.272

Source: Factors developed by AEA Energy & Environment and agreed with the Department for Transport (2008)

Table: Cat 8.5: Diesel HGV Road Freight Mileage Conversion Factors (based on UK average load)

Type of Lorry Gross Vehicle 
Weight 
(tonnes)

Units Total Units 
Travelled

x kg CO2 
per Unit

Total kg 


CO2

Rigid >3.5–7.5t Miles x 0.906

km x 0.563

Rigid >7.5–17t Miles x 1.202

km x 0.747

Rigid >17t Miles x 1.559

km x 0.969

Articulated >3.5–33t Miles x 1.315

km x 0.817

Articulated >33t Miles x 1.495

km x 0.929

Source: Revised factors developed by AEA Energy & Environment and agreed with the Department for Transport 
(2008)

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

None.

Special Cases 

None. 




Man 4: Security  |  231


Man

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Man 4  Security  2 No



Aim 


To promote the design of developments where people feel safe and secure- where 
crime and disorder, or the fear of crime, does not undermine quality of life or 
community cohesion. 

Assessment Criteria

Criteria Credits

An Architectural Liaison Officer (ALO) or Crime Prevention Design Advisor (CPDA) from 
the local police force is consulted at the design stage and their recommendations are 
incorporated into the design of the dwelling.


AND


Section 2 – Physical Security from ‘Secured by Design – New Homes’ is complied with 
(Secured by Design certification is not required). 


2

Default Cases 



None

232  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Man

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

Detailed documentary 
evidence showing: 

•  That an ALO/CPDA 
has been consulted 
with to ensure that the 
requirements of Section 
2 – Physical Security from 
‘Secured by Design – New 
Homes’ are met

•  A commitment to follow 
the advice provided by the 
ALO/CPDA

Detailed documentary evidence showing:

Confirmation from the developer that all of the 
recommendations provided by the ALO/CPDA 
have been incorporated in the design and that 
the site meets the standards required in Section 2 
– Physical Security from ‘Secured by Design – New 
Homes’ 

Assessor Site Inspection Report


OR

As-Built drawings showing security features

Where a ‘Secured by Design’ certificate can 
be provided, this will be deemed to satisfy the 
requirements and no other evidence will be 
required

Definitions

(ALO) Architectural Liaison Officer

“This is the same as the Crime Prevention Design Advisor (see definition below)  
and is the title given to the same role in some police forces.” Taken from  
www.securedbydesign.com

(CPDA) Crime Prevention Design Advisor

“The Crime Prevention Design Advisor (CPDA) is a specialist crime prevention officer, 
trained at the Home Office Crime Reduction College, who deals with crime risk and 
designing out crime advice for the built environment. In addition to physical security 
measures the officer will consider defensible space, access, crime and movement 
generators all of which can contribute to a reduction in crime and disorder.” Taken 
from www.securedbydesign.com 

(SBD) Secured by Design

This is a police initiative to encourage the building industry to adopt crime prevention 
measures in the design of developments to assist in reducing the opportunity for, and 
fear of, crime, creating a safer and more secure environment. Secured by Design is 
owned by the Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO), and has the support of the 
Home Office Crime Reduction & Community Safety Group and the Planning Section 
of the Department for Communities and Local Government. 

http://www.securedbydesign.com
http://www.securedbydesign.com




Man 4: Security  |  233


Man

Section 2 – Physical Security from ‘Secured by Design – New Homes’

To be awarded, a Secured by Design award, the ALO/CPDA must be satisfied that 
the criteria of both Section 1 – The Development – Layout & Design, and Section 2 – 
Physical Security are met. The requirements of Section 1 are beyond the remit of the 
Code and for this issue, only the requirements of Section 2 must be met.

Site Inspection Report

A report prepared by the Code assessor during a post construction stage assessment 
and provided as evidence with the assessment.

Assessment Methodology

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met. 

Design Stage 

•  Check that an ALO/CPDA has been appointed and that the developer confirms 
their advice will be followed. 

Post Construction Stage 

•  Check that there is confirmation from the ALO/CPDA that all dwellings comply 
with Section 2 of ‘Secured by Design’ (i.e. the development is SBD-part 
compliant), or the development has been awarded an SBD certificate which 
indicates compliance with both Sections 1 and 2 of ‘Secured by Design’. 

Calculation Procedures 

None.

Checklists and Tables 

None.

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

None.

Special Cases 

None. 




234  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Eco

Category 9: Ecology 

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Eco 1  Ecological Value of Site  1 No



Aim 


To promote development on land that already has a limited value to wildlife, and 
discourage the development of ecologically valuable sites. 

Assessment Criteria 

Criteria Credits

Where the development site is confirmed as land of inherently low ecological value

EITHER 

By meeting the criteria for low ecological value (using Checklist Eco 1 – Land of Low Ecological 
Value under Checklists and Tables below) 


OR 


By being confirmed by a suitably qualified ecologist


OR 


Where an independent ecological report of the site, prepared by a suitably qualified ecologist, 
confirms that the construction zone is of low or insignificant ecological value 



AND 


Any land of ecological value outside the construction zone but within the development site will 
remain undisturbed by the construction works.


1

Default Cases 



None

Eco 1: Ecological Value of Site  |  235


Eco

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance 

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage

Where using Checklist Eco 1, provision 


of:

•  Site visit report from the design team/
assessor confirming details adequate 
to meet Checklist Eco 1 based on 
plans of the site and surrounding 
area prior to the commencement of 
construction works/site clearance

Where using Checklist Eco 1 evidence to 
be provided as at design stage 

Where a suitably qualified ecologist is 
appointed;

A copy of a report or letter from the 
ecologist highlighting the information 
required as set out in the ‘Code for 
Sustainable Homes Ecology Report 
Template’ 


AND


Detailed documentary evidence 
identifying the construction zone and 
how any areas of ecological value 
outside the construction zone will 
remain undisturbed in accordance with 
the ecologist’s recommendations.

Where a suitably qualified ecologist is 
appointed;

Evidence to be provided as at design 
stage


AND


Detailed documentary evidence 
confirming that any land of ecological 
value outside the construction zone has 
been and will continue to be adequately 
protected during construction works 

Definitions

Construction zone

The construction zone includes any land used for buildings, hard-standing, 
landscaping, site access or where construction work is carried out (or land is being 
disturbed in any other way), plus a 3m boundary in either direction around these 
areas. It also includes any areas used for temporary site storage and buildings. If it is 
not known exactly where buildings, hard-standing, site access and temporary storage 
and buildings will be located, it must be assumed that the construction zone is the 
development site. 

Contaminated land 

A site can be defined as contaminated land where the level of site contamination 
prevents development unless decontamination is carried out.




236  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Eco

Contamination includes any solid, liquid or gaseous material in or on the ground to 
be covered by the building, and which is a pollutant or could become toxic, corrosive, 
explosive, flammable or radioactive and therefore likely to be a danger to health and 
safety or the environment. This also includes non-native invasive plant species as 
defined below.

Where the only decontamination required is for the removal of asbestos within an 
existing building fabric to be demolished, this cannot be classified as contaminated 
land. Where asbestos is found to be present in the ground, this will be classed as 
contamination for the purposes of this issue.

Development site

The development site is the whole site up to and including the boundary.

Ecological features

Ecological features are defined in Checklist Eco 1 – Land of Low Ecological Value, and 
include trees, hedges, ponds, streams, rivers, marshes, wetlands, meadows, species-
rich grassland, heathland and heather.

Low ecological value

Land defined as having low ecological value using Checklist Eco 1 or defined by a 
suitably qualified ecologist as having low or insignificant ecological value. 

Non-native invasive species 

These are non-indigenous species (e.g. plants or animals) that adversely affect the 
habitats they invade economically, environmentally or ecologically. For the purposes 
of the Code, this currently includes only Japanese Knotweed and Giant Hogweed. 
Further information on their control and disposal and how this fits into the legislative 
framework relating to such species can be obtained from DEFRA.

Suitably qualified ecologist

A suitably qualified ecologist is defined as an individual who:

•  Holds a degree or equivalent qualification (e.g. N/SVQ Level 5) in ecology or a 
related subject 

•  Is a practising ecologist, with a minimum of three years’ relevant experience 
(within the last five years). Such experience must clearly demonstrate a practical 
understanding of factors affecting ecology in relation to construction and 
the built environment, including acting in an advisory capacity to provide 
recommendations for ecological protection, enhancement and mitigation 
measures. Examples of relevant experience are ecological impact assessments, 
Phase 1 and 2 habitat surveys, and habitat restoration 

•  Is covered by a professional code of conduct and subject to peer review. 

Peer review is defined as the process employed by a professional body to demonstrate 
that potential or current full members maintain the standard of knowledge and 




Eco 1: Ecological Value of Site  |  237


Eco

experience required to ensure compliance with a code of conduct and professional 
ethics. 

Full members of the following organisations who meet the above requirements are 
deemed to be suitably qualified ecologists:

•  Association of Wildlife Trust Consultancies (AWTC) 

•  Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management (CIWEM) 

•  Institute of Ecology and Environmental Management (IEEM) 

•  Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (IEMA) 

•  Landscape Institute (LI). 

Verified ecological report

A verified ecological report is a report carried out by an ecologist who does not fully 
meet the requirements of a suitably qualified ecologist. For the report to comply, as a 
minimum a suitably qualified ecologist must have read and reviewed the report and 
confirmed in writing that it:

•  Represents sound industry practice

•  Reports and recommends correctly, truthfully and objectively

•  Is appropriate given the local site conditions and scope of works proposed

•  Avoids invalid, biased and exaggerated statements

•  Additionally, written confirmation from the third-party verifier that they comply 
with the definition of a suitably qualified ecologist.

Assessment Methodology

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met. 

Design Stage 

•  For Checklist Eco 1 – Land of Low Ecological Value, verify that the answer to all 
questions in Section 1 is ‘No’ and that ‘Yes’ has been answered to at least one 
question in Section 2. 

•  Where a suitably qualified ecologist has been appointed, confirm that the 
ecologist’s report verifies that the construction zone is of low or insignificant 
value and that any land of ecological value outside the construction zone will 
remain undisturbed by the construction works.

•  Confirm that the ecologist meets the definition of a suitably qualified ecologist, 
as defined above. If the ecologist does not meet the requirements, confirm that 
the report is a verified ecological report. 




238  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Eco

Post Construction Stage 

•  Where the construction zone was of low ecological value, ensure that the area 
designated as the construction zone has not changed from the design stage.

•  Where any land of ecological value was present outside the construction zone 
but within the development site, ensure that this has remained undisturbed by 
the construction works. 

Calculation Procedures 



None


Checklists and Tables 

Checklist Eco 1: Land of Low Ecological Value 

General information: For the development to be defined as ‘land of low ecological value’, the assessor must 
answer NO to all of the questions in Section 1 and YES to any of the questions in Section 2.

Section 1: Ecological features of the site

Instruction: Criteria 1.1–1.5 can be used to determine the presence of existing ecological features across the 
site. If YES is recorded against any question in Section 1 then the site cannot be defined as having land of low 
ecological value and the credit cannot be awarded. If NO is recorded against all the questions in Section 1 then 
proceed to Section 2.

1.1 Does the site contain any trees or hedges above 1 m high or with a trunk 
diameter greater than 100 mm? 


 

YES        NO 

1.2 Are there any ponds, streams or rivers on, or running through, the site? 


  

YES        NO 

1.3 Is there any marsh or other wetland present on the site? 


  

YES        NO 

1.4 Are there any meadows or species-rich grassland present on the site? 


  

YES        NO 

1.5 Is there any heath land, consisting of heather and/or scrub present on the site? 


  

YES        NO   


    

continued




Eco 1: Ecological Value of Site  |  239


Eco

Checklist Eco 1: Land of Low Ecological Value 

Section 2: Type of land

Instruction: In addition to answering NO to all the questions in Section 1, if YES is recorded against one or 
more of the questions in Section 2, the development site can be defined as having land of low ecological value 
and the credit can be awarded. (The assessor MUST check that these agree with the site drawings.)

2.1 Does the development site consist of land which is entirely within the floor plan(s) 
of existing building(s) or building(s) demolished within the past two years?  


 

YES        NO 

2.2 Does the development site consist of land which is entirely covered by other 
constructions such as sporting hard surfaces, car parking or such constructions 
which have been demolished within the past two years?  

YES        NO 

2.3 Does the development site consist of land which is contaminated by industrial or 
other waste to the extent that it would need decontamination before building 
commences?  

YES        NO 

2.4 Does the development site consist of land which is a mixture of existing buildings, 
hard surfaces and/or contaminated land? 


 

YES        NO 

2.5 Does 80% of the land within the development site comply with statements 2.1, 
2.2 or 2.3 and the remaining 20% of the building’s ground area extend into land 
which has been either used for single-crop arable farming for at least five years, 
OR consists of regularly cut lawns and sports fields.

YES        NO 

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

A site that consists of buildings, hard surfaces, car parking or other such construction 
which has been derelict for more than two years cannot achieve the credit unless it 
can be verified by a suitably qualified ecologist that the site is of low or insignificant 
ecological value. 

Special Cases 

Areas of high ecological importance can be omitted from the construction zone if 
the suitably qualified ecologist is satisfied that they will not be disturbed by actions 
on site. Confirmation from the ecologist is required in writing, including details of 
the features and their locations. At the post construction stage, the ecologist must 
confirm that these areas were not affected by site activities. 




240  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Eco

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Eco 2  Ecological Enhancement  1 No



Aim 


To enhance the ecological value of a site. 

Assessment Criteria 

Criteria Credits

Where a suitably qualified ecologist has been appointed to recommend appropriate ecological 
features that will positively enhance the ecology of the site. 



AND 


Where the developer adopts all key recommendations and 30% of additional 
recommendations. 


1

Default Cases 

None 




Eco 2: Ecological Enhancement  |  241


Eco

Information required to Demonstrate Compliance

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

A copy of the ecologist’s report 
highlighting the information required as 
set out in ‘Code for Sustainable Homes 
Ecology Report Template’


AND


Detailed documentary evidence stating:

•  How the key recommendations and 
30% of additional recommendations 
will be incorporated into the design

•  The planting schedule of any species 
to be incorporated from suitably 
qualified ecologists recommendations

For post construction stage only 
assessments, provide evidence (as listed 
for design stage) representing the 
dwellings as built and confirmation that 
the ecologists recommendations were 
implemented, by providing plans or 
other detailed documentary evidence 


OR

Confirmation from the ecologist that 
what was agreed at design stage was 
implemented, by providing plans or 
other detailed documentary evidence 


OR

Where different from design stage, 
provide ecologists report and detailed 
documentary evidence (as listed for 
design stage) representing the dwellings 
as built

Definitions 

Development site

The development site is the whole site up to and including the boundary.

Recommendations 

Recommendations are defined as measures adopted to enhance the ecology of the 
site, which may include:

•  The planting of native species

•  The adoption of horticultural good practice (e.g. no or low use of residual 
pesticides)

•  The installation of bird, bat and/or insect boxes at appropriate locations on the 


site


•  Development of a full biodiversity management plan including avoiding 
clearance/works at key times of the year (e.g. breeding season) 




242  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Eco

•  The proper integration, design and maintenance of SUDS and green roofs, 
community orchards etc.

Only native floral species or those with a known attraction or benefit to local wildlife 
can be considered for the purpose of enhancing the ecological value of the site.

RIBA Outline Plan of Work

The Royal Institute of British Architects publishes an Outline Plan of Work (Royal 
Institute of British Architects, 1991) which describes the UK traditional approach 
to the project delivery process in 12 well-defined steps, labelled A to M. The RIBA 
process begins at the project inception (A), where a general outline of requirements 
and a plan of action are produced by an architect and the commissioning client, and 
it ends at feedback (M) following the completion and handover of the building to the 
client.

Suitably qualified ecologist

A suitably qualified ecologist is defined as an individual who:

•  Holds a degree or equivalent qualification (e.g. N/SVQ Level 5) in ecology or a 
related subject 

•  Is a practising ecologist, with a minimum of three years’ relevant experience 
(within the last five years). Such experience must clearly demonstrate a practical 
understanding of factors affecting ecology in relation to construction and 
the built environment, including acting in an advisory capacity to provide 
recommendations for ecological protection, enhancement and mitigation 
measures. Examples of relevant experience are ecological impact assessments, 
Phase 1 and 2 habitat surveys, and habitat restoration 

•  Is covered by a professional code of conduct and subject to peer review. 

Peer review is defined as the process employed by a professional body to demonstrate 
that potential or current full members maintain the standard of knowledge and 
experience required to ensure compliance with a code of conduct and professional 
ethics. 

Full members of the following organisations who meet the above requirements are 
deemed to be suitably qualified ecologists:

•  Association of Wildlife Trust Consultancies (AWTC) 

•  Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management (CIWEM) 

•  Institute of Ecology and Environmental Management (IEEM) 

•  Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (IEMA) 

•  Landscape Institute (LI). 




Eco 2: Ecological Enhancement  |  243


Eco

Assessment Methodology 

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met.

Design Stage 

•  The assessor must confirm that a suitably qualified ecologist has been appointed 
to provide a report detailing key and additional recommendations for enhancing 
the site’s ecology and that: 

a)  The report has been prepared using the ‘Code for Sustainable Homes 
Ecology Report Template’, and it is recommended that this is carried out at 
Stage B according to the RIBA Outline Plan of Work

b) The ecologist meets all the requirements stated in the definition of a suitably 
qualified ecologist.

c)  The suitably qualified ecologist has confirmed that all UK and EU laws in 
respect of protected species have been complied with and that any key and 
additional recommendations are beyond the requirements of such laws.

d) The ecologist made a site visit prior to the commencement of initial site 
preparation works.

e)  The ecologist’s recommendations are based on the existing site ecology, 
determined from the site visit.

f)  The site visit was made at appropriate times of year when plant and animal 
species were evident.

•  If there has been no site visit prior to initial site preparation, this is only 
acceptable where the credit for Eco 1 – Ecological Value of Site has been 
achieved, and evidence provided to achieve Eco 1 has been passed on to 
the ecologist as the basis for the ecological report. This evidence must be in 
accordance with the Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance as 
detailed in Eco 1. 

Post Construction Stage 

•  Confirm which specifications and evidence provided at the design stage are still 
valid.

•  Assess all the new specifications and evidence provided at the post construction 
stage.

•  Verify that the post construction stage evidence provided demonstrates that all 
the assessment criteria have been met. 

•  Where the whole site has not yet been built out, the assessor must confirm that 
there is either a contract in place or a letter confirming when final site wide 
issues such as planting will be complete.




244  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Eco

Calculation Procedures 

None.

Checklists and Tables 

None. 

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

The credit cannot be achieved where the developer/client has confirmed a 
commitment to comply with all current EU and UK legislation relating to protected 
species and habitats applicable to the development site but no ecological 
enhancement is proposed. 

Where enhancement has been made to an unconnected area(s) outside the site 
boundary and no enhancement has been made within the boundary, the credit 
cannot be awarded. 

To achieve the credit, features designed to enhance the ecology of the site must be 
recommended by a suitably qualified ecologist. 

Special Cases 

None. 




Eco 3: Protection of Ecological Features  |  245


Eco

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Eco 3  Protection of Ecological Features  1 No



Aim 


To promote the protection of existing ecological features from substantial damage 
during the clearing of the site and the completion of construction works. 

Assessment Criteria 

Criteria Credits

Where all existing features of ecological value on the development site potentially affected by 
the works are maintained and adequately protected during site clearance, preparation and 
construction works.


1

Default Cases 

The credit can be awarded by default where the site has been classified as having low 
ecological value in accordance with Section 1 of Checklist Eco 1, Ecological features of the site, 
AND no features of ecological value have been identified. 

If a suitably qualified ecologist has confirmed a feature can be removed because of its 
insignificant ecological value or where an arboriculturalist has confirmed a feature can be 
removed owing to poor health/condition (e.g. diseased trees which require felling for health 
and safety and/or conservation reasons), the credit can be achieved provided all other features 
are adequately protected in accordance with the ecologist’s recommendations. 




246  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Eco

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

Detailed documentary evidence* 
confirming ecological features present 
and how they will be protected

*Where compliance with the criteria 
is demonstrated by the relevant 
documents submitted to the Planning 
Authority which gained planning 
approval, these can be used as evidence

Detailed documentary evidence 
confirming that any ecological features 
within the development site have been 
and will continue to be adequately 
protected during construction works

Where ecological features are being 
removed for health and safety and/or 
conservation reasons;

Written evidence from an appropriate 
statutory body / arboriculturalist 
confirming the requirement to remove 
any features

Where ecological features are being 
removed for health and safety and/or 
conservation reasons;

Detailed documentary evidence to 
demonstrate that only those features 
agreed by appropriate statutory body / 
arboriculturalist were removed.

Where ecological features are being 
removed and are of low ecological 
value;

A copy of the ecologist’s report 
highlighting the information required 
as set out in the Code for Sustainable 
Homes Ecology Report Template

Where ecological features have been 
removed;

Confirmation from the ecologist that 
all features removed were identified at 
design stage as being of low ecological 
value.

Where using Checklist Eco 1, to 
demonstrate that there are no features 
to protect provision of:

•  Site visit report from the design team/ 
assessor confirming details adequate 
to meet Checklist Eco 1 based on 
plans of the site and surrounding 
area prior to the commencement of 
construction works/site clearance

Where using Checklist Eco 1 evidence to 
be provided as at design stage 

Definitions 

Development site

The development site is the whole site up to and including the boundary.




Eco 3: Protection of Ecological Features  |  247


Eco

Ecological features

Ecological features are defined in Checklist Eco 1 – Land of Low Ecological Value, and 
include trees, hedges, ponds, streams, rivers, marshes, wetlands, meadows, species-
rich grassland, heathland and heather.

Low ecological value

Land defined as having low ecological value using Checklist Eco 1 or defined by a 
suitably qualified ecologist as having low or insignificant ecological value. 

Protection of natural areas 

The provision of physical barriers to prevent damage to existing natural areas. Natural 
areas include meadows, species-rich grassland, heathland consisting of heather and/
or scrub, marshes and wetlands, ponds, streams and rivers. If such areas are remote 
from site works or storage, construction activity should be prevented in their vicinity. 

Protection of trees and hedges

Where trees and hedges have been protected in accordance with BS 5837, Trees in 
relation to construction. This standard requires a tree protection plan to be developed 
which involves erecting physical barriers to prevent damage to existing trees, with 
an exclusion area around the trees. It also looks at defining a root protection area 
and requires consideration when compulsory work is carried out within the root 
protection area. 

Protection of watercourses and wetland areas 

The provision of physical barriers (e.g. bunds and cut-off ditches) and site drainage 
to ensure no site run-off damages the local watercourses. Specialist advice should 
be obtained from a suitably qualified ecologist, Natural England or the Environment 
Agency with reference to Pollution Prevention Guidelines 05. 

Suitably qualified ecologist

A suitably qualified ecologist is defined as an individual who:

•  Holds a degree or equivalent qualification (e.g. N/SVQ Level 5) in ecology or a 
related subject 

•  Is a practising ecologist, with a minimum of three years’ relevant experience 
(within the last five years). Such experience must clearly demonstrate a practical 
understanding of factors affecting ecology in relation to construction and 
the built environment, including acting in an advisory capacity to provide 
recommendations for ecological protection, enhancement and mitigation 
measures. Examples of relevant experience are ecological impact assessments, 
Phase 1 and 2 habitat surveys, and habitat restoration 

•  Is covered by a professional code of conduct and subject to peer review. 

Peer review is defined as the process employed by a professional body to demonstrate 
that potential or current full members maintain the standard of knowledge and 




248  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Eco

experience required to ensure compliance with a code of conduct and professional 
ethics. 

Full members of the following organisations who meet the above requirements are 
deemed to be suitably qualified ecologists:

•  Association of Wildlife Trust Consultancies (AWTC) 

•  Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management (CIWEM) 

•  Institute of Ecology and Environmental Management (IEEM) 

•  Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (IEMA) 

•  Landscape Institute (LI). 

Verified ecological report

A verified ecological report is a report carried out by an ecologist who does not fully 
meet the requirements of a suitably qualified ecologist. For the report to comply, as a 
minimum a suitably qualified ecologist must have read and reviewed the report and 
confirmed in writing that it:

•  Represents sound industry practice

•  Reports and recommends correctly, truthfully and objectively

•  Is appropriate given the local site conditions and scope of works proposed

•  Avoids invalid, biased and exaggerated statements

•  Additionally, written confirmation from the third-party verifier that they comply 
with the definition of a suitably qualified ecologist.

Assessment Methodology 

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met.

Design Stage 

•  Confirm that a report has been prepared on ecological features in accordance 
with the Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance, together with 
details of ecological protection to be carried out prior to the start of any 
preliminary construction or preparation works (e.g. site clearance or the erection 
of temporary site facilities). 

•  Where there are no ecological features to protect and the credit is being 
awarded by default, the evidence provided must demonstrate this and that the 
requirements of Section 1 of Checklist Eco 1, Ecological features of the site, 
have been met. 

•  The assessor must check that the developer/client has confirmed compliance 
with all current EU and UK legislation relating to protected species and habitats 




Eco 3: Protection of Ecological Features  |  249


Eco

applicable to the development site. This is in addition to the protection of 
ecological features as set out above. 

Post Construction Stage 

•  Confirm that any features identified at the design stage have been successfully 
protected. 

Calculation Procedures 

None. 

Checklists and Tables 

None.

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

Credits cannot be awarded for the relocation of ecological features. 

Where ecological features (as defined above) have not been protected, credits 
cannot be awarded. This applies even where the developer/client has confirmed a 
commitment to comply with all current EU and UK legislation relating to protected 
species and habitats applicable to the development site. 

Special Cases 

None. 




250  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Eco

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Eco 4  Change in Ecological Value of Site  4 No



Aim 


To minimise reductions and promote an improvement in ecological value. 

Assessment Criteria 

Criteria Credits

The ecological value before and after development is measured, and the overall change in 
species per hectare is: 

•  Minor negative change: between –9 and less than or equal to –3

•  Neutral: greater than –3 and less than or equal to +3

•  Minor enhancement: greater than 3 and less than or equal to 9

•  Major enhancement: greater than +9 


 1234

Default Cases 

None 




Eco 4: Change in Ecological Value of Site  |  251


Eco

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

Copy of the calculations completed 
by the assessor and supported by 
the following detailed documentary 
evidence:

•  Proposed site layout

•  The pre-development site 
survey, clearly indicating natural 
and built features on both 
the site and land surrounding 
the site before the proposed 
development 

•  Landscape and plot categories (in 
accordance with the Assessment 
Methodology) with a list of site 
areas provided for both before 
and after development

For post construction stage only 
assessments, provide detailed documentary 
evidence and calculations as design stage


OR 


Written confirmation from the developer 
that the proposed site layout detailed at 
design stage has been implemented


OR 


Where different from design stage, provide 
detailed documentary evidence and 
calculations as design stage

Where the advice of an ecologist 
is sought, the following detailed 
documentary evidence must be 
provided:

Code for Sustainable Homes 
Ecology Report Template completed 
by the ecologist


AND


Written confirmation from the 
developer confirming how the 
ecologist’s recommendations will be 
implemented including a planting 
schedule.

Where post construction stage assessment 
only, provide detailed documentary evidence 
as design stage


AND


Written confirmation from the developer 
that the ecologist’s recommendations have 
been implemented


OR

Where the advice of an ecologist was 
sought at the design stage, the following 
detailed documentary evidence must also be 
provided:

Written confirmation from the developer 
that the ecologist’s recommendations have 
been implemented


OR

Where different from design stage, provide 
detailed documentary evidence as design 
stage




252  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Eco

Definitions

Arable

Land dominated by cereals and other arable crops, as well as intensively managed 
grasslands. 

Crops/weeds

Mostly highly disturbed vegetation of arable fields and their boundaries; includes 
cereal and vegetable crops.

Derelict land

The ecological value of derelict sites (table: Cat 9.3, Checklists and Tables) is time 
dependent; a linear scale has been used to determine intermediate values between 
zero ecological value at 1 year from dereliction/demolition to a value at 30 years 
based on marginal upland figures. This presents a worst case figure which can be 
amended on the advice of a suitably qualified ecologist.

Development site

The development site is the whole site up to and including the boundary.

Fertile grass

The bulk of agriculturally improved grasslands, intensive pasture and silage crops, 
but also includes mown areas of improved grasslands for recreational and amenity 
purposes, as well as re-sown roadside verges.

Heath/bog

Mostly heather moorland, blanket bog and upland heath, but also lowland heath and 
raised bog.

Infertile grass

A diverse group of semi-improved and semi-natural grasslands which includes 
acidic to basic, wet to dry grasslands, and tall herb vegetation mainly present in the 
lowlands; often found on stream sides and roadside verges.

Lowland wooded

Includes wooded vegetation of hedges and broadleaved woods in the lowlands.

Marginal upland

Areas that are on the periphery of upland and are dominated by mixtures of low-
intensity agriculture, forestry and semi-natural vegetation.




Eco 4: Change in Ecological Value of Site  |  253


Eco

Moorland grass/mosaic

Typically grazed moorland vegetation, including extensive upland acidic and peaty 
grassland that is species-rich with very localised flushes.

Pastoral

Grasslands used for grazing purposes. 

Suitably qualified ecologist

A suitably qualified ecologist is defined as an individual who:

•  Holds a degree or equivalent qualification (e.g. N/SVQ Level 5) in ecology or a 
related subject 

•  Is a practising ecologist, with a minimum of three years’ relevant experience 
(within the last five years). Such experience must clearly demonstrate a practical 
understanding of factors affecting ecology in relation to construction and 
the built environment, including acting in an advisory capacity to provide 
recommendations for ecological protection, enhancement and mitigation 
measures. Examples of relevant experience are ecological impact assessments, 
Phase 1 and 2 habitat surveys, and habitat restoration 

•  Is covered by a professional code of conduct and subject to peer review. 

Peer review is defined as the process employed by a professional body to demonstrate 
that potential or current full members maintain the standard of knowledge and 
experience required to ensure compliance with a code of conduct and professional 
ethics. 

Full members of the following organisations who meet the above requirements are 
deemed to be suitably qualified ecologists:

•  Association of Wildlife Trust Consultancies (AWTC) 

•  Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management (CIWEM) 

•  Institute of Ecology and Environmental Management (IEEM) 

•  Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (IEMA) 

•  Landscape Institute (LI). 

Tall grassland/herb

Typical vegetation of overgrown lowland field boundaries, stream sides, ditches and 
roadside verges.

Upland

Land generally above a height suitable for mechanised farming and frequently 
dominated by semi-natural vegetation.




254  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Eco

Upland wooded

A varied group of acidic vegetation types usually associated with upland woods, 
including semi-natural woodland, conifer plantations, bracken, and wooded stream 
sides.

Urban mosaic

A complex mix of habitats located within cities, towns or villages, which include 
buildings, hard-standing, pockets of disused land and scrub, and areas of managed 
green spaces, such as gardens, allotments and parkland.

Verified ecological report

A verified ecological report is a report carried out by an ecologist who does not fully 
meet the requirements of a suitably qualified ecologist. For the report to comply, as a 
minimum a suitably qualified ecologist must have read and reviewed the report and 
confirmed in writing that it:

•  Represents sound industry practice

•  Reports and recommends correctly, truthfully and objectively

•  Is appropriate given the local site conditions and scope of works proposed

•  Avoids invalid, biased and exaggerated statements

•  Additionally, written confirmation from the third-party verifier that they comply 
with the definition of a suitably qualified ecologist.

‘Wildlife’ garden planting

Garden planting that uses native species and those that have a known attraction or 
benefit to local fauna, based on the advice of a suitably qualified ecologist.

Assessment Methodology 

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met.

Design Stage 

•  Calculate the change in ecological value of the development site by comparing 
the estimated diversity of plant species before and after construction using the 
method described in Calculation Procedures below. 

Post Construction Stage 

•  Confirm which specifications and evidence provided at the design stage are still 
valid.




Eco 4: Change in Ecological Value of Site  |  255


Eco

•  Assess all the new specifications and evidence provided at the post construction 
stage.

Calculation Procedures 

Before Development 

1. Select the most appropriate landscape type from table: Cat 9.3 (Checklists 
and Tables) using the descriptions provided in Definitions. This will be based 
on the typology of the land surrounding the site and is likely to be the same 
throughout the development. However, in some cases it may differ, such as 
when a disused site is developed as part of a master plan for a mixed-use 
development. Typical of this would be a new town development (e.g. Milton 
Keynes), or the development of an inner-city derelict site. 

2. Select all of the plot types from table Cat 9.3 which are applicable to the 
development site and calculate the area of each of them. It is important to 
ensure that the appropriate vegetation plot types for the site and their areas are 
correctly defined. 

  Where areas of ‘garden planting (typical)’ and ‘wildlife garden planting’ are 
present, these will always record a score of zero, unless a suitably qualified 
ecologist has been appointed who will make the distinction between ‘typical’ 
and ‘wildlife’ garden planting species and record ‘actual’ species numbers. 

  Enter the name of each plot type, its area and the number of species per plot 
type into table Cat 9.2a Follow the prompts to calculate the total average 
number of species before development. 

  Alternatively, where a suitably qualified ecologist has conducted an ecological 
site survey, the habitat types, their areas and number of species per habitat type 
can be entered directly into table Cat 9.2a. 

  The ecological report does not have to be produced by a suitably qualified 
ecologist. Where this is the case a verified ecological report can be provided. 




256  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Eco

Table: Cat 9.2a : Calculation of the Ecological Value of the Site Before Development

Plot Type Area of Plot Type 


(m2)


Species No.  
(from Table 2 
or an SQE)

Species 3 Area 
of Plot Type


xxxxxxxxxx

(1) Total Site Area =  (2) Total ∑ Species × Area = 

Species per Plot Type Before Development:

Total ∑ Species × Area of Plot Type/Total Site Area = (2)/(1) = 

After Development 

1. Repeat steps 1–2 above. 

2. Enter the name of each plot type, its area and number of species per plot type 
(from table Cat9.3) into table Cat 9.2b. Follow the prompts to calculate the 
total average number of species after development. 

3. Where a suitably qualified ecologist has conducted an ecological site survey and 
recommended new habitat types/planting schemes, their areas and number of 
species per habitat type can be entered directly into table Cat 9.2b. 

  Where new habitats are to be created or floral species are to be planted as part 
of a landscape design, only those species which are native or have a known 
attraction to local wildlife can be included in the calculations based on the 
advice and recommendations of a suitably qualified ecologist. 




Eco 4: Change in Ecological Value of Site  |  257


Eco

  Where ‘extensive green roofs’ are designed by a suitably qualified ecologist, add 
this area to ‘wildlife garden’ plot type and subtract the area from ‘building’ plot 
type. 

  The species value figures in table Cat 9.3 are for an existing, well-established 
site. It takes many years before the ecological value of a specific landscape type 
is established naturally. It is therefore not possible to assume that, for example, 
newly developed urban parkland has between 13.8 and 17.6 species just after 
construction without the expert knowledge of a suitably qualified ecologist. 
However, if the homes are to be built on existing urban parkland with part of 
the site left undisturbed, the ecological value of that part of the site can be 
assumed to be unchanged. If an urban parkland is being created on part of the 
site, the number of species on this part will need to be confirmed by a suitably 
qualified ecologist (taken from the actual number of indigenous species being 
planted), rather than assuming that the new parkland will immediately have a 
species value of 11.6 (assuming fertilisers are going to be used).

Table: Cat 9.2b : Calculation of the Ecological Value of the Site After Development

Plot Type Area of Plot Type  


(m2)


Species No.  
(from Table 2 
or a SQE)

Species 3 Area 
of Plot Type


xxxxxxxxxx

(1) Total Site Area =  (2) Total ∑ Species × Area = 

Species per Plot Type Before Development:

Total ∑ Species × Area of Plot Type/Total Site Area = (2)/(1) = 




258  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Eco

4. Calculation of the Change in Ecological Value 

  The average number of species for the site before development is calculated 
by multiplying the area of the different plot types and the equivalent number 
of ‘species’ for those plot types (values taken from table Cat 9.3 or given by a 
suitably qualified ecologist), adding these values and then dividing by the area 
of the whole site. The same procedure is carried out after the development, and 
the two values are compared to establish the change.

    Species Before Development  =  S


n

1(Area Plot Type N × Species Plot Type N)

Total Site Area

    Species After Development  =  S


n1 

(Area Plot Type N × Species Plot Type N)

Total Site Area

    Species Change = Species After Development – Species Before Development

Checklists and Tables 

Ecological Value 

Table Cat 9.3 below provides default values for calculating the change of ecological 
value of the site. This information is based on national figures from the Countryside 
Survey prepared for the Digest of Environmental Statistics No 20, 1998 (DEFRA). 

The actual number of species may be used to replace any of the figures in table 
Cat 9.3 below, provided that a suitably qualified ecologist has been appointed and 
has reported actual species values in accordance with the calculation procedures 
above. 




Eco 4: Change in Ecological Value of Site  |  259


Eco Table Cat 9.3 : Average Number of Species per Landscape and Vegetation Plot Type for Existing Habitats Plot Type Landscape Type Arable Pastoral Marginal Upland Upland Existing Building/Hard Landscaped Areas Urban Mosaic Industrial Derelict Land <1 year Industrial Derelict Land <10 years Industrial Derelict Land <20 years Industrial Derelict Land ≥30 years Crop Weeds5.48.3––0–––––Tall grassland/herb12.715.0––017.606.315.821.1Fertile grassland11.612.715.3–011.604.611.515.3Infertile grassland17.117.621.1–017.606.315.821.1Lowland wooded12.912.5––013.8––––Upland wooded–12.713.820.4013.8––––Moorland grass/mosaic–2.020.421.00–––––Heath/Bog––14.320.00–––––Hard Landscaping0000000000Buildings0000000000Garden Planting (Typical)tbetbetbetbetbetbe––––Wildlife Garden Plantingtbetbetbetbetbetbe––––‘ – ‘ insufficient data to produce national averages, as not all vegetation plot types are found in all landscape types. Values are data from: DEFRA “Digest of Environmental Statistics” No. 20. HMSO, 1998tbe: To be evaluated by a suitably qualified ecologist – otherwise assume 0


260  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Eco

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

Where the creation of a habitat such as garden planting or wildlife garden planting 
increases the site’s ecological value, a suitably qualified ecologist must advise in terms 
of the species required and species per hectare to achieve the credit.

Special Cases 

None. 




Eco 5: Building Footprint  |  261


Eco

Issue ID Description No. of Credits 
Available

Mandatory 
Elements

Eco 5  Building Footprint  2 No



Aim 


To promote the most efficient use of a building’s footprint by ensuring that land and 
material use is optimised across the development. 

Assessment Criteria 

Criteria Credits

For houses, where the net internal floor area: net internal ground floor area ratio is greater 
than or equal to 2.5:1 


OR 


For blocks of flats, where the net internal floor area: net internal ground floor area ratio is 
greater than or equal to 3:1 


OR 


For a combination of houses and flats, the ratio of total net internal floor area: total net 
internal ground floor area of all houses and flats (i.e. the site-wide footprint to floor area ratio) 
is greater than the area weighted average of the two target ratios above (see Calculation 
Procedures)


1

For houses, where the net internal floor area: net internal ground floor area ratio is greater 
than or equal to 3:1 


OR 


For blocks of flats, where the net internal floor area: net internal ground floor area ratio is 
greater than or equal to 4:1 


OR 


For a combination of houses and flats, the ratio of total net internal floor area: total net 
internal ground floor area of all houses and flats (i.e. the site-wide footprint to floor area ratio) 
is greater than the area weighted average of the two target ratios above (see Calculation 
Procedures)


2

Default Cases 



None

262  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Eco

Information Required to Demonstrate Compliance 

Schedule of Evidence Required 

Design Stage Post Construction Stage 

Calculation of the building footprint

ratio, stating the Net Internal Floor Area 
(NIFA) and the Net Internal Ground 
Floor Area (NIGFA)

For post construction stage only 
assessments include the calculations of 
the building footprint ratio, stating NIFA 
and the NIGFA


OR

Written confirmation from the 
developer in the form of detailed 
documentary evidence confirming that 
the dwellings and buildings have been 
constructed in accordance with the 
design stage calculations


OR

Where different from design stage, 
revised calculations of the building 
footprint ratio, stating the NIFA and the 
NIGFA 

Definitions

Habitable space

A space typically occupied for more than 30 minutes during the day with safe 
access by a permanent stairway or other means of entrance which complies with 
the requirements of relevant national Building Regulations and where the space is 
‘finished’ with floor, walls, lighting and electric sockets.

Net internal floor area 

The area of all habitable spaces, including the area taken up by halls, stairwells, 
cupboards, internal partitions, habitable loft spaces and basements. This also includes 
common areas of blocks of flats and apartment buildings, including stairwells, 
circulation spaces and entrance lobbies.

For semi-detached or terraced dwellings, this excludes the area of the party walls. 

For flats, the floor area includes the party walls and separating walls to common 
areas. 

Where residential accommodation is constructed above other occupied space such 
as shops or offices (garages or car parking would not be included), the floor area 




Eco 5: Building Footprint  |  263


Eco

of these spaces can be included within the net internal floor area of the dwelling 
provided the areas are directly beneath the residential space.

Net internal ground floor area

Also referred to as the building footprint, this is the area of land that is taken up by 
the permanent foundations of the dwelling (including any other outbuildings with 
permanent foundations that are associated with the dwelling), within the external 
walls of the building. 

For this issue, this is measured as the total net internal floor area of the ground floor, 
excluding the area taken up by the external walls. 

In blocks of flats, this also includes the area taken up by party walls and separating 
walls to common areas, with the exception of party walls to adjoining buildings. 

For staggered dwellings, the footprint area equals the total net internal floor area of 
the floor with the largest plate.

•  Areas that normally count towards the footprint include conservatories, 
garages, permanent outhouses, fully enclosed permanent waste storage areas, 
communal garages or storage rooms and any other permanent buildings used 
by the occupants 

•  Areas that will NOT normally count towards the footprint include hard 
landscaping, semi-enclosed external spaces, pergolas and carports 

•  Garden sheds will not count unless they are built on a permanent solid 
foundation and are fitted out as habitable space with heating, lighting and 
power

•  If a dwelling is raised above ground level on columns or other structures, the 
net internal ground floor area must be measured from the lowest floor of the 
dwelling

•  Where other occupied spaces (e.g. non-domestic spaces such as retail and 
offices etc) form the ground floor or lower floors under a block of flats, the net 
internal ground floor area must be measured as the net internal floor area of 
the lowest floor of the block of flats. 

Other occupied space

Other occupied spaces include retail and office spaces and other non-domestic spaces 
which are occupied for more than 30 minutes during the day. Garages or car parking 
would not be included in this definition. 

Staggered dwellings

These are dwellings on several levels which are of unequal floor area. For example, 
a dwelling with a first floor area greater than the ground floor area which may 
overhang the ground floor.




264  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Eco

Assessment Methodology

The assessment criteria should be read with the methodology and the definitions in 
this section. Credits are awarded where the performance requirements (set out in the 
assessment criteria table) have been met.

Design Stage 

•  Assess this issue on a site-wide basis using the ratio of combined net internal 
floor area to footprint area. This is measured as the total net internal ground 
floor area of all dwellings on site. Individual dwellings (i.e. detached, semi-
detached and terraced, not individual flats) that are not subject to a Code 
assessment can be excluded from the assessment of this issue.

•  Verify that the evidence demonstrates that all the assessment criteria have been 
met. 

•  Calculate the floor area: footprint ratio for each type of dwelling. Note that any 
outbuildings such as permanent garages and cycle stores must be taken into 
account in the footprint area. 

Post Construction Stage 

•  Confirm which specifications and evidence provided at the design stage are still 
valid.

•  Assess any new specifications and evidence provided at the post construction 
stage. 

Calculation Procedures 

1. Where there is a mixture of houses and flats, to calculate the area weighted 
target ratio for the site, use the following formula:

 For one credit:

    Area Weighted  
  Target Ratio 


= 


(Total NIFA Houses × 2.5) + (Total NIFA Flats × 2.5)

Total NIFA of all Houses and Flats

 For two credits:

    Area Weighted  
  Target Ratio 


= 


(Total NIFA Houses × 3.2) + (Total NIFA Flats × 4.0)

Total NIFA of all Houses and Flats




Eco 5: Building Footprint  |  265


Eco

2. The site wide ratio should then be calculated using the following formula and 
assessed against the above target ratio. Credits can be awarded where the ratio 
calculated using the following formula is greater than the target area weighted 
ratio as described in point 1 above.

    Site Wide Footprint to Floor Area Ratio  =  (  Total NIFA of all DwellingsTotal NIGFA of all Dwellings  ) 
Where:

NIFA = Net Internal Floor Area

NIGFA = Net Internal Ground Floor Area

Checklists and Tables 

None. 

Common Cases of Non-Compliance 

Two-storey dwellings will not achieve the credit criteria unless a habitable loft 
space or basement is provided, depending on the provision of any other permanent 
structures such as garages or outhouses which may impact on the footprint area. 

Special Cases 

None. 




266  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Annex

Annex 1: Acronyms
ACoP  Approved Code of Practice

ACPO  Association of Chief Police Officers

AD L1A  Approved Document L1A

ADE Approved Document E

ALO  Architectural Liaison Officer

ANC  Association of Noise Consultants

AWTC  Association of Wildlife Trust Consultancies

BRE  Building Research Establishment

BREEAM Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method

BS  British Standard

BSRIA  Building Services Research and Information Association

CABE  Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment

CCS  Considerate Constructors Scheme

CEH  Centre for Ecology and Hydrology

CFL  Compact fluorescent lamp

CH4  Methane

CIBSE  Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers

CIE  Commission Internationale de l’Eclairage (International Commission 
on Illumination)

CIRIA  Construction Industry Research and Information Association

CITES  Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild 
Fauna and Flora

CIWEM  Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management

CO2 Carbon dioxide

CoC  Chain of custody

Code  Code for Sustainable Homes

CPDA  Crime Prevention Design Advisor

CPET  Central Point of Expertise on Timber

CSA  Canadian Standards Association

CSH  Code for Sustainable Homes




Annex 1: Acronyms  |  267


Annex

DECC Department for Energy and Climate Change

DEFRA  Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs

DER  Dwelling Emission Rate

DF  Average daylight factor

DfT  Department for Transport

DIY  Do It Yourself

DS  Design stage

DTI  Department of Trade and Industry

Eco  Ecology

EMAS  Eco-Management and Audit Scheme

EMS  Environmental management system

EN  European Normalization

Ene  Energy and CO2 Emissions

EPC Energy Performance Certificate

EPDM  Ethylene propylene diene monomer

EPIs  Environmental performance indicators

ESCO  Energy services company

EST  Energy Saving Trust

EU  European Union

FEH  Flood Estimation Handbook

FRA  Flood risk assessment

FSC  Forest Stewardship Council

GLS  General Lighting Services

GRP  Glass reinforced plastic

GWP  Global Warming Potential

HCR Hea Home Condition ReportHealth and Wellbeing

HFCs  Hydrofluorocarbons

HIP  Home Information Pack

HMSO  Her Majesty’s Stationery Office

HSE  Health and Safety Executive 

ICoP IDP Interim Code of PracticeInclusive Design Principles




268  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Annex

IEEM  Institute of Ecology and Environmental Management

IEMA  Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment

IPCC  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change

ISO  International Organization for Standardisation

KPI  Key performance indicators

LCA  Life cycle assessment

LED  Light emitting diode

LI Landscape Institute

LZC  Low or zero carbon

Man  Management

Mat Materials

MCS  Microgeneration Certification Scheme

MDF  Medium density fibreboard

MTCC  Malaysian Timber Certification Council

MVHR  Mechanical ventilation with heat recovery

NAEI National Atmospheric Emissions Inventory

NaFRA National Flood Risk Assessment

NIFA NIGFA Net internal floor areaNet internal ground floor area

NOx Nitrogen oxides

O2 Oxygen

ODPM  Office of the Deputy Prime Minister

OSB  Oriented strand board

PCS Post construction stage

PEFC  Programme of Endorsement of Forest Certification Schemes

PFCs  Perfluorocarbons

PIR  Passive infra red (movement detecting devices)

Pol  Pollution

PPG  Planning Policy Guidance

PPS  Planning Policy Statement

PU  Polyurethane

PVC  Polyvinyl chloride




Annex 1: Acronyms  |  269


Annex

QA  Quality assurance

RDL  Robust Details Limited

RIBA  Royal Institute of British Architects

SAP  Standard Assessment Procedure

SF6  Sulphur hexafluoride

SFI  Sustainable Forestry Initiative

SGS  Société Générale de Surveillance

SMP  Shoreline management plan

SQE  Suitably qualified ecologist

SSSI  Site of Special Scientific Interest

SUDS  Sustainable drainage systems

Sur  Surface Water Run-off

SWMP  Site Waste Management Plan

TER  Target emission rate

TFT  The Forest Trust

TPO  Thermoplastic olefin

UK United Kingdom

UKAS  United Kingdom Accreditation Service

UKPIA  United Kingdom Petroleum Industry Association

UNEP  United Nations Environment Programme

VOC  Volatile organic compound

Was  Waste

Wat  Water

WMO  World Meteorological Organization

WRAP  Waste and Resources Action Programme




270  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Annex

Annex 2: References
BRE Global. Code for Sustainable Homes – provision of scheme management services: 
Guidance notes for prospective service providers. BRE Global, Garston, Watford, 
December 2007. Available from www.breeam.org/filelibrary/CSH_Guidance_Notes-_
for_Prospective_Service_Providers.pdf

BRE. The Government’s Standard Assessment Procedure for energy rating of 
dwellings March 2010 Version (SAP 2009, version 9.90, March 2010, revision 
October 2010). Published on behalf of DECC by BRE, Garston, Watford, 2009. 
Available from http://www.bre.co.uk/filelibrary/SAP/2009/SAP-2009_9-90.pdf

Department for Communities and Local Government. Approved Document L1A 
Conservation of fuel and power (New dwellings). CLG, London, 2010. Available from 
www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments 

Department for Communities and Local Government. Building Regulations Approved 
Document F – Ventilation (2010) available from www.planningportal.gov.uk/
approveddocuments

Communities and Local Government. Code for Sustainable Homes: A step-change in 
sustainable home building practice. Communities and Local Government, London, 
2006. Available from www.communities.gov.uk

Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora 
(CITES). www.cites.org 

ISO 17024 (General Requirements for Bodies Operating Certification of Persons) 

Royal Institute of British Architects. RIBA Outline Plan of Work. RIBA Publications, 
London, 2008. Available from;  
www.architecture.com/Files/RIBAProfessionalServices/Practice/
OutlinePlanofWork(revised).pdf

UKAS Standard EN 45011 (General Requirements for Bodies Operating Product 
Certification Schemes) 

Yates, A.; Brownhill, D.; Crowhurst D. BRE’s Environmental Assessment Methods for 
Buildings – BREEAM, including EcoHomes. Prepared for the Sustainable Buildings Task 
Group, BRE, Garston, Watford, January 2004

Ene 1

BRE. The Government’s Standard Assessment Procedure for energy rating of 
dwellings March 2010 Version (SAP 2009, version 9.90, March 2010, revision 
October 2010). Published on behalf of DECC by BRE, Garston, Watford, 2009. 
Available from http://www.bre.co.uk/filelibrary/SAP/2009/SAP-2009_9-90.pdf

http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments
http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments
http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments




Annex 2: References  |  271


Annex

Department for Communities and Local Government. Approved Document L1A 
Conservation of fuel and power (New dwellings). CLG, London, 2010. Available from 
www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments 

Ene 2

BRE. The Government’s Standard Assessment Procedure for energy rating of 
dwellings March 2010 Version (SAP 2009, version 9.90, March 2010, revision 
October 2010). Published on behalf of DECC by BRE, Garston, Watford, 2009. 
Available from http://www.bre.co.uk/filelibrary/SAP/2009/SAP-2009_9-90.pdf

Department for Communities and Local Government. Approved Document L1A 
Conservation of fuel and power (New dwellings)). CLG, London, 2010. Available from 
www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments

Ene 3

Ene 4

Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers (CIBSE): Low Carbon Consultants 
and Energy Assessors, CIBSE Certification Ltd www.cibse.org

Department for Communities and Local Government. Approved Document L1A 
Conservation of fuel and power (New dwellings). CLG, London, 2010. Available from 
www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments

Department for Communities and Local Government. Building Regulations Approved 
Document F – Ventilation (2010) available from www.planningportal.gov.uk/
approveddocuments

Ene 5

Energy Saving Trust (EST). Helps you find energy efficient products and provides 
information on the EU energy efficiency labelling scheme.  
www.energysavingtrust.org.uk/cym/Home-improvements-and-products/Home-
appliances www.energysavingtrust.org.uk/cym/Home-improvements-and-products/
About-Energy-Saving-Recommended-products/Other-energy-labels

Energy Saving Trust’s Energy Saving Recommended scheme http://www.
energysavingtrust.org.uk/business/Business/Energy-Saving-Trust-Recommended

Ene 6

British Standard BS 5266: Emergency Lighting. BSI, London, 2008. 

Department for Communities and Local Government. Approved Document L1A 
Conservation of fuel and power (New dwellings). CLG, London, 2010. Available from 
www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments

Department for Communities and Local Government. Building Regulations Approved 
Document F – Ventilation (2010) available from www.planningportal.gov.uk/
approveddocuments

http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments
http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments
http://www.cibse.org
http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments
http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments
http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments
http://www.energysavingtrust.org.uk/cym/Home-improvements-and-products/About-Energy-Saving-Recommended-products/Other-energy-labels
http://www.energysavingtrust.org.uk/cym/Home-improvements-and-products/About-Energy-Saving-Recommended-products/Other-energy-labels
http://www.energysavingtrust.org.uk/business/Business/Energy-Saving-Trust-Recommended
http://www.energysavingtrust.org.uk/business/Business/Energy-Saving-Trust-Recommended
http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments
http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments
http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments




272  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Annex

Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers (CIBSE). LG9, Lighting for 
Communal Residential Buildings. CIBSE, London, 1997. 

Ene 7

BRE. The Government’s Standard Assessment Procedure for energy rating of 
dwellings March 2010 Version (SAP 2009, version 9.90, March 2010, revision 
October 2010). Published on behalf of DECC by BRE, Garston, Watford, 2009. 
Available from http://www.bre.co.uk/filelibrary/SAP/2009/SAP-2009_9-90.pdf

Department for Communities and Local Government. Approved Document L1A 
Conservation of fuel and power (New dwellings). CLG, London, 2010. Available from 
www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments

Department for Communities and Local Government. Building Regulations Approved 
Document F – Ventilation (2010) available from www.planningportal.gov.uk/
approveddocuments

European Parliament. Directive 2009/28/EC of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of 23 April 2009 on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable 
sources and amending and subsequently repealing Directives 2001/77/EC and 
2003/30/EC.

Available from http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2009:140:0
016:0062:EN:PDF

Microgeneration Certification Scheme (MCS) information available from;  
www.microgenerationcertification.org

Ene 8

Architectural Press. New Metric Handbook – Planning and Design Data. Architectural 
Press, Oxford, 2007.

British Standard BS 3621: Thief-resistant lock assembly – Key egress. BSI, London, 
2007. 

www.soldsecure.com

Wat 1

The Water Efficiency Calculator for New Dwellings, Communities and Local 
Government. September 2009. Available from http://www.communities.gov.uk/
publications/planningandbuilding/watercalculator

British Standard EN 997: WC pans and WC suites with integral trap. BSI, London, 
2003.

British Standard BS EN 12056-3: Gravity drainage inside buildings – Roof drainage, 
layout and calculations. BSI, London, 2000. 

http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments
http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments
http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments
http://www.soldsecure.com
http://www.communities.gov.uk/publications/planningandbuilding/watercalculator
http://www.communities.gov.uk/publications/planningandbuilding/watercalculator




Annex 2: References  |  273


Annex

British Standard BS 8515: Rainwater Harvesting Systems – Code of Practice. BSI, 
London, 2009. 

BSRIA Technical Note TN 7/2001. Available at  
 https://infonet.bsria.co.uk/bookshop/books/rainwater-and-greywater-in-buildings-
project-report-and-case-studies-tn-72001/?v=302&search=TN+7%2F2001

CIBSE TM13: Minimising the risk of Legionnaire’s disease. 2002

CIRIA Publication C539: Rainwater and Greywater Use in Buildings – Best Practice 
Guidance. 2001

EN200: Sanitary tapware. General technical specifications. 2008

EN1112: Sanitary tapware. General technical specifications. 2008

HSE. Approved Code of Practice and Guidance L8. 1999

The Meteorological Office (incl. figures for UK rainfall) http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/

Water efficiency in new homes, an introductory guide for housebuilders. NHBC 
Foundation, 2009

Mat 1

The Green Guide to Specification. Available from www.thegreenguide.org.uk

The Green Guide Calculator http://www.bre.co.uk/greenguide/calculator/page.
jsp?id=2071

Mat 2 and Mat 3

Arena Network & Groundwork Wales, 2006, Green Dragon Environmental Standard® 
2006 Requirements. Available from www.greendragonems.com

BES6001:2008 Issue 1 Framework Standard for the Responsible Sourcing of 
Construction Products, BRE Global, 2008.

British Standard BS 8555: Environmental management systems – Guide to the phased 
implementation of an environmental management system including the use of 
environmental performance evaluation. BSI, London, 2003

Briefing Sheets – The UK’s Footprint: The UK Timber Industry and its Impact on the 
World’s Forest. Friends of the Earth, 2000

Canadian Standards Association. www.csa.ca

Central Point of Expertise on Timber (CPET). www.proforest.net/cpet 

Central Point of Expertise on Timber. Evaluation of Category A Evidence – Review of 
forest certification schemes – Results. December 2006 

Certification of Forest Products. BRE, 1999

http://www.greendragonems.com




274  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Annex

Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora 
(CITES). www.cites.org 

Companies Act 1985

EU Eco-Management and Audit Scheme (EMAS). www.emas.org.uk/aboutemas/
mainframe.htm

EU Forest Law Enforcement, Governance and Trade (FLEGT) Action Plan. http://
europa.eu.int

FERN – European NGO campaigning for forests. www.fern.org

Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) www.fsc.org/en/

Forests Forever Campaign. www.forestsforever.org.uk

Green Book Live www.greenbooklive.com

Greenpeace Ancient Forest Campaign. www.greenpeace.org.uk

International Organization for Standardization (ISO), ISO 14001. Available at  
www.iso14000-iso14001-environmental-management.com

ProForest. www.ProForest.net

Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certification Schemes (PEFC). www.pefc.


org/


Scottish Procurement Policy Note (SPPN-09): Procurement of Timber and Timber 
Products. Scottish Procurement Directorate, 2005

Société Générale de Surveillance (SGS) timber tracking programme. www.sgs.com

Sustainable Forestry Initiative (SFI). www.sfiprogram.org

The Environment in Your Pocket. DEFRA, London, 2001

Malaysian Timber Certification Council (MTCC). www.mtcc.com.my 

The Forest Trust (TFT). www.tropicalforesttrust.com

UK Government Timber Procurement Policy. Definition of Legal and sustainable for 
timber procurement. Second edition. CPET, 2006

UK Woodland Assurance Scheme. www.forestry.gov.uk/ukwas

Wood for Good. www.woodforgood.com

WRAP. Calculating and declaring recycled content in construction products: Rules of 
Thumb Guide. WRAP, February 2008

WWF. www.panda.org

http://www.emas.org.uk/aboutemas/mainframe.htm
http://www.emas.org.uk/aboutemas/mainframe.htm
http://www.fsc.org/en/
http://www.greenpeace.org.uk
http://www.pefc.org/
http://www.pefc.org/
http://www.forestry.gov.uk/ukwas
http://www.panda.org




Annex 2: References  |  275


Annex

Sur 1

BRE Digest 365 – Soakaway design 1991 (BRE)

BS EN 752:2008 – Drain and sewer systems outside buildings 

Building Greener – Guidance on the use of green roofs, green walls and 
complementary features on buildings, C644, CIRIA (2007)

Centre for ecology and hydrology. Flood estimation handbook. 5 Volumes. National 
Environmental Research Council. ISBN 0 94854094X. 1999. Available from www.nwl.
ac.uk

CIRIA SUDS information http://www.ciria.org/suds/ 

DEFRA / Environment Agency. Preliminary rainfall runoff management for 
developments. Flood and Coastal Defence R&D Programme. R&D Technical Report 
W5-074/A/TR/1. Contractor HR Wallingford. (2005).

Designing for exceedance in urban drainage – good practice, C635, CIRIA (2006)

Environment Agency Flood information http://www.environment-agency.gov.uk/
subjects/flood/ 

Environment Agency website www.environment-agency.gov.uk

Environment Agency website: Your environment > Environmental Facts and Figures > 
Climate > Flooding. See www.environment-agency.gov.uk

Foresight Future Flooding website: Previous Projects > Flood and Coastal Defence > 
Index. See www.foresight.gov.uk 

Lancaster JW, Preene M, and Marshall. Development and flood risk – guidance for 
the construction industry. CIRIA Report C624. CIRIA, London. 2004. Available from 
www.ciriabooks.com

Marshall DCW and Bayliss AC. Flood estimation for small catchments. IOH Report 
No.124. Institute of hydrology, Wallingford (1994). Currently out of print. Available 
to download from http://www.ceh.ac.uk/products/publications/documents/
IH124FLOODESTIMATIONSMALLCATCHMENTS.PDF

Planning and Flood Risk, Planning Policy Statement 15 (PPS15), Department of the 
Environment Northern Ireland, Planning Service (2006) 

PPS 25 (Planning Policy Statement 25), “Development and flood risk”, ODPM (2006)

Preliminary rainfall runoff management for developments, EA/DEFRA, 2007

Technical Advice Note (TAN) 15: Development and Flood Risk, Welsh Assembly 
Government (2004)

The Met Office (incl. figures for UK rainfall) www.metoffice.gov.uk 




276  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Annex

The SUDS Manual – 2007 (CIRIA C697) This replaces C522 and includes revised and 
rationalised elements of C523 and C609

Town and Country Planning Act 1990

Water Industry Act 1991

Sur 2

See applicable references in Sur 1

BS EN 752:2008 – Drain and sewer systems outside buildings

Environment Agency Flood information http://www.environment-agency.gov.uk/
subjects/flood/ 

Environment Agency website www.environment-agency.gov.uk/

PPS 25 (Planning Policy Statement 25), “Development and flood risk”, ODPM (2006)

Technical Advice Note (TAN) 15: Development and Flood Risk, Welsh Assembly 
Government (2004)

Was 1

British Standard BS 8300: Design of buildings and their approaches to meet the needs 
of disabled people – Code of practice. BSI, London, 2009

British Standard BS 5906: Code of Practice for Storage and On-Site Treatment of Solid 
Waste from Buildings. BSI, London, 2005

British Standards Institution. Design of accessible housing – Lifetime home – Code of 
practice. Draft for Development DD 266. BSI, London, 2007

British Standard BS 5709: Gaps, gates and stiles. Specification. BSI, London, 2006

British Standard BS1703: Refuse chutes and hoppers specification. BSI, London, 2005

Building Regulations Part M and Approved Document M – Access to and use of 
Buildings (2004 Edition). Communities and Local Government, London, 2006. 
Available from http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/england/government/buildingregs/
technicalguidance/bcapproveddocumentslist/

BRE Digest 505. Access to Building. BRE, 2008 

Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment (CABE). The principles of 
inclusive design. (They include you.) CABE, 2006. Available from www.cabe.org.uk 

Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment (CABE). Homes for our old 
age. Independent living by design. CABE, 2009. Available from www.cabe.org.uk

http://www.cabe.org.uk




Annex 2: References  |  277


Annex

Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment (CABE). Inclusion by design 
Equality, diversity and the built environment. CABE, 2008. Available from www.cabe.
org.uk

Building Regulations Approved Document H: Drainage and Waste Disposal. (2002 
Edition), Communities and Local Government, London, 2006. Available from http://
www.planningportal.gov.uk/england/government/buildingregs/technicalguidance/
bcapproveddocumentslist/

Disability Discrimination Act, 1995

Disability Equality Duty, 2006

Environmental Protection Act, 1991

Household Waste Recycling Act, 2003 

Waste Strategy for England (2007). Available from http://www.defra.gov.uk/
environment/waste/strategy/incentives/

Was 2

BRE: SMARTWaste Plan (Site waste management planning tool), SMARTStart, waste 
benchmarks/EPIs and guidance: Reduction of Site Construction Waste, Recycling and 
Reuse of materials. A Site Guide and a Project Management Guide. Available from 
www.smartwaste.co.uk

BREMAP - geographical information system of waste management facilities. www.
bremap.co.uk 

Constructing Excellence. Annual benchmarks for KPIs. www.constructingexcellence.
org.uk 

DEFRA (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs). Non Statutory 
Guidance for Site Waste Management Plans. Available from www.defra.gov.uk/
constructionwaste

Environment Agency. Technical guidance available from www.environment-agency.
gov.uk/subjects/waste

Envirowise GG493: Saving money and raw materials by reducing waste in 
construction: case studies. Available from www.envirowise.gov.uk

Envirowise GG642: An Introduction to Site Waste Management Plans. Available from 
www.envirowise.gov.uk 

European Waste Catalogue. Available from http://www.environment-agency.gov.uk/
business/topics/waste/31873.aspx

Site Waste Management Plans, Guidance for Construction Contractors and Clients. 
Voluntary Code of Practice. DTI, 2004 

http://www.cabe.org.uk
http://www.cabe.org.uk




278  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Annex

DEFRA (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs). Waste Strategy for 
England 2007. Available from http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/waste/strategy/
incentives/

Department for Communities and Local Government. Approved Document L1A 
Conservation of fuel and power (New dwellings). CLG, London, 2010. Available from 
www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments 

Department for Communities and Local Government. Building Regulations Approved 
Document F – Ventilation (2010) available from www.planningportal.gov.uk/
approveddocuments

WRAP: SWMP templates for standard, good and best practice. Details and 
registration for download available from: www.wrap.org.uk/construction

WRAP: The requirements suite for setting SWMPs early within projects (client 
summary and waste minimisation and management guidance for delivering on the 
requirements). Available from www.wrap.org.uk/construction

Was 3

British Standard BS 8300: Design of buildings and their approaches to meet the needs 
of disabled people – Code of practice. BSI, London, 2001

British Standard BS 5709: Gaps, gates and stiles. Specification. BSI, London, 2006

British Standard BS 1703. Refuse chutes and hoppers. Specification. BSI, London, 


2005


British Standard BS 5906. Code of Practice for Storage and On-Site Treatment of Solid 
Waste from Buildings. BSI, London, 2005

Building Regulations Part M and Approved Document M – Access to and use of 
Buildings (2004 Edition). Communities and Local Government, London, 2006. 
Available from http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/england/government/buildingregs/
technicalguidance/bcapproveddocumentslist/

Disability Discrimination Act, 1995

The Animal By-Products Regulations 2005, Regulation (EC) No 1774/2002

DEFRA composting website. http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/waste/topics/
compost/index.htm

DEFRA. Guidance on the treatment in approved composting or biogas plants of 
Animal by-Products and catering waste. Version 8, September 2008. Available from 
http://www.defra.gov.uk/foodfarm/byproducts/documents/compost_guidance.pdf

Pol 2

British Standards EN 297:1994. A1:1995, A2:1996, A3:1996, A5:1998 and A6:2003 
Gas-fired central heating boilers, page 42, table 14, section 3.6.2 

http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments
http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments
http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments
http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/england/government/buildingregs/technicalguidance/bcapproveddocumentslist/
http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/england/government/buildingregs/technicalguidance/bcapproveddocumentslist/
http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/waste/topics/compost/index.htm
http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/waste/topics/compost/index.htm




Annex 2: References  |  279


Annex

Hea 1

Building Research Establishment. BRE IP 23/93: Measuring daylight. BRE, 1993

British Standard BS 8206-2. Lighting for buildings. Code of practice for daylighting. 
BSI, London, 2008 

Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers (CIBSE). Lighting Guide 10: 
Daylighting and window design. CIBSE, London,1999

P.J. Littlefair, Site layout planning for daylight and sunlight: a guide to good practice. 


1998


Building Research Establishment. BRE IP4/92: Site layout for sunlight and solar gain. 
BRE, 1992 

Hea 2

Association of Noise Consultants (ANC). www.association-of-noise-consultants.co.uk

British Standard BS 8233: Sound insulation and noise reduction for buildings – 
Code of practice. BSI, London,199Communities and Local Government. Building 
Regulations Approved Document E – Resistance to the passage of sound. (2003 
edition incorporating 2004 amendments). Communities and Local Government, 
London, 2006. Available from http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/england/
government/buildingregs/technicalguidance/bcapproveddocumentslist/

Institute of Acoustics. www.ioa.org.uk

Robust Details Limited. www.robustdetails.com 

United Kingdom Accreditation Service (UKAS). www.ukas.com 

Hea 3

Architectural Press. New Metric Handbook – Planning and Design Data, Section 2.09. 
Oxford 2007. 

British Standard BS 8300: Design of buildings and their approaches to meet the needs 
of disabled people – Code of practice. BSI, London, 2001

Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment (CABE). The Value of Public 
Space. 2004. Available at www.cabe.org.uk

Building Regulations Part M and Approved Document M – Access to and use of 
Buildings (2004 Edition). Communities and Local Government, London, 2006. 
Available from http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/england/government/buildingregs/
technicalguidance/bcapproveddocumentslist/

Hea 4

Habinteg Housing Association. www.habinteg.org.uk/

http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/england/government/buildingregs/technicalguidance/bcapproveddocumentslist/
http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/england/government/buildingregs/technicalguidance/bcapproveddocumentslist/
http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/england/government/buildingregs/technicalguidance/bcapproveddocumentslist/




280  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Annex

Joseph Rowntree Foundation. www.jrf.org.uk

Lifetime Homes. 2010. Available from http://www.lifetimehomes.org.uk/pages/
revised-design-criteria.html 

Lifetime Home Standards. www.lifetimehomes.org.uk/codeassessors 

Meeting Part M and Designing Lifetime Homes Carroll, C.; Cowans, 
J.; Darton, D. (eds). Available from http://www.jrf.org.uk/publications/
meeting-part-m-and-designing-lifetime-homes

Man 1

Department for Communities and Local Government. Approved Document L1A 
Conservation of fuel and power (New dwellings). CLG, London, 2010. Available from 
www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments 

Department for Communities and Local Government. Building Regulations Approved 
Document F – Ventilation (2010) available from www.planningportal.gov.uk/
approveddocuments

Energy Performance Certificate (EPC). www.communities.gov.uk 

Energy Saving Trust. www.energysavingtrust.org.uk 

Info4local. One-stop information gateway for local public services.  
www.info4local.gov.uk 

Sustrans. www.sustrans.org.uk

WRAP – The Waste and Resource Action Plan. www.wrap.org.uk 

Man 2

Considerate Constructors Scheme. www.ccscheme.org.uk

Considerate Contractor Scheme. http://www.cityoflondon.gov.uk/Corporation/LGNL_
Services/Business/Business_support_and_advice/considerate_contractor_scheme.
htm#gold

Rethinking Construction. Available from www.constructingexcellence.org.uk/pdf/
rethinking%20construction/rethinking_construction_report.pdf 

Man 3

Construction Site Transport., April 2003. Measures for traffic movements and 
distances, BRE and DTI. www.bre.co.uk/pdf/constructiontraffic.pdf 

Control of Dust from Construction and Demolition Activities. BRE, February 2003 
Pollution Control Guide Parts 1–5, BRE, 2003 

UK Construction Industry Key Performance Indicators. www.kpizone.com 

http://www.jrf.org.uk
http://www.jrf.org.uk
http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments
http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments
http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/approveddocuments
http://www.constructingexcellence.org.uk/pdf/rethinking construction/rethinking_construction_report.pdf
http://www.constructingexcellence.org.uk/pdf/rethinking construction/rethinking_construction_report.pdf




Annex 2: References  |  281


Annex

Environment Agency. www.environment-agency.gov.uk 

Guidelines for Company Reporting on Greenhouse Gas Emissions, Annex 6 Transport 
Conversion Tables. DEFRA, 2002, annexes updated July 2005. 

NAEI (Netcen, 2005) based on data from DfT combined with factors from TRL as 
functions of average speed of vehicle derived from test data under real world testing 
cycles.

National Atmospheric Emissions Inventory for 2003. Developed by Netcen, 2005 

Pollution Prevention Guideline PPG 1: General guide to the prevention of pollution. 
Environment Agency. Available from www.environment-agency.gov.uk 

Pollution Prevention Guideline PPG 5: Works and maintenance in or near water. 
Environment Agency. Available from www.environment-agency.gov.uk 

Pollution Prevention Guideline PPG 6: Working at demolition and construction sites. 
Environment Agency. Available from www.environment-agency.gov.uk/business/
topics/pollution/39083.aspx

Sustainability Action Plan (or Achieving Sustainability in Construction 
Procurement); Government Construction Client’s Panel (GCCP), Office of 
Government Commerce (OGC). Available from www.ogc.gov.uk/documents/
AchievingSustainabilityConstructionProcurement.pdf

Man 4

BS 3621: 2004 Thief resistant lock assemblies - Key egress

BS 5588 Part 1:1990 Fire precautions in the design, construction and use of buildings. 
Code of practice for residential buildings

BS 7950:1997 Specification for enhanced security performance of windows for 
domestic applications

PAS 24:2007 Enhanced security performance requirements for door assemblies. 
Single and double leaf, hinged external door assemblies to dwellings 

Safer Places – The Planning System & Crime Prevention. ODPM. Available from www.
communities.gov.uk 

Secured by Design – New Homes 2009 Available from www.securedbydesign.com/
pdfs/newHomes2009.pdf

Secured by Design. www.securedbydesign.com 

Eco 1

Association of Wildlife Trust Consultancies (AWTC) – Please contact the current 
chairman of the Association who will provide details of your local advisor. 
www.awtc.co.uk/contact.htm

http://publications.environment-agency.gov.uk/pdf/PMHO1107BNKG-e-e.pdf?lang=_e




282  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Annex

Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management (CIWEM),15 John 
Street, London, WC1N 2EB. Tel: 020 78313110 Fax: 020 74054967 Email: admin@
ciwem.org www.ciwem.org

Institute of Environmental Management and Assessment (IEMA), St Nicholas House, 
70 Newport, Lincoln, LN1 3DP. Tel 01522 540069. Fax 01522 540090  
E-mail info@iema.net www.iema.net

The Institute of Ecology and Environmental Management (IEEM), 45 Southgate Street, 
Winchester, Hampshire SO23 9EH. www.ieem.co.uk

Landscape Institute (LI) – The Chartered Institute of the UK for Landscape Architects, 
33 Great Portland Street, W1W 8QG http://www.landscapeinstitute.org/

Eco 3

Pollution Prevention Guideline PPG 5: Works and maintenance in or near water. 
Environment Agency. Available from www.environment-agency.gov.uk 

Eco 4

Construction Industry Key Performance Indicators. www.kpizone.com 

Department of the Environment, Transport and the Regions. Digest of Environmental 
Statistics, No 20. DEFRA, 1998

http://publications.environment-agency.gov.uk/pdf/PMHO1107BNKG-e-e.pdf?lang=_e




Annex 3: Sources of further information  |  283


Annex

Annex 3:  Sources of further 
information

Ene 4

Good Practice Guide 268: Energy efficient ventilation of dwellings - a guide for 
specifiers. 2006. Available from www.feta.co.uk/rva/downloads/GPG268%20-%20
Energy%20efficient%20ventilation%20in%20dwellings.pdf 

Ene 5

Energy Saving Trust (EST). www.energysavingtrust.org.uk

Ene 6

Energy Efficiency Best Practice and Housing (EEBPH). 
www.est.org.uk/housingbuildings/professionals

Energy Saving Trust (EST). www.est.org.uk 

Secured by Design – Guidance for New Homes 2009, Section 2 Available from www.
securedbydesign.com/pdfs/newHomes2009.pdf

The Carbon Trust. www.thecarbontrust.co.uk/energy/pages/home.asp 

Ene 7

Quality Assurance for Combined Heat and Power www.chpqa.com

Ene 8

Cycling England. National body charged with co-ordinating the development of 
cycling across England. Includes design guidance, examples, best practice etc.  
www.cyclingengland.co.uk 

Cyclists Touring Club (CTC). The UK’s national cyclist’s organisation. www.ctc.org.uk 

Communities and Local Government. Better places to live by design: a companion 
guide to PPG3. 2001 

Planning guidance and advice. www.communities.gov.uk 

London Cycling Campaign. www.lcc.org.uk 

Sustrans, Cycle Parking Information Sheet FF37. www.sustrans.org.uk

Sustrans, National Cycle Routes. www.sustrans.org.uk 




284  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Annex

Ene 9

Communities and Local Government. Better places to live by design: a companion 
guide to PPG3. 2001 

Department for Communities and Local Government. www.communities.gov.uk  
Planning Policy Guidance Note 08: Telecommunications. 2001 
Planning Policy Guidance Note 13: Transport. 2002

Wat 1

Building Research Establishment. BRE IP 1/04: Drainage design for buildings with 
reduced water use. BRE

Environment Agency National Water Demand Management Centre. Conserving 
Water in Buildings. 2007, available at http://publications.environment-agency.gov.uk/
pdf/GEHO1107BNJR-E-E.pdf 

Environment Agency. Assessing The Cost Of Compliance With The Code For 
Sustainable Homes. WRc Ref: UC7231

Statutory Instruments 1999 No. 1148, Water Supply, (Water Fittings) Regulations

Market Transformation Programme (MTP), BN DW BATHS: Bath design and efficiency. 
Briefing Note relating to Policy Scenario Objectives in Policy Brief 

Market Transformation Programme (MTP), BNWAT02: Domestic baths specification 
and stock model information 

Office of the Deputy Prime Minister (ODPM). Buildings Regulations Approved 
Document H: Drainage and waste disposal. 2002 

Water Regulations Advisory Scheme. Information and Guidance Note 09-02-04: 
Reclaimed Water Systems. Information about Installing, Modifying or Maintaining 
Reclaimed Water Systems. 1999 Available at http://www.wras.co.uk/pdf_files/
IGN%209-02-04%20Reclaimed.pdf

Wat 2

UK Rainwater Harvesting Association (UKRHA). www.ukrha.org 

Water UK. www.water.org.uk 

Mat 1

The Green Guide to Specification. www.thegreenguide.org.uk

Mat 2 and Mat 3

Arena Network & Groundwork Wales. Green Dragon Environmental Standard® 2006 
Requirements. 2006. Available from www.greendragonems.com/




Annex 3: Sources of further information  |  285


Annex

British Standard BS 8555: Environmental management systems – Guide to the phased 
implementation of an environmental management system including the use of 
environmental performance evaluation. BSI, London, 2003

Canadian Standards Association. www.csa.ca

Central Point of Expertise on Timber (CPET). http://www.cpet.org.uk/

Central Point of Expertise on Timber. Evaluation of Category A Evidence – Review of 
forest certification schemes – Results. December 2008 

Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora 
(CITES). www.cites.org 

EU Eco-Management and Audit Scheme (EMAS). (www.emas.org.uk/aboutemas/
mainframe.htm)

EU Forest Law Enforcement, Governance and Trade (FLEGT) Action Plan. http://
ec.europa.eu/environment/forests/flegt.htm

FERN – European NGO campaigning for forests. www.fern.org 

Forest Stewardship Council (FSC). www.fsc.org/en

Greenpeace Ancient Forest Campaign. www.greenpeace.org.uk

International Organization for Standardization (ISO). ISO 14001. Available at  
www.iso14000-iso14001-environmental-management.com/

ProForest. www.ProForest.net

Programme of Endorsement of Forest Certification Schemes (PEFC). www.pefc.org/

Scottish Procurement Policy Note SPPN-09: Procurement of Timber and Timber 
Products. Scottish Procurement Directorate, 2005

Société Générale de Surveillance (SGS) timber tracking programme. www.sgs.com

Sustainable Forestry Initiative (SFI). www.sfiprogram.org

The Environment in Your Pocket, DEFRA, 2001

Malaysian Timber Certification Council (MTCC). www.mtcc.com.my 

The Forest Trust (TFT) available at www.tropicalforesttrust.com/

UK Government Timber Procurement Policy. Definition of Legal and Sustainable for 
Timber Procurement. Second edition, CPET, 2006

UK Woodland Assurance Scheme. www.forestry.gov.uk/ukwas

Wood for Good. www.woodforgood.com

http://www.emas.org.uk/aboutemas/mainframe.htm
http://www.emas.org.uk/aboutemas/mainframe.htm
http://www.fern.org
http://www.fsc.org/en/
http://www.greenpeace.org.uk
file:///Users/iMac/Desktop/10045-Code%20for%20sustainable%20homes/Word%20files/../../../../../Local Settings/Temporary Internet Files/Local Settings/Temporary Internet Files/Content.Outlook/6CKKNSBZ/www.pefc.org/
http://www.sfiprogram.org/
file:///Users/iMac/Desktop/10045-Code%20for%20sustainable%20homes/Word%20files/../../../../../Local Settings/Temporary Internet Files/Local Settings/Temporary Internet Files/Content.Outlook/6CKKNSBZ/www.tropicalforesttrust.com/
http://www.forestry.gov.uk/ukwas




286  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Annex

WRAP. Calculating and declaring recycled content in construction products: Rules of 
Thumb Guide. WRAP, February 2008

WWF. www.panda.org

Sur 1

BRE Digest 365 – Soakaway design 2007 (BRE)

BS EN 752:2008 – Drain and sewer systems outside buildings

The Met Office (incl. figures for UK rainfall) www.met-office.gov.uk 

The SUDS Manual – 2007 (CIRIA C697) This replaces C522 and includes revised and 
rationalised elements of C523 and C609.

Sur 2

Approved Document H Drainage and waste Disposal ODPM (2002)

BRE – Repairing flooded buildings: an insurance industry guide to investigation and 
repair of flood damage to housing and small businesses

BRE Digest 365, “Soakaway design”, Building Research Establishment (2007).
BRE Good Repair Guide 11, “Repairing Flood Damage” Part 1–4, CRC Ltd, (1997)

BS EN 12056-3: 2000, “Gravity drainage inside buildings – Part 3: Roof drainage, 
layout and calculation”, British Standard Institute (2000)

CIRIA – Flood repair standards for buildings, 2005 

CIRIA – New development and flood risk, 2005 

DEFRA / Environment Agency. Preliminary rainfall runoff management for 
developments. Flood and Coastal Defence R&D Programme. R&D Technical Report 
W5-074/A/TR/1. Contractor HR Wallingford. (2005).

Development and flood risk, guidance for the construction industry, Lancaster et. al, 
CIRIA (2004). 

ODPM. PPS 25 (Planning Policy Statement 25), “Development and flood risk”  
A practice guide, (2006). Available from www.communities.gov.uk

CIRIA – Standards for the repair of buildings following floods -  C632, 2005 (http://
www.ciria.org/service/bookshop/core/orders/product.aspx?prodid=112) 

CIRIA - Development and Flood Risk: Guidance for the Construction Industry - C624 
(2004)

Was 1

Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA). www.defra.gov.uk/
environment/waste

http://www.panda.org
http://www.ciria.org/service/bookshop/core/orders/product.aspx?prodid=112
http://www.ciria.org/service/bookshop/core/orders/product.aspx?prodid=112




Annex 3: Sources of further information  |  287


Annex

Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment (CABE). www.cabe.org.uk

Recycle Now. www.recyclenow.com 

WRAP (Waste and Resources Action Programme). www.wrap.org.uk 

Was 3

Community Composting. www.communitycompost.org 

Community Recycling Network UK. www.crn.org.uk (further information to set up 
community composting).

Compost Information Sheet 2005: Composting and disposing of garden and kitchen 
waste. Available from www.wasteonline.org.uk 

Composting troubleshooting. www.compostguide.com 

Project: Growing with compost, which contains a technical guidance library on 
different subjects regarding community composting, at  
www.growingwithcompost.org

Recycle Now. www.recyclenow.com 

Waste and Resources Action Programme (WRAP). www.wrap.org.uk 

Pol 1

Guidance on EC Regulation No 2037/2000 on substances that deplete the ozone 
layer. October 2000, DTI. Available from http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/+/
http://www.berr.gov.uk/sectors/sustainability/ods/page29091.html

National Atmospheric Emissions Inventory, UK Emissions of Air Pollutants 1970–2006. 
DEFRA, 2008 

IPCC/TEAP Special Report: Safeguarding the Ozone Layer and the Global Climate 
System. 2005

Pol 2

Nitrogen Dioxide in the United Kingdom. DEFRA, (2004) Summary report also 
available http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/quality/air/airquality/publications/
nitrogen-dioxide/nd-summary.pdf

Hea 1

BR 288. Designing buildings for daylight. James Bell and Bill Burt, 1995 

Man 1

Coach Information/Enquiries. www.nationalexpress.co.uk 

General Travel Information. www.traveline.org.uk 

file:///Users/iMac/Desktop/10045-Code%20for%20sustainable%20homes/Word%20files/../../../../../Local Settings/Temporary Internet Files/Local Settings/Temporary Internet Files/Content.Outlook/6CKKNSBZ/from




288  |  Code for Sustainable Homes


Annex

Rail Information/Enquiries. www.nationalrail.co.uk 

Recycle Now. www.recyclenow.com 

UK water companies. www.water.org.uk 

WRAP Waste and Resources Action Programme www.wrap.org.uk 

Man 2

Considerate Builders Scheme. www.westminster.gov.uk/Business/
businessandstreettradinglicences/highways/considerate_builders.cfm

Constructing Excellence. www.constructingexcellence.org.uk

Man 3

COPERT II: Computer programme to Calculate Emissions from Road Transport – 
Methodology and Emissions Factors. Technical Report No 6, 1999. 

Good Practice Guide GPG 273: Computerised Routing and Scheduling for Efficient 
Logistics 

NERA Report on lorry track and environmental costs –Available at http://webarchive.
nationalarchives.gov.uk/+/http://www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/roads/environment/nera/ 

The Carbon Trust. www.thecarbontrust.co.uk/energy 

Man 4

British Standards Online. http://www.bsigroup.com/

British Standard BS 7950: Specification for enhanced security performance of 
windows for domestic applications. BSI, London, 1997

Guide to Security Standards for Doors and Windows (May 2002) prepared with the 
support of LPCB, Secured by Design and BSIA. Available from  
www.securedbydesign.com/pdfs/standards_doors_2002.pdf 

PAS 24:2007 Enhanced security performance requirements for door assemblies. 
Single and double leaf, hinged external door assemblies to dwellings. 

Eco 1

British Standard BS 5837:Trees in relation to construction. BSI, London, 2005. 
Available from http://www.bsigroup.com/

CIRIA C502: Environmental Good Practice on Site. Available from www.ciria.org.uk 

CIRIA C567: Working with Wildlife Site Guide. Available from www.ciria.org.uk 

Environment Agency. www.environment-agency.gov.uk 

http://www.ihsti.com/CIS/Search.aspx?AuthCode=2CFDBA4&sc=pg%3dUK%3bso%3dtitsort.dat%3bfq%3d13%2c0%2c%2c%22x+PAS+x%22%2c%2c1&page=browse




Annex 3: Sources of further information  |  289


Annex

The Hedgerows Regulations. London: Office of Public Sector Information (formerly 
The Stationery Office). London, 1997 

UK Biodiversity Action Plan. www.ukbap.org.uk 

Eco 2

Biodiversity By Design. TCPA, 2004 

British Standard BS5837: Trees in relation to construction. BSI, London, 2005. 
Available from www.bsigroup.com 

CIRIA C502: Environmental good practice on site. Available from www.ciria.org.uk 

CIRIA C567: Working with wildlife site guide. Available from ww.ciria.org.uk 

Environment Agency. www.environment-agency.gov.uk

Grant G., Green Roofs and Facades. BRE, 2006 

Eco 3

CIRIA C502: Environmental good practice on site. Available from www.ciria.org.uk 

CIRIA C567: Working with wildlife site guide. CIRIA, 2005. Available from www.ciria.
org.uk 

Pollution Prevention Guideline PPG06: Working at construction and demolition sites. 
Environment Agency. Available from www.environment-agency.gov.uk 

UK Biodiversity Action Plan. www.ukbap.org.uk

Eco 4

CIRIA C644: Building greener – Guidance on the use of green roofs, green walls and 
complementary features on buildings. CIRIA, 2007

Countryside Survey 2000. www.cs2000.org.uk 

Environment Agency. www.environment-agency.gov.uk 

Government Planning Department. www.communities.gov.uk 

Eco 5

CIRIA. www.ciria.org.uk 

Government Planning Department. www.communities.gov.uk

http://www.environment-agency.gov.uk




Code for Sustainable Homes
Technical Guide
November 2010

www.communities.gov.uk9 7 8 1 8 5 9 4 6 3 3 1 4

ISBN 978-1-85946-331-4

The previous version was published under  
ISBN: 978 1 85946 330 7

Further copies available from:

RIBA Publishing

15 Bonhill Street

London

EC2P 2EA

Tel: 020 7256 7222

Fax: 020 7374 2737

Email: sales@ribabookshops.com

Website: www.ribabookshops.com

Price: £40 
ISBN: 978 1 85946 331 4

The Code for Sustainable Homes provides a comprehensive measure of the 
sustainability of new homes, ensuring that sustainable homes deliver real 
improvements, in key areas such as carbon dioxide emissions and water use. 

This Technical Guide sets out the requirements for the Code and the process for 
achieving a Code assessment. It aims to make gaining a Code assessment as simple, 
transparent and rigorous as possible. It also aims to inspire confidence in Code 
assessors, home builders, product manufacturers and consumers. 

This new full-colour 2010 edition follows a recent wide-ranging Government 
consultation that sought views on updating and streamlining the Code, to take 
account of changes to Part L of the Building Regulations, and to resolve some 
problems that had arisen during its use.


Code fo




r Su

stain


able Homes Technical Guide November 2010

	Code for Sustainable Homes: Technical Guide. November 2010
	Acknowledgements
	Contents
	Preface
	1 Purpose of the Technical Guide
	1.1 Summary of the assessment system
	1.2 Weightings, credits and percentage points
	1.3 Calculating an assessment score
	1.4 Total percentage points score and resulting Code level

	2 Obtaining a Code rating – The Process
	2.1 Registering a site (before detailed designs are finished)
	2.2 Performing Code assessments
	2.3 Evidence Requirements
	2.4 Using the Schedule of Evidence Required
	2.5 Roles and Responsibilities
	2.6 Definitions of Terminology Used in the Evidence Requirements Tables
	2.7 Assessment Routes
	2.8 Certifying Code for Sustainable Homes assessments

	3 Keeping This Guide up to Date
	Organisations delivering the Code for Sustainable Homes
	Category 1: Energy and Carbon Dioxide Emissions
	Dwelling Emission Rate
	Fabric Energy Efficiency
	Assessment Criteria
	Energy Display Devices
	Drying Space
	Energy Labelled White Goods
	External Lighting
	Low and Zero Carbon Technologies
	Cycle Storage
	Home Office

	Category 2: Water
	Indoor water use
	External Water Use

	Category 3: Materials
	Environmental Impact of Materials
	Responsible Sourcing of Materials - Basic Building Elements
	Responsible Sourcing of Materials - Finishing Elements

	Category 4: Surface Water Run-off
	Management of Surface Water Run-off from Developments
	Flood Risk

	Category 5: Waste
	Storage of Non-recyclable Waste and Recyclable Household Waste
	Construction Site Waste Management
	Composting

	Category 6: Pollution
	Global Warming Potential (GWP) of Insulants
	NOx Emissions

	Category 7: Health & Well-being
	Daylighting
	Sound Insulation
	Private Space
	Lifetime Homes

	Category 8: Management
	Home User Guide
	Considerate Constructors Scheme
	Construction Site Impacts
	Security

	Category 9: Ecology
	Ecological Value of Site
	Ecological Enhancement
	Protection of Ecological Features
	Change in Ecological Value of Site
	Building Footprint

	Annex 1: Acronyms
	Annex 2: References
	Annex 3: Sources of further information




