



The Carbon Plan: Delivering our low carbon future




The Carbon Plan:


 

Delivering our
low carbon future 

December 2011


 

The Carbon Plan: 
Delivering our 
low carbon future
Presented to Parliament pursuant to  
Sections 12 and 14 of the Climate Change Act 2008
Amended 2nd December 2011 from the version laid before Parliament on 1st December 2011.

December 2011




© Crown copyright 2011


 

You may re-use this information (not including logos) free of


 

charge in any format or medium, under the terms of  the  

Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit  

http://www. nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/  

or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, 

London TW9 4DU, or e-mail: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.


 

Any enquiries regarding this document should be sent to us at 

Department of  Energy & Climate Change, 3 Whitehall Place,  

London SW1A 2AW.


 

This publication is available for download at  

www.official-publications.gov.uk and it is also available from  

our website at www.decc.gov.uk.


 

mailto:psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk
http://www.official-publications.gov.uk
http://www.decc.gov.uk
http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/




Contents


 

Foreword 1


 

Executive summary 3


 

Part 1: The Government’s approach to energy and climate change 13


 

Introduction 13


 

Our principles 14


 

The vision for 2050 15


 

2050 futures 16


 

Planning for the future 18


 

Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 21


 

Achieving carbon budgets 21


 

Buildings 29


 

Transport 47


 

Industry 59


 

Secure, low carbon electricity 69


 

Agriculture, forestry and land management 85


 

Waste and resource efficiency 93


 

Working with the EU and Devolved Administrations 100


 

Part 3: Delivering the fourth carbon budget 107


 

Scenarios to deliver the fourth carbon budget 107


 

Delivering non-traded sector emissions reductions 107


 

Delivering traded sector emissions reductions 110


 

Considerations for achieving the fourth carbon budget 111


 

Managing our performance 118


 

Annexes


 

A 2050 analytical annex 121


 

B Carbon budgets analytical annex 137


 

C Carbon Plan action summary 208


  1


Foreword
Even in these tough times, moving to a low carbon economy is the right thing to do, for our 
economy, our society and the planet. This plan sets out how Coalition Government policies put us 
on track to meet our long term commitments. The Green Deal will help cut energy bills, the Green 
Investment Bank will attract new investment, and our reforms to the electricity market will generate 
jobs in new low carbon industries. Climate change requires global action; every country needs to play 
its part. This Carbon Plan shows that the UK is prepared to govern in the long term interests of the 
country and build a coalition for change.

David Cameron 
Prime Minister

Nick Clegg 
Deputy Prime Minister

In June 2011, the Coalition Government enshrined in 
law a new commitment to halve greenhouse gas 
emissions, on 1990 levels, by the mid-2020s. This 
Carbon Plan sets out how we will meet this goal in a 
way that protects consumer bills and helps to attract 
new investment in low carbon infrastructure, 
industries and jobs.

By 2020, we will complete the ‘easy wins’ that have 
helped emissions to fall by a quarter since 1990. By 
insulating all remaining cavity walls and lofts, while 
continuing to roll out more efficient condensing 
boilers, we will cut the amount consumers spend  
on heating by around £2 billion a year. Having  
fallen by a quarter in the last decade, average  
new car emissions will fall by a further third in  
the next, as internal combustion engines continue  
to become more efficient. Emissions from power 
stations, already down a quarter since 1990, will fall 
a further 40%, with most existing coal-fired power 
stations closing.

Over the next decade, we must also prepare for 
the future. The 2020s will require a change of gear. 
Technologies that are being demonstrated or 
deployed on a small scale now will need to move 
towards mass deployment. By 2030, up to around a 
half of the heat used in our buildings may come 
from low carbon technologies such as air- or 
ground-source heat pumps. Electric or hydrogen 
fuel cell cars will help to reduce vehicle emissions to 
less than half today’s levels. New low carbon power 
stations – a mix of carbon capture and storage, 
renewables and nuclear power – will be built. In the 
2020s, we will run a technology race, with the 

least-cost technologies winning the largest market 
share. Before then, our aim is to help a range of 
technologies bring down their costs so they are 
ready to compete when the starting gun is fired.

The transition to a low carbon economy will require 
investment. But by insulating our homes better, and 
driving more fuel efficient cars, we will use less 
energy, offsetting the funding needed for low 
carbon energy. By investing in more diverse  
energy sources, we will be less vulnerable to fossil 
fuel price spikes. And by investing in industries that 
suit our geography and skills, such as offshore wind 
and carbon capture and storage, we will gain a 
long-term comparative advantage in industries with 
a big future. 

This plan shows that moving to a low carbon 
economy is practical, achievable and desirable. It will 
require investment in new ways of generating 
energy, not a sacrifice in living standards. But turning 
it into reality will require business, government and 
the public pulling in the same direction. We face big 
choices on infrastructure and investment. I hope 
over the next year this plan can help us to forge a 
new national consensus on our energy future.

Chris Huhne
Secretary of State for Energy and 
Climate Change


 3 

Executive summary


 

1. This plan sets out how the UK will achieve 
decarbonisation within the framework of our 
energy policy: to make the transition to a low 
carbon economy while maintaining energy security, 
and minimising costs to consumers, particularly 
those in poorer households. 

2. Emissions are down by a quarter since 1990.1 

Current policies put the UK on track to cut 
emissions by over a third, on 1990 levels, by 2020. 

In the next ten years, we will develop and deploy 
the technologies that will be needed to halve 
emissions in the 2020s. This will put the UK on a 
path towards an 80% reduction by 2050. 

3. By moving to a more efficient, low carbon and 
sustainable economy, the UK will become less 
reliant on imported fossil fuels and less exposed 
to higher and more volatile energy prices in 
the future. 

Box 1: The Climate Change Act 2008 and the carbon budget framework 

The Climate Change Act established a legally binding target to reduce the UK’s greenhouse gas 
emissions by at least 80% below base year levels by 2050, to be achieved through action at home and 
abroad.2 To drive progress and set the UK on a pathway towards this target, the Act introduced a 
system of carbon budgets which provide legally binding limits on the amount of emissions that may be 
produced in successive five-year periods, beginning in 2008. The first three carbon budgets were set in 
law in May 2009 and require emissions to be reduced by at least 34% below base year levels in 2020. 

The fourth carbon budget, covering the period 2023–27, was set in law in June 2011 and requires 
emissions to be reduced by 50% below 1990 levels.3 

This report sets out the proposals and policies for meeting the first four carbon budgets. 

First carbon budget 
(2008–12) 

Second carbon 
budget (2013–17) 

Third carbon 
budget (2018–22) 

Fourth carbon 
budget (2023–27) 

Carbon budget 
level (million tonnes 
carbon dioxide 
equivalent (MtCO


2e)) 


3,018 2,782 2,544 1,950 

Percentage 
reduction below 
base year levels 

23% 29% 35% 50% 

1 This figure includes the effect of emissions trading. UK territorial emissions have fallen by 28% over the same period.


 

2 The base year is 1990 for carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide and methane, and 1995 for hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons and sulphur hexafluoride.


 

3 To be reviewed in 2014 in light of EU Emissions Trading System cap.


 

4 Executive summary

Progress so far 
4. Our past record shows that progress is 
possible. Between 1990 and 2010 emissions from 
power stations fell by almost a quarter, as the 
‘dash for gas’ in the 1990s saw large numbers 
of coal-fired power stations replaced. In the last 
decade wind and other renewables have grown 
to the point that they now provide nearly a tenth 
of UK generating capacity. With nuclear power 
generating 16% of total UK electricity, a quarter of 
electricity generation is now low carbon. 

5. In buildings, emissions have fallen by 18%, 
despite the growth in population and housing. 
Regulation has required the introduction of new, 
more efficient condensing boilers, saving at least 
£800 million this year on energy bills. Eleven million
homes, 60% of all homes with cavity walls, have 
been fitted with cavity wall insulation. This will 
reduce the amount the UK spends on heating in 
2011 by £1.3 billion. 


 

6. In transport, emissions are roughly the same 
as they were in 1990. Emissions rose before 
2007 as the economy grew and transport 
demand increased, but have since fallen due to 
improvements in new car efficiency, an increased 
uptake of biofuels and, to a lesser extent, the 
recent economic downturn.

7. Since 1990 industrial output has grown at an 
average of 1% a year while emissions have fallen by 
46%. Industry has become more energy efficient 
and the UK’s industrial base has shifted towards 
higher value, more knowledge-intensive sectors.

8. Agricultural emissions have fallen by almost 
a third, due in part to more efficient farming 
practices, while the diversion of waste from 
landfill, as a result of the landfill tax, has cut waste 
emissions by more than two thirds. 

9. Government policies are already helping 
consumers. Our analysis predicts that average 
energy bills for domestic consumers will be 7.1% 
lower in 2020 than they would have been without 
policy interventions in place.

Vision
10. However, if we are to cut emissions by 80% by 
2050, there will have to be major changes in how 
we use and generate energy. Energy efficiency will 
have to increase dramatically across all sectors. 
The oil and gas used to drive cars, heat buildings 
and power industry will, in large part, need to be 
replaced by electricity, sustainable bioenergy, or 
hydrogen. Electricity will need to be decarbonised 
through renewable and nuclear power, and the 
use of carbon capture and storage (CCS). The 
electricity grid will be larger and smarter at 
balancing demand and supply. 

11. But there are some major uncertainties. 
How far can we reduce demand? Will sustainable 
biomass be scarce or abundant? To what extent 
will electrification occur across transport and 
heating? Will wind, CCS or nuclear be the cheapest 
method of generating large-scale low carbon 
electricity? How far can aviation, shipping, industry 
and agriculture be decarbonised? 

12. The sectoral plans in this document seek to 
steer a course through this uncertainty.

13. In the next decade, the UK will complete 
the installation of proven and cost effective 
technologies that are worth installing under all 
future scenarios. All cavity walls and lofts in homes, 
where practicable, are expected to be insulated 
by 2020. The fuel efficiency of internal combustion 
engine cars will improve dramatically, with CO


2 


emissions from new cars set to fall by around 
a third. Many of our existing coal-fired power 
stations will close, replaced primarily by gas and 
renewables. More efficient buildings and cars will 
cut fuel costs. More diverse sources of electricity 
will improve energy security and reduce exposure 
to fossil fuel imports and price spikes. 

14. The UK is not alone in taking action on energy 
efficiency. Japan has set a goal of improving its 
energy consumption efficiency from 2003 levels 
by at least 30% in 2030. The Swedish Government 
has proposed an energy efficiency target to reduce 
energy by 20% between 2008 and 2020.4

4 International Energy Agency (2009) Implementing Energy Efficiency Policies.




Executive summary 5 

15. Over the next decade the UK will also prepare 
for the future by demonstrating and deploying the 
key technologies needed to decarbonise power, 
buildings and road transport in the 2020s and 
beyond. Rather than picking a single winner, this 
plan sets out how the UK will develop a portfolio 
of technologies for each sector. This has two 
virtues. It will reduce the risk of depending on a 
single technology. And it will generate competition 
that will drive innovation and cost reduction. 

16. In electricity, the three parts to our portfolio 
are renewable power, nuclear power, and coal- and 
gas-fired power stations fitted with carbon capture 
and storage. In transport, ultra-low emission 
vehicles including fully electric, plug-in hybrid, 
and fuel cell powered cars are being developed. 
In buildings, the technologies will include air- or 
ground-source heat pumps, and using heat from 
power stations. Both of these are solutions proven 
by their use in other countries. 

17. During the 2020s, each of these technologies – 
low carbon electricity, low carbon cars and low 
carbon heating – will move towards mass roll-out. 
We estimate that between 40 and 70 gigawatts 
(GW) of new low carbon power will need to be 
deployed by the end of the decade. Emissions for 
the average new car will need to fall to between 
50 and 70 gCO


2

/km, compared with 144 gCO


2

/ km 

in 2010. Between 21% and 45% of heat supply to 
our buildings will need to be low carbon by 2030. 

18. By developing options now, the UK will 
not only reduce the costs of deploying these 
technologies in the 2020s. It will also gain a long-
term competitive advantage in sectors that play to 
our comparative strengths. These include offshore 
wind, carbon capture and storage, and information 
services to manage smart grids, heating controls 
and transport. 

19. To 2030 and beyond, emissions from the 
hard-to-treat sectors – industry, aviation, shipping 
and agriculture – will need to be tackled. This 
will require a range of solutions to be tested by 
at the latest, the 2020s, including: greater energy 
efficiency; switching from oil and gas to bioenergy 
or low carbon electricity; and carbon capture and 
storage for industrial processes. 

Sectoral plans 
Low carbon buildings 
20. In 2009, 37% of UK emissions were produced 
from heating and powering homes and buildings. 
By 2050, all buildings will need to have an emissions 
footprint close to zero. Buildings will need to 
become better insulated, use more energy-
efficient products and obtain their heating from 
low carbon sources. 

Energy efficiency 
21. Over the next decade, with trends in 
installation rates maintained at today’s levels, all 
cavity walls and lofts, where practical, will be 
insulated. Alongside this, the Government will 
support up to 1.5 million solid wall insulations 
and other energy efficiency measures such as 
double glazing. 

22. The Green Deal, launching in 2012, will 
remove the upfront costs to the consumer of 
energy efficiency, with the cost being recouped 
through savings on their energy bills. The Energy 
Company Obligation will support this effort. It 
will place a duty on energy companies both to 
reduce emissions through undertaking solid wall 
insulation and to tackle fuel poverty by installing 
central heating systems, replacing boilers, and 
subsidising cavity wall and loft insulation. In parallel, 
Smart Meters will be deployed to every home 
to support consumers in managing their energy 
and expenditure intelligently. The Government 
will introduce zero carbon homes standards 
to cut the energy demand of new homes still 
further, reducing emissions and fuel bills. Through 
European energy standards and labelling we will 
promote the sales of the most efficient electrical 
appliances and products on the market. 

23. During the 2020s, deployment of solid wall 
insulation will increase and installation costs will 
fall as the supply chain and the skills base become 
established. Chart 1 shows different levels of 
ambition for the uptake of solid wall insulation, 
ranging from 1 million to 3.7 million additional 
homes insulated by 2030. 




6 Executive summary 

Chart 1: Projected deployment of solid wall insulation over the first three carbon budgets, and 
illustrative range of deployment over the fourth carbon budget period and in 2050 

Projected deployment 
over the first four 
carbon budget periods 

Range of additional 
deployment during 
the fourth carbon 
budget period 

Illustrative range of 
deployment in 2050 


9 

CB1 CB2 CB3 CB4 


8 , millions) 7 e

tiv 6 


ulations (cum5 Number of solid wall insula4 3 2 1 0 

By 2030 expecting to deploy 
an additional 1–3.7 million 
solid wall insulations. 

Projected deployment of 
up to 1.5 million insulations 
by 2020. 


2008201320182023202820332038204320482050 

Year 

Source: Department of Energy and Climate Change 

Low carbon heating 
24. Energy efficiency is the immediate priority. 
But in this decade we also need to support ways 
of heating buildings without emitting carbon. 
Through the Renewable Heat Incentive (RHI) and 
Renewable Heat Premium Payment, over 130,000 
low carbon heat installations are expected to be 
carried out by 2020.5 While we do not expect 
mass-market deployment of these technologies in 
this decade, there is an important opportunity to 
build the market, particularly in off-gas grid homes 
and in the commercial sector. At the same time 
the Government will work with local authorities, 
where appropriate, to lay the foundations for 
district heating networks, particularly in urban 
areas with more densely packed demand for heat. 
This should enable the long-term delivery of heat 
from low carbon sources. 

25. During the 2020s, we need to begin the mass 
deployment of low carbon heat. Technologies such 
as heat pumps will begin to expand at scale into 
residential areas, overcoming current barriers such 
as cost and unfamiliarity, and working with the 
supply chain to meet consumer demand. At the 
same time, the heating networks that started 
in urban areas during this decade will begin to 
expand to meet demand in surrounding areas, and 
to compete with low carbon heat technologies in 
individual buildings, helping to keep costs down. 

26. By 2027, based on the scenarios set out in this 
plan, emissions from buildings should be between 
24% and 39% lower than 2009 levels. 

This only includes installations as a result of RHI Phase 1. 5 




Executive summary 7 

Chart 2: Projected deployment of low carbon heat in buildings over the first three carbon budgets 
and illustrative ranges of deployment potential in the fourth carbon budget period and in 2050 



600 




500 TWh) tion 

( 400 


oject prw carbon he

a 300 


al

 lo 200 


ot T100 0 

CB1 CB2 CB3 CB4 

By 2030 delivering between 
83 and 165 TWh of low 
carbon heat, plus 10–38 TWh 
from heating networks. 

Projected deployment 
over the first four 
carbon budget periods 

Range of additional 
deployment during 
the fourth carbon 
budget period 

Illustrative range of 
deployment in 2050 


2008201320182023202820332038204320482050 

Year 

Source: Department of Energy and Climate Change 

Low carbon transport 
27. Domestic transport emissions make up nearly 
a quarter of UK emissions. By 2050, domestic 
transport will need to substantially reduce 
its emissions. 

28. Over the next decade, average emissions of 
new cars are set to fall by around a third, primarily 
through more efficient combustion engines. 
Sustainable biofuels will also deliver substantial 
emissions reductions. As deeper cuts are required, 
vehicles will run on ultra-low emission technologies 
such as electric batteries, hydrogen fuel cells and 
plug-in hybrid technology. These vehicles could 
also help to deliver wider environmental benefits, 
including improved local air quality and reduced 
traffic noise. 

29. To ensure that these emissions savings are 
delivered, the Government will continue to 
work at European Union (EU) level to press for 

strong EU vehicle emissions standards for 2020 
and beyond in order to deliver improvements 
in conventional vehicle efficiency and give 
certainty about future markets for ultra-low 
emission vehicles. 

30. To support the growth of the ultra-low 
emission vehicle market, the Government is 
providing around £300 million this Parliament for 
consumer incentives, worth up to £5,000 per car, 
and further support for the research, development 
and demonstration of new technologies. 

31. During the 2020s, we will move towards the 
mass market roll-out of ultra-low emission vehicles, 
although further improvements in the efficiency  
of conventional vehicles and sustainable biofuels 
are also anticipated to play a key role. Based on 
current modelling the Government anticipates  
that average new car emissions could need to  
be 50–70 gCO


2

/km and new van emissions  

75–105 gCO


2

/km by 2030. 




8 Executive summary

Chart 3: Projected average new car and van emissions over the first three carbon budgets and 
illustrative ranges of average new car and van emissions in the fourth carbon budget period and 
to 2050


250200150100500Cars and vans (g CO2/km)

Vans (2030: 105 gCO2/km)Vans (2030: 90 gCO2 /km)Vans (2030: 75 gCO2/km)
Cars (2030: 70 gCO2/km)Cars (2030: 60 gCO2/km)Cars (2030: 50 gCO2/km)


205020472044204120382035203220292026202320202017201420112008

Increasing internal combustion engine e�ciency

Increasing uptake of ultra-low emission vehicles



Year


32. While cars and vans make up the largest 
share of emissions, other sectors will need to 
decarbonise over time.

33. To support people to make lower carbon 
travel choices, such as walking, cycling or public 
transport, the Government is providing a 
£560 million Local Sustainable Transport Fund 
over the lifetime of this Parliament. 

34. Industry is leading the drive to reduce 
emissions from freight. The Logistics Carbon 
Reduction Scheme, for example, aims to reduce 
emissions by 8% by 2015, through improved 
efficiency and some modal shift to rail. For the 
longer term, to make deeper reductions in 
emissions, innovation will be needed in ultra-low 
emissions technologies such as sustainable biofuels 
and electric, hydrogen or hybrid technologies.

35. Emissions from aviation will be capped by being 
part of the EU Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) 
from 2012, ensuring that any increases in aviation 
emissions are offset by reductions elsewhere in the 
EU economy, or internationally.

36. By 2027, based on the scenarios set out in this 
plan, emissions from transport should be between 
17% and 28% lower than 2009 levels. 

Low carbon industry
37. Industry makes up nearly a quarter of the 
UK’s total emissions. Over 80% of these emissions 
originate from generating the heat that is needed 
for industrial processes such as manufacturing 
steel and ceramics, and the remainder from 
chemical reactions involved in processes such as 
cement production. By 2050, the Government 
expects industry to have delivered its fair share of 
emissions cuts, achieving reductions of up to 70% 
from 2009 levels. 

38. The Government will work with industry to 
ensure that low carbon growth continues into the 
future. Industry must make significant reductions 
in the emissions intensity of production, while the 
Government assists in maintaining the competitiveness 
of strategically important sectors. Emissions reductions 
will come from three sources: first, driving further 
efficiencies in the use of energy and materials and the 
design of industrial processes; second, replacing fossil 
fuels with low carbon alternatives such as bioenergy 




Executive summary 9 

and electrification; and third, from carbon capture and 
storage (CCS) to address combustion and process 
emissions, for example in cement and steel. 

39. Over the next decade, the main chances for 
industry to decarbonise will come from taking up 
the remaining opportunities for energy efficiency, 
and beginning the move to low carbon fuels, such 
as using sustainable biomass to generate heat 
for industrial processes. Through the EU ETS 
and domestic policies such as Climate Change 
Agreements and the CRC Energy Efficiency Scheme 
the Government is helping to ensure that these cost 
effective energy efficiency measures are being taken 
up. Innovation efforts during this period will also be 
important, bringing down the cost of decarbonising 
industrial processes and moving technology options 
such as electrification and CCS closer to commercial 
reality. CCS technology research projects are being 
strongly backed by UK and international sources of 
funding, with the aim of turning CCS into a viable 
option for the coming decades. 

40. During the 2020s, in addition to energy 
efficiency measures, reductions will be driven by 
switching to low carbon fuels. As with buildings, 
the Government expects industry to take 
advantage of the Renewable Heat Incentive, 
replacing expensive fossil fuels with low carbon 
heat alternatives and thereby accelerating the 
decarbonisation of industry in the 2020s. CCS 
technology is also expected to start to be 
deployed during this decade. 

41. Throughout this transition the Government 
will work closely with industry to address the 
principal risks, including the impact of anticipated 
increases in energy costs, to ensure that UK 
industry remains internationally competitive. The 
Government announced a package of measures to 
support sectors which are particularly exposed  
to these risks. 

42. By 2027, emissions from industry should be 
between 20% and 24% lower than 2009 levels. 

Low carbon electricity 
43. The power sector accounts for 27% of UK 
total emissions by source. By 2050, emissions from 
the power sector need to be close to zero. 

44. With the potential electrification of heating, 
transport and industrial processes, average 
electricity demand may rise by between 30% and 
60%. We may need as much as double today’s 
electricity capacity to deal with peak demand. 
Electricity is likely to be produced from three 
main low carbon sources: renewable energy, 
particularly onshore and offshore wind farms; a 
new generation of nuclear power stations; and 
gas and coal-fired power stations fitted with 
CCS technology. Renewable energy accounted 
for approximately half of the estimated 194 GW 
of new electricity capacity added globally during 
2010.6 Fossil fuels without CCS will only be used 
as back-up electricity capacity at times of very high 
demand. The grid will need to be larger, stronger 
and smarter to reflect the quantity, geography and 
intermittency of power generation. We will also 
need a more flexible electricity system to cope 
with fluctuations in supply and demand. 

45. While the overall direction is clear, major 
uncertainties remain over both the most cost 
effective mix of technologies and the pace of 
transition. The Government is committed to 
ensuring that the low carbon technologies with the 
lowest costs will win the largest market share. 

46. Over the next decade, we need to continue 
reducing emissions from electricity generation 
through increasing the use of gas instead of coal, 
and more generation from renewable sources. 
Alongside this, we will prepare for the rapid 
decarbonisation required in the 2020s and 2030s 
by supporting the demonstration and deployment 
of the major low carbon technologies that we 
will need on the way to 2050. The reforms to the 
electricity market will be the most important step 
in making this happen. The introduction of Feed-in 
Tariffs with Contracts for Difference from 2014 will 
provide stable financial incentives for investment in 
all forms of low carbon generation. 

REN21 (2011) Renewables 2011: Global Status Report. 6 




10 Executive summary 

47. In addition, the Government is: 

•	 helping industry to reduce the costs of offshore 
wind by setting up an Offshore Wind Cost 
Reduction Task Force with the aim of driving 
down the cost of offshore wind to £100 per 
megawatt hour (MWh) by 2020; 

•	 supporting the development of CCS technology 
at scale in a commercial environment, to bring 
down costs and risks, with £1 billion set aside to 
support the programme; 

•	 supporting the demonstration of less mature 
renewable technologies, and committing up to 
£50 million over the next four years to support 
innovation in marine and offshore technologies; 

•	 enabling mature low carbon technologies 
such as nuclear to compete by addressing the 
barriers to deployment such as an under­
developed UK supply chain; and 

•	 working with Ofgem and the industry to 
deliver the investment required to ensure that 
the electricity transmission and distribution 
networks will be able to cope in the future. 

48. Maintaining secure energy supplies remains 
a core government priority. New gas-fired 
generation will play a significant supporting role as 
19 GW of existing generation capacity closes over 
the next decade. 

49. Over the 2020s, large-scale deployment of 
low carbon generation will be needed, with, we 
estimate, 40–70 GW of new capacity required 
by 2030. This will drive a huge reduction in 
emissions from electricity supply. In the 2020s, 
the Government wants to see nuclear, renewables 
and CCS competing to deliver energy at the 
lowest possible cost. As we do not know how 
costs will change over time, we are not setting 
targets for each technology or a decarbonisation 
target at this point. 

Chart 4: Projected deployment of low carbon generation over the first three carbon budgets and 
illustrative ranges of deployment potential in the fourth carbon budget period and in 2050 



160 80 60 


CB1 CB2 CB3 CB4 



140 


Projected low carbon 120 
generation over the 
first four carbon budget 
periods 100 

Around 40–70 GW of new 
low-carbon capacity will be 
needed by 2030, in addition to 
10 GW of existing capacity that 
will still be operating 

in 2050 


40 20 0 tion/GW w carbon gene

ra Range of additional 
low carbon generation 
during the fourth 
carbon budget period 


al loot T

Illustrative range of 
low carbon generation 


2008201320182023202820332038204320482050 

Year 

Source: Department of Energy and Climate Change, Redpoint modelling, 2050 Calculator 




Executive summary 11 

50. The scenarios modelled in this plan show that 
by 2030 new nuclear could contribute 10–15 GW, 
with up to 20 GW achievable if build rates are 
higher; fossil fuel generation with CCS could 
contribute as much as 10 GW; and renewable 
electricity could deliver anywhere between 35 and 
50 GW – depending on assumptions about costs 
and build rates. 

51. By the end of the fourth budget period, our 
analysis suggests that emissions from electricity 
generation could be between 75% and 84% lower 
than 2009 levels. 

Agriculture, land use, forestry 
and waste 
52. As set out above, the majority of emissions 
reductions will come from action in buildings, 
transport, industry and electricity generation. 
However, efforts elsewhere will continue to 
contribute – in the next decade, during the fourth 
carbon budget period, and ultimately to meeting 
the 2050 target. 

53. In 2009, agriculture, forestry and land 
management together accounted for around 9% 
of UK emissions. The Government is encouraging 
practical actions which lead to efficiencies such as 
improved crop nutrient management and better 
breeding and feeding practices, which save both 
money and emissions. The Government is also 
working to improve its evidence base to better 
understand what this sector can feasibly deliver 
in the future. The Government will undertake a 
review of progress towards reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions from agriculture in 2012 which will 
assess the impact of existing measures and highlight 
further policy options. Next spring an independent 
panel will provide advice on the future direction of 
forestry and woodland policy in England. 

54. In 2009, emissions from waste management 
represented a little over 3% of the UK total. 
The Government is committed to working 
towards a zero waste economy, and by 2050 
it is estimated that emissions of methane from 

landfill (responsible for around 90% of the sector’s 
emissions) will be substantially below current 
levels. The Government is working to improve our 
scientific understanding of these emissions so that 
they can be managed better. Our strategy over 
the next decade was set out in the Action Plan 
which accompanied the Review of Waste Policy in 
England, and includes increases to the landfill tax. 
By the end of 2013 the Government will develop 
a comprehensive Waste Prevention Programme, 
and work with businesses and other organisations 
on a range of measures to drive waste reduction 
and re-use. 

A plan that adds up 
55. Part 3 of this report outlines some illustrative 
scenarios to demonstrate different ways in which 
the fourth carbon budget could be met through 
different combinations of the various ambitions in 
the different sectors. As the Government develops 
its policy framework further it will look to meet 
the fourth budget in the most cost effective and 
sustainable way and keep costs under review, 
developing clear impact assessments and consulting 
publicly on policies before it implements them.  
A full list of the Government’s energy and climate 
change commitments for this Parliament is set out 
at Annex C. 

56. We will also continue to work on the 
international stage to ensure that this is a genuinely 
collaborative global effort. Other countries 
are already taking actions to decarbonise their 
economies and we will continue to push for 
ambitious action both in the EU and globally.  
At the EU level, the UK is pushing for the EU to 
show more ambition by moving to a tighter 2020 
emissions target, which in turn will drive a more 
stringent EU ETS cap. We will review our progress 
in 2014. If at that point our domestic commitments 
place us on a different emissions trajectory than 
the ETS trajectory agreed by the EU, we will, as 
appropriate, revise up our budget to align it with 
the actual EU trajectory.7 

Before seeking Parliamentary approval to amend the level of the fourth carbon budget, the Government will take into account the advice of the 
Committee on Climate Change, and any representations made by the other national authorities. 


7 

12 Executive summary 

Building a coalition 
for change 
57. To make this transition, industry, the 
Government and the public need to be pulling in 
the same direction. 

58. For industry, the global low carbon market 
is projected to reach £4 trillion by 2015 as 
economies around the world invest in low carbon 
technology. The innovation challenge for industry 
is in business models as well as technologies, with 
electric vehicles, renewable electricity and solid 
wall insulation requiring upfront investment, but 
delivering large savings in operating costs. 

59. Industry must lead, but the Government 
can facilitate. This plan provides more clarity 
on the scale of the UK market opportunity and 
the pace of transition. In the next decade, the 
state will support innovation to ensure that key 
technologies can get off the ground. Rather than 
pick a winning technology, the Government will 
create markets that enable competing low carbon 
technologies to win the largest market share 
as the pace of change accelerates in the 2020s. 
New business models require new institutional 
frameworks that underpin long-term investment. 
That is the purpose behind both the Green Deal 

and Electricity Market Reform. As we make the 
transition, the state will need to solve co-ordination 
problems and ensure that the system as a whole 
coheres – for example, to understand when 
infrastructure decisions are required relating to 
the electricity grid, the gas network and charging 
points for electric cars. 

60. The plans for new electricity infrastructure 
and changes in the way in which we travel and 
heat our homes will require public support. While 
public opinion is in favour of tackling climate 
change, there is little agreement over how to go 
about it. This plan shows that the UK can move 
to a sustainable low carbon economy without 
sacrificing living standards, but by investing in new 
cars, power stations and buildings. However, it will 
require the public to accept new infrastructure 
and changes to the way in which we heat homes, 
and to be prepared to invest in energy efficiency 
that will save money over time. As part of this 
Carbon Plan, the Government is launching a 
new 2050 Calculator, to enable a more informed 
debate about UK energy choices and develop 
a national consensus on how we move to a low 
carbon economy. The Government will also use 
this plan to build more consensus globally on how 
moving to a low carbon transition is a practical and 
achievable goal. 


 13 


Part 1: The Government’s 
approach to energy and climate
change 

Introduction 
1.1 The UK, in common with other countries, 
faces two great risks over the coming decades: 

•	 First, if we are not able to constrain global 
greenhouse gas emissions, the world faces the 
prospect of dangerous climate change, which 
will have unprecedented impacts on global 
security and prosperity. 

•	 Second, the UK faces challenges to its energy 
security as our current generation of power 
stations closes and we must ensure supplies 
of energy which are resilient to volatile fossil 
fuel prices. 

The threat of climate change 
1.2 Climate change is one of the greatest threats 
facing the world today. There is an overwhelming 
scientific consensus that climate change is 
happening, and that it is primarily the result of 
human activity. There is now almost 40% more 
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere than there 
was before the industrial revolution, the highest 
level seen in at least the last 800,000 years. As 
a consequence, global average temperatures 
continue to rise. 2000–09 was the warmest 
decade on record, and 2010 matched 2005 and 
1998 as the equal warmest year.8 

1.3 The UK accounts for less than 1.5% of global 
greenhouse gas emissions,9 so we have a clear 
national interest in ensuring that the world tackles 
climate change together. Climate change is a 
global problem, and it requires a global solution. 
Therefore the UK’s international approach 
focuses on: 

•	 encouraging the European Union to 
demonstrate leadership on climate change; 

•	 influencing global political and economic 
conditions to secure action from other 
countries to limit greenhouse gas emissions; 

•	 helping developing countries to build the climate 
resilience of their economies and move towards 
low carbon growth in the future; and 

•	 working for a comprehensive global climate 
change agreement. 

1.4 At the same time as mitigating climate change, 
the Government is committed to ensuring that the 
UK is resilient to the effects of a changing climate. 
The Climate Change Risk Assessment to be 
published next year will provide an assessment of 
climate change risks and opportunities for the UK. 
The assessment will underpin the development 
of a National Adaptation Programme establishing 
priorities for UK adaptation policy over the next 
five years. 

8	 For further information on climate science see: Royal Society (2010) Climate Change: A summary of the science. Available at:  
http://royalsociety.org/climate-change-summary-of-science/ 

9	 Climate Analysis Indicators Tool. Available at: http://cait.wri.org/ 

http://royalsociety.org/climate-change-summary-of-science/
http://cait.wri.org/




14 Part 1: The Government’s approach to energy and climate change 

Maintaining our energy security 
1.5 We face three challenges to our energy 
security. First, by 2020, the UK could be importing 
nearly 50% of its oil and 55% or more of its gas. 
At a time of rising global demand, and continued 
geopolitical instability, the risk of high and 
volatile energy prices, and physical disruptions 
will remain. Second, we will lose a fifth of our 
electricity generating capacity due to the closure 
of coal and nuclear plants over the coming 
decade. Third, in the long term, while dependence 
on imported energy is expected to fall, we will face 
a new challenge in balancing more intermittent 
supply of energy from renewables with more 
variable electricity demand from electric cars, 
or electric heating. Our system will need to be 
resilient to mid-winter peaks in heating demand 
due to cold weather, and troughs in supply due to 
low wind speeds. 

1.6 To meet our energy security needs, gas and 
oil will continue to play a valuable role as we 
make the transition to a low carbon economy. 
Gas will be needed over the coming decades 
both for heating and for electricity generation. 
Even in 2050, gas will contribute to electricity 
supply in the form of power stations fitted with 
carbon capture and storage (CCS) technology or 
as back-up to intermittent renewable generation. 
Our energy strategy seeks to underpin secure 
and diverse energy supplies, both domestically 
and internationally. This involves encouraging 
investment in oil and gas production; promoting 
reliable supply through more efficient markets 
and strengthened bilateral trading relations; 
and enhancing price stability through improved 
transparency and dialogue. 

Our principles 
1.7 The Government is determined that we 
should address the twin challenges of tackling 
climate change and maintaining our energy security 
in a way that minimises costs and maximises 
benefits to our economy. 

1.8 To achieve this, we will follow a clear set of 
principles: 

•	 We should always aim for the most cost 
effective means to achieve our aims. This 
necessitates using less energy across the 
economy. And it requires using the most 
cost effective technologies to drive further 
efficiencies and meet remaining demand. 

•	 A diverse portfolio of technologies, 
competing against each other for market 
share, can drive innovation and cost 
reduction. While our principle is to choose the 
most cost effective mix of technologies in  any 
sector, the reality is that we do not yet know 
how these technologies will develop, how their 
costs will change, or what other technologies 
may yet emerge. In transport this could mean 
electric, plug-in hybrid or hydrogen cars, or 
the use of biofuels. In heating this could mean 
building-level technologies such as air- and 
ground-source heat pumps or network-level 
options such as district heating. For that reason, 
the Government aims to encourage a portfolio 
of technologies and create competitive market 
conditions in which the most cost effective 
succeed over time. 

•	 Clear long-term signals about the regulatory 
framework can support cost reduction. 
There is a role for the Government in providing 
clear, unambiguous signals to the market and 
a stable long-term regulatory framework to 
create the conditions for the investment that is 
fundamental to economic growth and the move 
to a low carbon economy. 

•	 The Government should help to tackle 
market failures and unblock barriers to 
investment to encourage growth in newer 
technologies. While competition between 
technologies and businesses is the best way to 
ensure that we find the most cost effective mix, 
there is a role for the Government in identifying 
where it can constructively enable the market, 
particularly where technology deployment relies 
on the creation of new infrastructure. 

•	 Costs must be distributed fairly. The 
Government will continue to focus on the 
distributional impacts of the low carbon 
transition. We are supporting consumers by 




Part 1: The Government’s approach to energy and climate change 15 

providing subsidised insulation, delivered by 
energy companies, to the most vulnerable 
households, as well as bill rebates to more 
than 600,000 vulnerable pensioners. The 
Government also recognises the challenges 
confronting energy-intensive industries, 
including the difficulties some face in remaining 
internationally competitive while driving down 
domestic emissions. We are taking active 
steps to support these industries through the 
transition, recognising the future role these 
sectors will play in delivering economic growth. 

1.9 Reducing emissions will have wider impacts. 
Creating a low carbon and resource efficient 
economy means making major structural changes 
to the way in which we work and live, including 
how we source, manage and use our energy. 
The Government is committed to identifying a 
sustainable route for making that transition by 
balancing greenhouse gas benefits, cost, energy 
security and impacts on the natural environment. 
By adopting these principles, we seek to maximise 
the potential economic benefits to the UK from 
making the transition to a low carbon economy, 
as well as to minimise adverse impacts for the 
environment and public.10  Doing this in the most 
cost effective way will help to enable us to: 

•	 use our resources more efficiently. Managing 
energy and resource demand reduces costs 
to businesses and consumers, releasing 
spending power that can increase growth and 
productivity elsewhere. Lower demand for 
energy reduces risks to the security of our 
energy supplies; 

•	 reduce our exposure to fossil fuel price 
volatility. According to the Office for Budget 
Responsibility, a temporary 20% increase in 
the oil price (adjusted to remove inflation) 
would lead to a loss of potential output in the 
UK of over 0.3% in the following year;11 and 

•	 create long-term comparative advantages. 
Being an early mover in technologies such 

as renewables and CCS could give the UK a 
long-term comparative advantage in growing 
global markets for these technologies. 

The vision for 2050 
1.10 These principles will underpin our vision 
for a long-term transition to a low carbon 
economy. By 2050 we will have transformed 
our buildings, transport and industry, the way in 
which we generate electricity and our agriculture 
and forestry. 

1.11 Low carbon buildings: Heating and powering 
buildings produced 38% of the UK’s emissions 
in 2009. Those emissions are a result of burning 
fossil fuels to heat buildings, and generating the 
electricity that powers our lighting and appliances. 
Buildings will need to be much better insulated and 
make use of Smart Meters and heating controls, 
and more efficient lighting and appliances, to 
reduce their demand for energy. At the same 
time, we will move away from the use of fossil 
fuels for heating and hot water and towards low 
carbon alternatives such as heat pumps or heating 
networks. By 2050, emissions from heating and 
powering our buildings will be virtually zero. 

1.12 Low carbon transport: Transport is a major 
contributor to the UK’s energy demand and 
greenhouse gas emissions, creating 24% of the 
UK total in 2009. Most of those emissions come 
from the oil-based fuels we rely upon for road 
transport. A step-change is needed to move away 
from fossil fuels and towards ultra-low carbon 
alternatives such as battery electric or fuel cell 
vehicles. New technologies will have implications 
for energy security, with increased demands likely 
to be placed on the grid by ultra-low emission 
vehicles (such as electric cars), as well as presenting 
new opportunities for vehicles to help balance 
variations in demand for electricity over time and 
reducing our exposure to volatile oil prices. 

10	 In summer 2012 the Government will launch a research programme on sustainable pathways to 2050 which will consider the cumulative 
impacts of and interactions between different low carbon technologies. See Annex B for further details on the wider environmental 
impacts of reducing emissions and meeting carbon budgets. 

11	 OBR (2010) Assessment of the Effect of Oil Price Fluctuations on the Public Finances. Available at:  
http://budgetresponsibility.independent.gov.uk/wordpress/docs/assessment_oilprice_publicfinances.pdf 

http://budgetresponsibility.independent.gov.uk/wordpress/docs/assessment_oilprice_publicfinances.pdf




16 Part 1: The Government’s approach to energy and climate change 

1.13 Low carbon industry: Industry currently 
accounts for nearly one quarter of UK emissions, 
generated by burning fossil fuels for heat and by 
the chemical reactions involved in some industrial 
processes. Production of goods – from paper to 
steel – will need to become more energy efficient 
and switch over to low carbon fuel sources. 

1.14 Low carbon power generation: The 
power sector currently accounts for 27% of UK 
emissions. As heating, transport and industry 
become increasingly electrified, the amount of 
electricity we need to generate is very likely to 
increase from today, and it will need to be almost 
entirely carbon-free. By 2050, the three sources 
of UK electricity are likely to be renewables (in 
particular onshore and offshore wind farms); coal, 
biomass or gas-fired power stations fitted with 
CCS technology; and nuclear power.12 The grid 
will need to be larger, stronger and smarter to 
reflect the quantity, geography and intermittency 
of power generation. We will also need to ensure 
the security of the fossil fuel resources required to 
make the low carbon transition. 

1.15 Low greenhouse gas agriculture and 
forestry: Emissions from agriculture, land use and 
forestry – mostly in the form of nitrous oxide and 
methane – made up around 9% of total emissions 
in 2009, but will account for an increasingly large 
share of overall UK greenhouse gas emissions as 
other sectors decarbonise over the next three 
decades. In order to meet our 2050 target, the 
agricultural sector will need to contribute to 
reducing emissions by adopting more efficient 
practices. We will also ensure the development of 
a sustainable and expanding forestry sector. 

2050 futures 
1.16 While our vision for 2050 is clear, there are 
huge uncertainties when looking 40 years ahead 
as to exactly how that vision will be achieved. Our 
approach has been to try to explore a range of 
plausible scenarios for what the UK might look 
like in 2050 and to seek to draw lessons from 
the similarities and differences between those 
scenarios. In line with our principle of seeking the 
most cost effective technology mix, our starting 
point for this has been to take the outputs of the 
‘core’ run of the cost-optimising model, MARKAL, 
which was produced as part of the Department of 
Energy and Climate Change’s analysis to support 
the setting of the fourth carbon budget.13 

1.17 On the supply side, the core MARKAL run 
produces a balanced generation mix, with 33 gigawatts 
(GW) of nuclear, 45 GW of renewables and 28 
GW of fossil fuel with CCS power capacity by 
2050. On the demand side, the model run drives 
a sharp reduction in per capita energy demand; 
in this run, everybody in the UK would use half as 
much energy in 2050 as they do today, due to the 
adoption of more energy efficient technologies, 
with heat pumps, district heating, battery electric 
and fuel cell vehicles. 

1.18 This is only a starting point. Attempting to 
pick a single pathway to 2050 by relying on a single 
model is neither possible nor a helpful guide in the 
face of great uncertainty. But it does give insight 
into the most cost effective way to achieve the 
low carbon transition, illustrating the technologies 
likely to contribute to reducing emissions, and the 
most cost effective timing for their deployment.  
It shows that achieving a cost-optimal transition 
overall often necessitates deploying technologies 
in the medium term that may not yet be statically 
cost effective against the carbon price.14 

12	 The UK Government works in partnership with the Devolved Administrations in Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales to deliver the 
targets set by the Climate Change Act 2008. While the administrations have a shared goal of reducing the impacts of climate change, 
policies on how to achieve this vary across the administrations – the Scottish Government, for example, is opposed to the development 
of new nuclear power stations in Scotland. It believes that renewables, fossil fuels with CCS and energy efficiency represent the best long-
term solution to Scotland’s energy security. This document focuses largely on UK Government policy on climate change, with Devolved 
Administration views set out in ‘Working with the EU and Devolved Administrations’ on page 99. 

13 HMG (2011) Fourth Carbon Budget Level: Impact Assessment (final). MARKAL is discussed further at Annex A. 
14	 The cost effectiveness of measures is affected by the scale and timing of their deployment. Static cost effectiveness does not account for 

changes to a measure’s cost effectiveness due to variations in the scale and timing of its deployment. 




Part 1: The Government’s approach to energy and climate change 17 

1.19 Alongside this core MARKAL run the 
Government has developed three further ’futures’ 
that attempt to stress test the results of the core 
run by recognising that there will be changes that 
we cannot predict in the development, cost and 
public acceptability of different technologies in 
every sector of the economy.  

Figure 1: 2050 futures 

Higher 
renewables; 
more energy 

efficiency 


Stt

change

echnolog
ep-change in beha

St ep-change in
 CC S

and st

 t echnolog y , in
 po w er and , rene

industr y a ppli
cations 

orage
y costs


w

able 

Higher CCS;


 

viour 



more 

bioenergy
 Cor e MARKAL 


ame-changi

ng er


 y cost ough in pow No gtechnologeakthrbr

Higher nuclear;


 

less energy


 

efficiency


 

1.20 Future ‘Higher renewables, more energy 
efficiency’ assumes a major reduction in the cost 
of renewable generation alongside innovations that 
facilitate a large expansion in electricity storage 
capacity. This helps to manage the challenges 
of those renewables that are intermittent. It is 
consistent with a world where high fossil fuel prices 
or global political commitment to tackling climate 
change drives major investment and innovation 
in renewables. 

1.21 As a consequence, the power generation mix 
includes deployment of wind, solar, marine and 
other renewable technologies, as well as back-up 
gas generation. This future also assumes a major 
reduction in per capita energy demand driven by 
people embracing low carbon behaviour changes 
and smart new technologies such as heating 
controls, and recognising the financial benefits of 
taking up energy efficiency opportunities. We 

electrify the majority of our demand for heat, 
industry and transport using ground- and air-
source heat pumps in buildings and electrified 
industrial processes, and we travel in ultra-low 
emissions vehicles. 

1.22 Future ‘Higher CCS, more bioenergy’ 
assumes the successful deployment of CCS 
technology at commercial scale and its use in 
power generation and industry, supported by 
significant natural gas imports, driven by changes 
such as a reduction in fossil fuel prices as a result of 
large-scale exploitation of shale gas reserves. It also 
assumes low and plentiful sustainable bioenergy 
resources (see box 2). 

1.23 In this future, significant amounts of 
relatively low cost, sustainable biomass result in 
CCS also being used with biomass (BE-CCS) to 
generate negative emissions.15 Negative emissions 
production is a game-changer in that it could offset 
the continued burning of fossil fuels elsewhere 
in the energy system. In this scenario, BE-CCS 
creates around 50 million tonnes carbon dioxide 
equivalent (MtCO


2

e) of negative emissions – 

equivalent to almost 10% of today’s total – which 
creates ’headroom’ for some fossil fuel use. 
As a result, this pathway has less electrification 
of heat and transport, with more heat demand 
met through network-level heating systems such 
as district heating or combined heat and power. 
In transport, more demand is met through 
sustainable biofuels use in cars and buses, while 
strong effort is made to improve the efficiency of 
UK land management. No unabated gas generation 
is needed to balance the system in this future. 

1.24 Future ‘Higher nuclear, less energy 
efficiency’ is a future that is more cautious about 
innovation in newer technologies. CCS does 
not become commercially viable. Innovation in 
offshore wind and solar does not produce major 
cost reductions. Lack of innovation in solid wall 
insulation results in low public acceptability of 
energy efficiency measures.  

15	 In the 2050 modelling, biomass fuel sources are typically assumed to be ‘zero carbon’ because the CO


2

 released with their combustion 

is equal to the amount sequestered through the process of growing the biomass. Capture of this CO


2

 through use of CCS technology  

(BE-CCS) removes it from the system altogether by pumping it underground – thereby creating ‘negative emissions’. 




18 Part 1: The Government’s approach to energy and climate change 

Box 2: Sustainable bioenergy 

Sustainable bioenergy is a versatile source of low carbon energy which will play a key role in meeting 
carbon budgets and the 2050 target. It has applications in each sector – including for the generation of 
electricity and heat, and as a replacement for more emissions-intensive transport fuels. In 2010 the UK 
used 73.6 terawatt hours (TWh) of bioenergy. 

The UK Renewable Energy Roadmap stated that bioenergy could deliver around half of the total 
generation needed to meet our 2020 renewable targets. To achieve this level of deployment we 
will need to make the most of domestic supplies such as residues and wastes, increased use of 
under-managed woodlands and energy crop production on marginal land while also using globally 
traded feedstocks. 

A key condition for the use of bioenergy is its ability to generate genuine emissions reductions. Clear 
sustainability standards – which account for greenhouse gas emissions throughout the lifecycle and 
also consider wider environmental impacts – are critical. Current estimates suggest that global and UK 
biomass demand is likely to increase towards 2050. However, sustainability concerns may constrain the 
availability of particular feedstocks. 

The Government’s forthcoming Bioenergy Strategy will set out the role that sustainable bioenergy can 
play in cutting greenhouse gas emissions and meeting our energy needs. It will provide the strategic 
direction on the future role of sustainable bioenergy against which future policies in this area can be 
assessed and developed. 

1.25 As a result, nuclear is by far the largest 
source of electricity in 2050. Natural gas plays a 
role in matching peaks in demand. Compared with 
the core MARKAL run, there is less insulation of 
existing homes and less use of smart technologies 
and appliances in homes to reduce energy use. 
Individuals travel more than they do today and 
continue to make the most of their journeys 
using cars. We succeed in electrifying most of our 
demand for heat and transport, with remaining 
demand met through a mix of other technologies, 
such as district heating. 

Planning for the future 
1.26 These three futures, alongside the core 
MARKAL run, can help us to understand the 
choices we face as we make the transition to a 
low carbon economy by 2050. By looking at the 
commonalities and differences between them, 
we can try to understand which technologies and 
efforts now may be ’safe bets’ in the face of future 
uncertainty, and to identify the points in time 
between now and 2050 when choices between 
technologies will need to be made if we are to keep 
different possible futures open. The Government’s 

approach in this document, and in planning for the 
first four carbon budgets, is to ensure that we are 
supporting the safe bets; that we are acting to keep 
open different possibilities where we do not yet 
know what the cost effective and appropriate path 
may be; and that we identify and plan for decision 
points where possible paths diverge. 

1.27 The three futures suggest parameters around 
the key uncertainties in the transition: the degree 
of energy efficiency that may be achieved across 
the economy; the lowest cost technology mix for 
decarbonising remaining energy demand (especially 
heating and transport demand); and the lowest cost 
technology mix for decarbonising electricity supply. 

1.28 All three futures are published in the 2050 
Calculator web tool at http://2050-calculator-tool. 
decc.gov.uk and further detail on their specific 
choices and implications can be found at Annex A. 
These futures indicate a range of deployment for 
key technologies in 2050, acknowledging that a 
number of factors – notably cost – will ultimately 
determine the level of deployment within this range. 

http://2050-calculator-tool.decc.gov.uk




Part 1: The Government’s approach to energy and climate change 19 

1.29 The 2050 futures set out a helpful framework 
for developing the Government’s strategy to 
achieve carbon budgets on the way to 2050. In 
each sector, we need to ensure that our strategy 
for meeting the first four carbon budgets puts 
us on a path to deliver this range of ambition in 

2050. Part 2 of this document sets out how we 
will do this in each sector. Part 3 provides a range 
of scenarios for ways in which we could meet the 
fourth carbon budget, all of which would put us on 
track to deliver these 2050 futures.  

Table 1: Summary of 2050 futures 

(All figures 
in 2050) 

Measure Core 
MARKAL 

Renewables; 
more energy 
efficiency 

CCS; more 
bioenergy 

Nuclear; 
less energy 
efficiency 

Energy 
saving per 
capita, 
2007–50 

50% 54% 43% 31% 

Electricity 
demand 
increase, 
2007–50 

38% 39% 29% 60% 

Buildings Solid wall insulation 
installed 

n/a16 7.7 million 5.6 million 5.6 million 

Cavity wall insulation 
installed 

n/a16 8.8 million 6.9 million 6.9 million 

House-level heating 92% 100% 50% 90% 

Network-level heating 8% 0% 50% 10% 

Transport Ultra-low emission cars 
and vans (% of fleet) 

75% 100% 65% 80% 

Industry Greenhouse gas capture 
via CCS 

69% 48% 48% 0% 

Electricity 
generation 

Nuclear 33 GW 16 GW 20 GW 75 GW 

CCS 28 GW 13 GW 40 GW 2 GW 

Renewables17 45 GW 106 GW 36 GW 22 GW 

Agriculture 
and land use 

Bioenergy use ~350 TWh ~180 TWh ~470 TWh ~460 TWh 

16	 MARKAL does not provide figures for numbers of specific insulation measures deployed. The 2050 futures figures are taken directly from the 2050 
Calculator, and should be taken as illustrative rather than precise targets for deployment. 

17	 Note that the 2050 futures do not assume that existing renewables generation is repowered at the end of its lifetime. The 2050 Calculator assumes that 
wind turbines have a lifetime of 20 years. 




Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 


 21 


Part 2: Our strategy to achieve
carbon budgets 

Achieving carbon budgets 
2.1 As set out in Part 1, the Government’s 
approach to avoiding the risk of dangerous climate 
change has at its heart the Climate Change Act 
2008. The Act requires that five-yearly ‘carbon 
budgets’ be set three budget periods ahead, so 
that it is always clear what the UK’s emissions 
pathway will be for the next 15 years. 

Achieving carbon budgets one to 
three 
2.2 The first three carbon budgets, for the years 
2008–12, 2013–17 and 2018–22, were set in May 
2009. Table 2 overleaf shows the level of the first 
three carbon budgets. 

Our current policy framework 
2.3 The 2050 futures give us a clear vision of the 
longer-term changes we will need to see in each 
sector of the economy. The Government already 
has a comprehensive package of policies in place to 
deliver the emissions reductions necessary to meet 
the first three carbon budgets and to provide 
incentives for the development and take-up of the 
portfolio of technologies necessary to put us on 

track to 2050. Domestic policies such as the Green 
Deal, the Renewable Heat Incentive and roll-out 
of Smart Meters, along with EU-wide policies such 
as the EU Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) and 
regulations on new car and van CO


2

 emissions 

standards, are forecast to drive down emissions in 
the UK over this decade and provide a platform 
for further, deeper, cuts in emissions during the 
2020s and beyond. More information on these 
policies can be found later in this report. 

Emissions projections for carbon 
budgets one to three 
2.4 The Government’s emissions projections18 

provide forecasts for UK emissions over the short 
and medium term. These take into account the 
estimated energy and emissions savings from our 
current policy framework, and reflect estimates of 
the key economic factors that drive energy use and 
emissions, such as economic growth and fossil fuel 
prices (see box 3 on page 23). These projections 
are an essential tool for projecting progress 
and assessing risks to meeting carbon budgets. 
The table overleaf shows the latest emissions 
projections (central scenario) for the first three 
carbon budgets. 

18 DECC (2011) Updated Energy and Emissions Projections 2011. See: www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/about/ec_social_res/analytic_projs/en_emis_projs/ 
en_emis_projs.aspx 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/about/ec_social_res/analytic_projs/en_emis_projs/en_emis_projs.aspx




22 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

Table 2: October 2011 emissions projections (million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (MtCO


2e)) 


First carbon budget  
(2008–12) 

Second carbon budget 
(2013–17) 

Third carbon budget 
(2018–22) 

Legislated interim budgets19 3,018 2,782 2,544 

Percentage reduction from 1990 
baseline20 

23% 29% 35% 

Net UK carbon account 2,922 2,650 2,457 

Projected performance against 
first three carbon budgets 
(negative implies emissions under 
budget) 

−96 −132 −87 

Uncertainty range in projected 
over-achievement (high to low 
emissions projection) 

−73 to −124 −73 to −172 −19 to −142 

2.5 As can be seen, with current planned policies, 
the latest projections suggest that the UK is on 
track to meet its first three carbon budgets and 
that we expect to reduce emissions to below their 
levels by 96, 132 and 87 million tonnes carbon 
dioxide equivalent (MtCO


2

e) respectively, based 

on central forecasts. 

2.6 This forecast over-achievement suggests 
that the UK is in a strong position to deliver on 
more ambitious carbon budgets out to 2020. We 
continue to lobby strongly in Europe for a move to 
a more ambitious 2020 target and, if successful, we 
will amend our second and third carbon budgets 
accordingly, following effort share negotiations 
with other Member States, to ensure that they are 
consistent with new EU obligations. 

Achieving the fourth carbon 
budget 
2.7 On 30 June 2011, the level of the fourth 
carbon budget for the years 2023–27 was set 

in law, committing the UK to reduce emissions 
to 50% below 1990 levels. The Low Carbon 
Transition Plan, published in July 2009, set out 
the strategy for meeting the first three carbon 
budgets.21 This Carbon Plan updates and 
supersedes the 2009 report and presents the 
Government’s strategy for meeting all four carbon 
budgets, with a particular focus on the fourth 
carbon budget. 

2.8 The level of the fourth carbon budget 
(1,950 MtCO


2

e) assumes a split between emissions 

that will fall in the traded sector (690 MtCO


2e) 

and emissions that will fall in the non-traded sector 
(1,260 MtCO


2

e). In the traded sector, emissions are 

capped by the EU ETS – see box 4 on page 24 for 
more information. 

2.9 Whether or not we manage to reduce 
emissions by the amount required to meet carbon 
budgets will depend on the level of the UK’s share 
of the EU ETS cap. We know that the current 
EU ETS cap is not sufficiently tight to deliver the 

19 The ‘interim’ carbon budgets are set on the basis of the current EU target to reduce emissions by 20% from 1990 levels by 2020. 
20	 These percentages have changed since 2009 when quoted in the Low Carbon Transition Plan (HM Government (2009) The UK Low Carbon Transition Plan: 

National strategy for climate and energy, www.decc.gov.uk/publications/basket.aspx?FilePath=White+Papers%2fUK+Low+Carbon+ 
Transition+Plan+WP09%2f1_20090724153238_e_%40%40_lowcarbontransitionplan.pdf&filetype=4) owing to an update in the greenhouse gas inventory 
which revised total 1990 baseline UK greenhouse gas emissions from 777.4 MtCO


2

e to 783.1 MtCO


2

e. This number is the denominator in this calculation, 

hence while the budget levels (in MtCO


2

e) have not changed, the 1990 baseline and percentage reductions have. 

21 HM Government (2009) The UK Low Carbon Transition Plan: National strategy for climate and energy. 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/publications/basket.aspx?FilePath=White+Papers%2fUK+Low+Carbon+Transition+Plan+WP09%2f1_20090724153238_e_%40%40_lowcarbontransitionplan.pdf&filetype=4




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 23 

Box 3: The Government’s emissions projections 

Emissions projections are inherently uncertain and the outturn could be higher or lower than the 
projections. This is due to uncertainty over future temperatures, fossil fuel prices, carbon prices, 
economic growth, demographic trends and the impact of our policies. There is also modelling 
uncertainty surrounding the ability to forecast economic relationships, for example the relationship 
between economic growth and emissions, uncertainty which is likely to increase over time as the 
structure of the UK economy and economic relationships evolve. As an example, while on central 
projections we expect the over-achievement in the third carbon budget to be 87 MtCO


2

e over 

the five-year period, the over-achievement might be as much as 142 MtCO


2

e (under low emissions 

projections) or as little as 19 MtCO


2

e (under high emissions projections). In the case of the traded 

sector, the uncertainty increases significantly beyond 2020 due to the fact that we do not have 
renewables targets beyond 2020: removing a key input such as this naturally increases the range of 
uncertainty. Not yet knowing the level of the future EU ETS cap similarly adds to uncertainty beyond 
2020. The Government’s approach is to focus on the central projections when setting carbon budgets, 
which require a single value to compare with emissions in 1990, and to carefully monitor the outturn. 

necessary emissions reductions to meet the fourth 
carbon budget. The UK is pushing for the EU 
to show more ambition by moving to a tighter 
2020 emissions target, which in turn will drive a 
more stringent EU ETS cap. We will review our 
progress in 2014. If at that point our domestic 
commitments place us on a different emissions 
trajectory than the ETS trajectory agreed by the 
EU, we will, as appropriate, revise up our budget 
to align it with the actual EU trajectory. Before 
seeking parliamentary approval to amend the level 
of the fourth carbon budget, the Government will 
take into account the advice of the Committee on 
Climate Change (CCC), and any representations 
made by the other national authorities. 

Emissions projections for the fourth 
carbon budget 
2.10 On central projections based on our current 
policy framework, UK territorial emissions are 
forecast to be around 2,207 MtCO


2

e over the 

fourth carbon budget (or 441.4 MtCO


2

e a year). 

This assumes that emissions savings from the legacy 
of current policies will continue, even where those 
policies do not currently extend beyond 2020. 
This is particularly the case for efficiency standards, 
such as the new car CO


2

 target, where even 

without the 2020 car CO


2

 target being extended 

and tightened, it is assumed that – as more new 
cars are sold beyond 2020, replacing older, less 
efficient vehicles in the fleet – emissions from 
transport will continue to fall. 

2.11 The projections therefore show that our 
current suite of policies on its own is not likely to 
be sufficient to deliver the fourth carbon budget. 
On central projections, there is an expected 
shortfall in emissions of around 181 MtCO


2

e in 

the non-traded sector over the five-year period 
(or 36.2 MtCO


2

e a year).22 

How to achieve the fourth carbon budget 
2.12 The CCC was set up under the Climate 
Change Act to advise the Government on 
carbon budgets. Its fourth carbon budget report, 
published in December 2010,23 gave a clear 
illustration of the kind of actions that the UK 
Government and Devolved Administrations would 
need to take to deliver the necessary emissions 
reductions. All sectors of the economy will need 
to play their part by the time of the fourth carbon 
budget but the CCC’s advice focuses on the need 
for greater energy efficiency, particularly from 
energy use in buildings; for greater electrification of 
both heat and transport; and for decarbonisation 
of the power sector. 

22 Section B2 of Annex B contains further discussion of emissions projections for the fourth carbon budget period. 
23 See: www.theccc.org.uk/reports/fourth-carbon-budget 

http://www.theccc.org.uk/reports/fourth-carbon-budget




24 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

Box 4: The EU Emissions Trading System 

The EU Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) is an EU-wide carbon cap and trade system which started 
in 2005, covering electricity generation and the main energy-intensive industries, including refineries 
and offshore, iron and steel, cement and lime, paper, glass and ceramics. It sets a declining limit on 
emissions and allows participants to trade the right to emit with each other, enabling emissions cuts 
to be made where they are cheapest. 

Power and industries covered by the EU ETS together make up around 40% of UK emissions, and are 
collectively known as the traded sector. The level of emissions in the traded sector is governed by the 
UK’s share of the declining level of the EU ETS cap. While the current ETS cap trajectory enables us 
to achieve the first three carbon budgets, the fourth carbon budget was set assuming that the ETS 
cap will be tightened further in the future. Continuing the current trajectory of the cap into the 2020s 
would not be sufficient to deliver the deep emissions reductions needed in the UK power and heavy 
industry sectors during the fourth carbon budget. 

The scarcity of allowances in the ETS creates a carbon price. While the current carbon price set 
by the EU ETS is important to incentivising low carbon generation, it is not enough on its own – it 
has not been stable, certain or high enough to encourage sufficient investment in the UK. The 
Government therefore plans to introduce a Carbon Price Floor to support the carbon price, 
described further in paragraph 2.156. 

2.13 The non-traded sector covers all sectors that 
fall outside of the EU ETS, including the buildings, 
transport and agricultural sectors. In the non-
traded sector, there are three areas that have the 
potential to contribute significantly to emissions 
reductions over the fourth carbon budget period, 
in line with our vision for 2050. They are: 

•	 ensuring that our homes are better insulated to 
improve their energy efficiency; 

•	 replacing inefficient heating systems with more 
efficient, sustainable ones; and  

•	 ensuring a step-change in our move towards 
ultra-low carbon vehicles, such as electric 
vehicles. 

2.14 The traded sector covers all sectors that fall 
within the EU ETS, including power generation 
and most of the industry sector. The main area 
to contribute towards meeting the fourth carbon 
budget will be the installation of low carbon 
electricity generation. 

2.15 The sections that follow illustrate the 
Government’s plans in each of these areas. 




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 25 

Box 5: The Government’s response to the Committee on Climate Change’s Renewable Energy 
Review 

In May 2010, the Department of Energy and Climate Change asked the Committee on Climate 
Change (CCC) to undertake a review of the potential for renewable energy deployment for 2020 and 
beyond, including whether there is scope to increase the current target, taking into account technical 
potential, costs and practical delivery. 

The CCC approached the work in two phases. Phase 1 provided interim conclusions in September 
2010, which agreed that the UK 2020 target was appropriate, and should not be increased. Phase 2, 
published in May 2011, provided recommendations on the post-2020 ambition for renewables in the 
UK, and the possible pathways to maximise their contribution to the 2050 carbon reduction target. 

The Government thanks the Committee for its work and advice. We welcome its recognition that 
15% renewables by 2020 is both an appropriate and achievable scale of ambition. 

We are committed to achievement of the 2020 renewables target and agree with the CCC that our 
focus should now be on delivering that ambition, while working with industry to drive down costs. 
The UK Renewable Energy Roadmap, published in July 2011, sets out a programme of actions that 
Governments across the UK are taking to set us on the path to achieving the target.24 

We acknowledge that renewables have the potential to provide 30–45% of energy by 2030 and 
possibly higher levels in the longer term and that, before making any future commitments, we need 
to resolve current uncertainties and reduce costs. We have considered and responded to the CCC’s 
advice on the post-2020 potential for renewables in the electricity, buildings, industry and transport 
sections of this report. 

24 See: www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/meeting_energy/renewable_ener/re_roadmap/re_roadmap.aspx 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/meeting_energy/renewable_ener/re_roadmap/re_roadmap.aspx




26 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

Box 6: Emissions data in the Carbon Plan 

This report explains the progress the UK has already made in reducing greenhouse gas emissions 
since 1990. The sections which follow describe the Government’s strategy to reduce emissions over 
the fourth carbon budget in each area of the economy. We have disaggregated historic and projected 
emissions along different lines to the National Communication (NC) sector classification25 and the 
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC),26 in order to clarify which areas make the most substantial 
contribution to emissions. 

For the purpose of presenting historic emissions, we have allocated emissions from electricity 
generation to the end user of that electricity. This has been done in all sections except electricity 
generation where the emissions reported are by source. This breakdown is particularly important for 
some areas, such as buildings, where emissions from electricity generation make up the majority of 
the total. In most areas, the package of policies discussed targets both emissions relating to electricity 
use in that area, as well as emissions from other sources. 

For all other figures (save historic emissions), emissions have been allocated by source, i.e. the 
emissions directly produced by that sector.27 

The chart below shows a comparison of source and end user emissions. 

Chart 5: Emissions by source and end user for each section in this report 

Emissions by source (2009, MtCO


2

e)	 Emissions by end user (2009, MtCO


2e) 

Power stations Power stations 

Industry Industry 

Buildings Buildings

Transport Transport 

Agriculture and land use Agriculture and land use 

Waste Waste 

Exports Exports 

0 50 100 150 200 250 0 50 100 150 200 250 

Emissions from electricity generation Emissions from sources other than electricity generation 

Source: DECC National Statistics 
Note: The ‘exports’ category relates to emissions within the UK from producing fuels (e.g. from a refinery or coal mine) which are subsequently 
exported for use outside the UK. 

25	 These are consistent with the UK Greenhouse Gas Inventory. Available at: www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/statistics/climate_change/gg_emissions/ 
uk_emissions/2009_final/2009_final.aspx 

26	 The SIC is consistent with the Digest of UK Energy Statistics (DUKES). It is also consistent with the breakdown of the Updated Energy and Emissions 
Projections (UEP). 

27	 The historic emissions data quoted have been created on the basis of the NC sectors; the emissions projections data have been created on the basis of the 
UEP sectors.  

http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/statistics/climate_change/gg_emissions/uk_emissions/2009_final/2009_final.aspx




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 29 

BuiLdings 

Where we are now 
2.16 In 2009, our domestic buildings were 
responsible for 25% of the UK’s emissions and 
just over 40% of its final energy use. Over three 
quarters of the energy we use in our homes is for 
space and hot water heating, most of which comes 
from gas-fired boilers. Lighting and appliances 
account for a smaller percentage of domestic 
energy demand, and emissions here are expected 
to reduce as the electricity grid is decarbonised. 

2.17 The energy we use for heating and powering 
our non-domestic buildings is responsible for 

around 12% of the UK’s emissions, three quarters 
of which comes from private businesses, with 
the remainder from public buildings. In addition, 
energy use for cooling is more significant in the 
commercial sector than for residential buildings. 

2.18 Since 1990, emissions from buildings have 
fallen by around 9.2 MtCO


2

e, or 9%.28 

2.19 Over this period, government policies, 
including Warm Front, the Energy Efficiency 
Commitment and the Carbon Emissions 
Reduction Target have dramatically accelerated 

Chart 6: Proportion of UK emissions from the buildings sector in 2009 (by end use and by source)29 

UK GHG emissions in 2009, 
by end user 



38% 


Industry 23% 

Buildings 38% 

Transport 24% 

Agriculture and 
land use 9% 

Waste 3% 

Exports 3% 

Emissions from buildings 2009 by end use 

UK GHG emissions in 2009, 
by source 

17%	 

Electricity generation 27% 

Industry 23% 

Buildings 17% 

Transport 22% 

Agriculture and 
land use 9% 

Waste 3% 

Emissions from buildings 2009 by source 

Domestic – 
space heating 
Domestic – 
hot water 
Domestic – 
cooking 
Domestic – lighting, 
appliances and other 
Non-domestic – 
space heating 
Non-domestic – 
hot water 
Non-domestic – 
cooking 
Non-domestic – 
lighting, appliances 
and other 

Source: UK greenhouse gas statistics 

28	 This section covers all heat and power in relation to domestic, commercial, private and public buildings (but not industrial process heat or power). 
The sectoral breakdowns in this report are for illustrative purposes only. Annex B presents emissions and savings data using the standard Updated Energy 
and Emissions Projections/National Communication basis. 

29	 The emissions estimates in this section refer to greenhouse gas emissions from combustion of fuels (primarily gas, oil and coal) and have been presented both 
by end use and by source. This breakdown is particularly important where emissions from electricity generation make up a significant amount of the total. 




30 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

the deployment of cavity wall and loft insulation. 
In 2010 alone, over 400,000 existing homes 
received cavity wall insulation and over a million 
lofts were insulated, leading to warmer homes 
and savings on energy bills (see chart 7). And, as a 
result of the 10.8 million cavity walls insulated so 
far, the UK will save over £1 billion this year on its 
national heating bill. 

2.20 In addition, new buildings standards mean 
that a house built today demands only a fraction of 
the energy for space heating required by a house 
built before 1990. Improvements in this area have 
also been supported by new condensing boiler 
standards. Since legislation was introduced in 2005 
mandating the installation of condensing boilers30 in 
all but special applications, installation rates have 
increased to over 1.5 million a year (see chart 8), 

which in turn has saved 4.1 MtCO


2

e alone.  

This has led to savings for many householders 
(approximately £95 off their energy bills this year) 
and at least £800 million for the UK as a whole.31 

Where we will be in 2050 
2.21 By 2050 the emissions footprint of our 
buildings will need to be almost zero. We can 
achieve this through a mix of two main changes: 

•	 Reducing demand for energy in buildings 
By increasing the thermal efficiency of buildings 
through better insulation; by encouraging 
consumers to use smarter heating controls 
and Smart Meters; and by improving the 
energy efficiency of lighting and appliances, 
and encouraging more efficient use of hot 

Chart 7: Cavity walls insulated since 1990 and remaining uninsulated cavities 


20 


Existing uninsulated cavity walls 
remaining: 7.5 million 


18 16 

Harder to treat: 
4.9 million 


14 

Easy to treat: 


12 


2.6 million 

July 2011: 10 

10.8 million 


8 

Other cavity wall insulation – 
including retrofit: 6.9 million 


6 4 


Cavity wall insulation – installed in 2 

new builds since 1990: 3.8 million 


0 Millions of cavity walls insulated 

1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 
Year 

Source: Department of Energy and Climate Change 

30 Condensing boilers can reach efficiencies of around 90%. 
31 Savings calculated based on the average efficiency improvements of condensing boilers. 




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 31 

water. Better demand management can save 
money, bringing down energy bills, and release 
resources to support other activity and 
promote growth. 

•	 Decarbonising heating and cooling supply 
By supporting the transition from conventional 
gas and oil boilers to low carbon heating 

alternatives such as heat pumps and more 
efficient systems such as heating networks or 
combined heat and power. A move away from 
fossil fuels for heating, hot water and appliances 
can reduce our dependence on imports and 
associated price volatility, thereby improving the 
security of our energy supplies. 

Chart 8: Deployment of condensing and non-condensing boilers since 2001 


25 20 15  Millions10 5 0 

Year 

Non-condensing boilers 

Condensing boilers 

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 

Source: Department of Energy and Climate Change 




32 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

Chart 9: Emissions projections in the buildings sector for the first three carbon budgets and 
illustrative ranges of emissions abatement potential in the fourth carbon budget period and in 205032 



140 




120 e) tions (Mt CO

2 100 


80 Buildings emissions projec60 40 20 0 

CB1 CB2 CB3 CB4 

Projected emissions 
over the first four 
carbon budget 
periods 

Range of additional 
emission abatement 
over the fourth 
carbon budget 

Historical deployment for heating 
systems suggest mass period 
development of low carbon heat 
will need to start in the mid to Illustrative range of 
late 2020s. 

emissions abatement 
Early efforts to deploy and required in 2050 
monitor low carbon heating 
systems need to build supply To maximise benefit from low 
chains and bring down costs carbon heat, cost effective 
ahead of mass deployment. potential for domestic retrofit of 

all installations must be largely 
realised by 2027. 


2008201320182023202820332038204320482050 

Year 

Source: Department of Energy and Climate Change 

32 The emissions projections derive from UEP data. The illustrative ranges for emissions abatement potential for 2050 and the fourth carbon budget derive 
from the 2050 futures and fourth carbon budget scenarios – these are discussed in Parts 1 and 3 of this report respectively. 




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 33 

How we will make the transition 
2.22 Chart 9 on the previous page illustrates the 
trajectory we expect emissions from buildings to 
follow over the first four carbon budgets on the 
way to 2050. 

2.23 While we are on track for the first three 
carbon budgets, the UK will need between 26 and 
75 MtCO


2

e of additional abatement from buildings 

during the fourth carbon budget period, over 
and above what the Government expects to be 
delivered through current policy. Learning from 
history, it has taken around 40 years for cavity 
wall insulation to reach today’s level of market 
penetration. Achieving the scale of change ahead 
therefore requires us to start now. 

2.24 This decade we need to complete the cost 
effective ‘easy wins’ in the buildings sector. This 
means maximising our energy efficiency efforts 
over the next decade. This will reduce costs and 
the amount of low carbon heating needed in 
future years. 

2.25 The Government’s current policy package 
will depend on the final design of the Green 
Deal and Energy Company Obligation in the 
light of public consultation. It is likely to result in 
all practicable cavity walls and lofts having been 
insulated by 2020, together with up to 1.5 million 
solid walls also being insulated. 

2.26 We also need to prepare for the future. 
In the buildings sector, this means acting now to 
build the supply chain for low carbon heating, 
cooling, and lighting and appliances to stimulate 
the innovation and competition that will bring the 
cost of these technologies down to a level that will 
make them competitive with fossil fuel-based (or 
less efficient) alternatives. 

2.27 We will begin building the market for low 
carbon heating technologies, such as air- and 
ground-source heat pumps, so that these can 
displace expensive, carbon intensive alternatives. 
At the same time, we will encourage further 
deployment of heating networks, particularly in 
urban areas where building-level solutions may face 
more barriers. And in parallel we will continue to 
improve the efficiency of our existing gas boilers. 

2.28 The 2020s will be a key transitional decade 
in delivering mainstream low carbon heat from 
heating networks and in buildings, and will see 
the expansion of low carbon heat at scale into 
residential areas. Progress in the 2020s will be 
important in ensuring a smooth and cost effective 
transition to low carbon heat – 2030 would be 
the latest opportunity at which to begin roll-out 
at scale taking into account historical deployment 
trends (see chart 10 overleaf). 




2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030

Use of  natural gas to begin to wind down

Last date
to start

transition
to low
carbon

alternatives

Transition
to low
carbon

mainstream
by this


date


Historical installation rates suggest that
it may take around 20 years to

achieve desired market penetration of low 
carbon heat technologies

34 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

Chart 10: Decision points and key actions for buildings to 2030 

2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 

Opportunities this decade include deployment of  low carbon heat technologies in off-gas grid homes and commercial buildings 

Learning and monitoring of  low carbon heat installations through the 
Renewable Heat Incentive and the Renewable Heat Premium Payment 

Remove barriers to district heating implementing localised projects and pilot schemes 


w carbon

District heating network and supply chain to grow 


Lo Gasy efficiency measures Energ


Renewable 
Heat 

Incentive 
starts 

12% of 
heat from 
renewable 

sources 

Decision 
on gas 
grid 

investment 

Improving energy efficiency of  buildings 

Green 
Deal 
starts 

All new 
homes 
zero 

carbon 
from 
2016 

All new 


non-


domestic 
buildings 

zero 
carbon 

from 2019 



All 

remaining 
lofts and 

cavity 
walls 

completed 

Smart Meters mass roll-out 

Smart 
Meters 
roll-out 
starts 




2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Opportunities this decade include deployment of  low carbon heat technologies in off-gas grid homes and commercial buildings


Low carbon Gas Energy efficiency measures

Learning and monitoring of  low carbon heat installations through the
Renewable Heat Incentive and the Renewable Heat Premium Payment

Remove barriers to district heating implementing localised projects and pilot schemes

District heating network and supply chain to grow

12% of
heat from
renewable

sources

Renewable


Heat


Incentive
starts

Green


Deal

starts

All new
homes


zero


carbon


from2016


Smart
Meters
roll-out
starts

All new


non-


domestic
buildings



zero

carbon

from 2019


All

remaining
lofts and

cavity
walls

completed

Smart Meters mass roll-out

Improving energy efficiency of  buildings

Decision
on gas


grid


investment

2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 

Use of  natural gas to begin to wind down 

Last date 
to start 

transition 
to low 
carbon 

alternatives 

Transition 
to low 
carbon 

mainstream 
by this 
date 

Historical installation rates suggest that 
it may take around 20 years to 

achieve desired market penetration of low 
carbon heat technologies 

Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 35 




36 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets

Reducing demand for energy in 
buildings
2.29	 Reducing	our	demand	for	energy	is	the	
cheapest	way	of	cutting	emissions,	and	will	also	
benefit	consumers	and	our	economy:

•	 In	the	near term,	it	will	reduce	demand	for	gas	
and	electricity	in	buildings,	helping	to	bring	down	
emissions.

•	 In	the	medium term,	it	will	save	money	on	
bills,	releasing	spending	power	to	benefit	
the	economy	and	it	will	enable	smaller,	and	
therefore	cheaper,	low	carbon	heating	and	
cooling	systems	to	be	installed.

•	 In	the long term,	it	will	help	to	reduce	the	
challenge	of	balancing	the	electricity	grid.	

2.30	 The	Government	is	aiming	to	lead	by	
example	in	reducing	its	energy	demand.	On	
14 May	2010,	the	Prime	Minister	committed	the	
Government	to	reducing its carbon emissions 
by 10% in 12 months.	The	Government	has	
achieved	this	target,	reducing	its	emissions	by	
13.8%.33	Real-time	reporting	of	energy	use	has	
also	been	implemented	across	central	government	
headquarters	buildings	to	ensure	greater	public	
transparency	of	government	energy	efficiency.34

2.31	 We	can	achieve	a	reduction	in	energy	
demand	either	by	improving	the	energy	efficiency	
of	buildings,	lighting	and	appliances,	or	by	changing	
the	way	we	behave	so	that	we	use	energy	more	
intelligently	and	reduce	the	amount	we	need.

2.32	 As	a	result	of	the	boiler	standards	introduced	
in	2005,	savings	made	from	the	introduction	of	
condensing	boilers	up	to	2020	are	expected	to	
amount	to	around	£2	billion	a	year	for	the	UK	
as	a	whole.	Over	this	period	total	savings	from	
condensing	boilers	will	amount	to	£15	billion.35	
In	addition,	by	2020	we	will	also	capture	the	
remaining	potential	in	cavity	walls	and	lofts:	

•	 insulating	all	cavity	walls,	where	practicable,	by	
2020	(building	on	around	11	million	since	1990),	
saving	an	additional	£200	million	a	year;	and

•	 insulating	all	lofts,	where	practicable,	by	2020	
(building	on	9	million	lofts	since	1990).

Improving the heat efficiency of buildings
2.33	 Looking	beyond	2020,	we	may	need:

•	 between 1 million and 3.7 million additional 
solid wall insulations	by	2030	(see	chart	11	
overleaf);	and

•	 between 1.9 million and 7.2 million other 
energy efficiency related installations,	such	as	
improved	glazing,	by	2030.

2.34	 Many	energy	efficiency	measures	are	
inherently	cost	effective	and	help	people	
and	businesses	save	money	on	their	bills,	but	
barriers	such	as	upfront	costs,	disruption	and	
lack	of	information	about	how	to	take	up	these	
opportunities	can	present	real	problems.36

2.35	 The	Green Deal	is	the	Government’s	flagship	
energy	efficiency	policy,	designed	to	overcome	
barriers	to	improving	the	UK’s	building	stock.	
The	framework,	launching	in	2012,	will	mean	
that	households	and	businesses	will	have	the	
opportunity	to	improve	their	energy	efficiency	at	
no	upfront	or	additional	cost,	paying	back	through	
future	savings	on	their	energy	bills.	

2.36	 The	Green	Deal	will	promote	a	‘whole	
house’	approach,	offering	a	comprehensive	package	
of	measures	and	ensuring	that	the	needs	of	the	
property	are	assessed	as	a	whole.	This	will	mean	
that	the	improvements	happen	in	the	right	order	
and	that	hassle	and	disruption	are	minimised.	

2.37	 In	addition,	microgeneration	technologies	
may	be	eligible	for	the	Green	Deal	to	the	extent	
that	they	can	typically	be	expected	to	generate	

33	 This	was	an	ambitious	and	challenging	commitment	on	energy	efficiency,	spanning	3,000	central	government	office	buildings	and	300,000	civil	servants.
34	 Available	on	government	departments’	websites.
35	 Calculated	on	the	basis	of	20	million	condensing	boilers	being	in	place	in	2020.
36	 The	Energy	Efficiency	Deployment	Office	(EEDO),	which	will	be	set	up	in	the	Department	of	Energy	and	Climate	Change	by	the	end	of	the	year,	will	aim	

to	drive	a	step-change	in	energy	efficiency	by	supporting	existing	programmes	across	government	and	by	identifying	and	designing	a	strategy	to	realise	
further	energy	efficiency	potential	across	all	sectors	of	the	economy.




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 37 

Chart 11: Projected deployment of solid wall insulation over the first three carbon budgets and 
illustrative range of deployment over the fourth carbon budget period and in 2050 

Projected deployment 
over the first four 
carbon budget periods 

Range of additional 
deployment during 
the fourth carbon 
budget period 

Illustrative range of 
deployment in 2050 


9 

CB1 CB2 CB3 CB4 


8 , millions) 7 e

tiv 6 


ulations (cum5 Number of solid wall insula4 3 2 1 0 

By 2030 expecting to deploy 
an additional 1–3.7 million 
solid wall insulations. 

Projected deployment of 
up to 1.5 million insulations 
by 2020. 


2008201320182023202820332038204320482050 

Year 

Source: Department of Energy and Climate Change 

energy efficiency savings. The Government intends 
to use the Green Deal to provide information 
on low carbon heat alongside energy efficiency 
measures. The Government will in the future look 
to develop policy instruments for low carbon heat 
in a way which is compatible with our policies for 
reducing energy demand, so that consumers will 
be able to assess all options available. 

2.38 Private rented buildings are one of the most 
difficult sectors to improve. While tenants benefit 
from more energy efficient buildings, it is the 
landlords who decide whether to pay to make 
the changes. The Green Deal will help tackle this 
split incentive. 

2.39 The Government will work with the sector 
to encourage uptake of energy efficiency measures 
through the Green Deal. From 2016, domestic 
private landlords will not be able unreasonably 
to refuse their tenants’ requests for consent to 
energy efficiency improvements. In addition, 
the Energy Act 2011 contains provisions for a 
minimum standard for private rented housing and 

commercial rented property from 2018, and the 
Government intends for this to be set at Energy 
Performance Certificate band E. Use of these 
regulation-making powers is conditional on there 
being no net or upfront costs to landlords, and the 
regulations themselves would be subject to caveats 
setting out exemptions. If these powers are used, 
the Government envisages that landlords would be 
required to reach the minimum standard or carry 
out the maximum package of measures fundable 
under the Green Deal and Energy Company 
Obligation (even if this does not take them to 
band E). 

2.40 Alongside the Green Deal, the new Energy 
Company Obligation (ECO), which will provide 
an additional £1.3 billion a year, will play an 
important role in supporting the installation of 
solid wall insulation, and also in providing upfront 
support for basic heating and insulation measures 
for low-income and vulnerable households. The 
costs of ECO are assumed to be spread across all 
household energy bills in Britain. 




38 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

2.41 The UK’s building stock is one of the oldest 
in Europe and the Government recognises that, 
to enable the transition to a decarbonised building 
sector, standards will need to be raised in every 
type of housing. 

2.42 The Government is committed to successive 
improvements in new-build standards through 
changes to Part L of the Building Regulations in 
England and their equivalents within the Devolved 
Administrations. In October 2010, the new 
regulations in England and Wales introduced 
a 25% improvement on 2006 carbon emissions 
standards for new buildings, while regulation in 
Scotland delivered a 30% reduction on their 2007 
standards. In England, the current review of the 
Building Regulations is looking at opportunities 
for further improvements planned for 2013 
where these can be achieved while meeting our 
deregulatory aim. The Government intends to 
consult on these changes shortly. The review of 
Part L will also look at ways of generating take-up 
of greater levels of energy efficiency measures in 
existing buildings in order to help support demand 
for the Green Deal. 

2.43 In December 2010, the Government 
committed that all new non-domestic buildings 
in England would be zero carbon from 2019. 
And in the Plan for Growth,37 published alongside 
Budget 2011, the Government committed that 
all new homes from 2016 would be zero carbon. 
In driving investment in local low carbon energy 
generation and energy efficiency, zero carbon 
policy can work closely with local spatial planning in 
contributing to future growth. 

2.44 We also need to tackle the performance 
of the existing building stock, and ensure that the 
poorest and most vulnerable households are able 
to heat their homes affordably, in line with the aim 
of the Government’s efforts to tackle fuel poverty 
and achieve the statutory target.38 

2.45 Subject to public consultation, the ECO will 
therefore include an Affordable Warmth target, 
aiming to provide heating and insulation measures 
to low-income households and households in 

private tenures housing someone who is older, 
disabled or a child. In some circumstances, this will 
mean delivering low carbon heating, but the  
focus of this particular element of the ECO policy 
is likely to be on more efficient gas systems  
for households. 

Improving the electrical efficiency of 
lighting and appliances 
2.46 As well as improving the fabric of our 
buildings themselves, it will also be important to 
minimise the energy we use for our lighting and 
appliances. Energy-using products in our homes 
and offices, such as white goods, lighting and 
televisions, contribute around 14% of the UK’s 


CO2

 emissions. By removing the least efficient 

products from the market and promoting the sales 
of the most efficient, emissions and energy bills are 
reduced significantly. 

2.47 By the end of 2012, minimum EU 
performance standards and labelling conventions 
will have been agreed for most domestic and 
commercial appliances. Looking further ahead, 
these standards will also cover energy-related 
products, which may not directly use energy but 
which contribute to energy consumption, such as 
double glazing and insulation. The first of these is 
likely to be regulated from 2014. 

2.48 By 2020, the measures agreed so far are 
projected to save the UK 7 MtCO


2

e per annum, 

and the next tranche of measures are expected 
to save a further 6 MtCO


2

e per annum, subject to 

the stringency and timing of these measures being 
finalised in Europe. 

Changing behaviour to reduce demand 
2.49 The choices consumers and businesses make 
about how to use energy can have a huge impact 
on energy demand and on the costs they face. 
To help homes make the best use of their energy 
and prevent waste, the Government is mandating 
Smart Meters to be installed in every home by 
2019. Rolling out Smart Meters will enable people 
to understand their energy use and maximise 

37 See: http://cdn.hm-treasury.gov.uk/2011budget_growth.pdf 
38 Target to eradicate fuel poverty as far as reasonably practicable by 2016 (Warm Homes and Energy Conservation Act 2000). 

http://cdn.hm-treasury.gov.uk/2011budget_growth.pdf




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 39 

opportunities for energy saving. The Government 
is also mandating the provision of in-home 
displays for domestic customers and ensuring that 
consumers have the information and advice to 
make changes that will cut carbon and energy bills 
(through its consumer engagement strategy). 

2.50 Energy Performance Certificates (EPCs) 
are required on the sale, rent or construction of 
a building. Prepared by accredited and suitably 
qualified energy assessors, EPCs give consumers 
A to G ratings for a property’s energy efficiency 
and also provide advice on measures that can be 
carried out to improve its efficiency. The Energy 
Saving Trust estimates that the average household 
could save up to £300 a year by making energy 
saving improvements. Display Energy Certificates 
are required for buildings occupied by a public 
authority which are larger than 1,000 m² and are 
frequently visited by the public. 

2.51 A revised version of the domestic EPC will 
be launched in April 2012. It has been redesigned 
and made more consumer friendly with clear 
signposting to the Green Deal and information on 
which measures qualify for Green Deal finance. 
In future, the EPC will also be used as a mechanism 
to disclose the existence of a Green Deal on a 
particular property. 

2.52 The Government will also be producing 
guidance to support local authorities and social 
landlords to cut carbon emissions and maximise 
the opportunities for energy efficiency retrofit. 
This will help to drive forward large-scale retrofit 
of social housing, helping to stimulate the Green 
Deal and Energy Company Obligation markets. 

2.53 In order to address the energy efficiency 
potential that exists in large, non-energy-intensive 
businesses, the Government has put in place the 
CRC Energy Efficiency Scheme. This scheme, 
currently in its introductory phase, combines 
a range of mechanisms to address the barriers 
to energy efficiency deployment. Over 2,000 
participants submitted reports in July 2011 for 
the first compliance year. The Government is 
aware that a number of stakeholders have raised 

concerns about the complexity of the scheme. 
Therefore, in early 2012, the Government will 
issue a formal consultation on our proposals for 
a simplified scheme. 

2.54 The Government also believes that there 
may be potential for smarter use of heating 
controls to help save energy, by giving consumers 
and businesses greater control and flexibility 
over the way in which they heat and cool their 
homes. At a relatively simple level, thermostatic 
radiator valves (currently estimated to be deployed 
in around 55% of homes with a boiler)39 allow 
radiators to be turned down or off in rooms that 
are not in use. More sophisticated options, such 
as remote controls and sensors that respond 
to building occupancy, offer more possibilities. 
As these technologies develop, this may enable 
consumers to reduce the average internal 
temperature of their buildings – delivering savings 
of around 10% of energy use on space heating for 
every 1°C reduction – without experiencing a big 
change in their levels of thermal comfort. 

Decarbonising heating and cooling 
supply 
2.55 Achieving a cut in building emissions to 
virtually zero by 2050 will only be achievable if 
we decarbonise our supply of heat and cooling as 
well as reducing demand. It is likely that we will still 
get most of our heat from natural gas well into 
the 2020s. 

2.56 As things stand, we are increasingly 
dependent on other countries for our oil and 
gas supplies, and continuing to use these fuels 
may mean that we are more exposed to global 
pressures which lead to price spikes and increases. 
Keeping the price of energy competitive is crucial. 
For many years, our domestic consumers have 
benefited from the UK’s competitive energy 
market – from 2008 to the present day, UK gas 
prices have been among the lowest in Europe. 

2.57 As we look further ahead, the proportion of 
heat provided directly by natural gas will fall as we 
see increased use of low carbon technologies, but 

39 BEAMA analysis of EST HEC data and EHCS in the Heating and Hot Water Taskforce (2010) Heating and Hot Water Pathways to 2020. 




40 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

Chart 12: Projected deployment of total low carbon heat in buildings over the first three carbon budgets 
and illustrative ranges of deployment in the fourth carbon budget period and in 205040 



600 




500 TWh) tion 

( 400 


oject prw carbon he

a 300 


al

 lo 200 


ot T100 0 

CB1 CB2 CB3 CB4 

By 2030 delivering between 
83 and 165 TWh of low 
carbon heat, plus 10–38 TWh 
from heating networks. 

Projected deployment 
over the first four 
carbon budget periods 

Range of additional 
deployment during 
the fourth carbon 
budget period 

Illustrative range of 
deployment in 2050 


2008201320182023202820332038204320482050

Year 

Source: Department of Energy and Climate Change 

this will be a gradual process. Deployment of heat 
pumps and other low carbon heat technologies, 
and the construction of district heating systems in 
urban areas with high heat demand, will replace 
natural gas as the primary source of heat in this 
country, a process that has already started and 
will take many decades to complete. Continuing 
efforts to deploy highly efficient condensing boilers 
in homes and businesses remains a priority in the 
transition. 

2.58 Looking to the future, between 21% and 
45% of heat supply to our buildings will need to 
be low carbon by 2030. We will therefore need 
between 1.6 million and 8.6 million building-level 
low carbon heat installations by 2030, delivering 
83–165 terawatt hours (TWh) of low carbon heat, 
alongside 10–38 TWh of low carbon heat delivered 
through heating networks (see chart 12).41 

40	 The main differences in assumptions between government modelling and that done by the Committee on Climate Change (CCC) are around the cost and 
effectiveness of heat pumps where the Government assumes that performance and cost do not improve as quickly as the CCC does, and biomass, where 
the Government assumes greater availability for low carbon heat than the CCC. However, the differences in assumptions lead to only a small difference in 
the expected deployment of low carbon heat to 2030. 

41	 In the lower range, our modelling shows mainly commercial installations take up low carbon heat, with a large heat load per installation. In the higher range 
most of the additional installations come from domestic-level heat pumps and biomass boilers, with smaller heat loads per installation. 




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 41 

2.59 The portfolio of technologies through which 
we can achieve the decarbonisation of heating and 
cooling supply is diverse. 

Box 7: Technology portfolio for low carbon heat 

Building-level technologies 

Biomass boilers – These work like conventional boilers, but instead of using natural gas or heating oil 
they burn biomass, such as wood pellets, to produce the heat used to provide heating and hot water. 

Electrical resistance heating – This converts electrical energy directly into heat. It can also be used as 
secondary back-up heating or with a storage system which takes advantage of cheaper electricity, sold 
during low demand periods such as overnight. 

Heat pumps – These use electricity to leverage ambient heat from the air or ground (or in some 
cases from water), using a compressor just like a fridge. This allows heat pumps to work at efficiencies 
far higher than even the best gas boilers, typically producing three units of heat for every unit of 
electricity. Heat pumps can either directly heat the air inside a building or heat up water for central 
heating and hot water systems. Some heat pumps can also be operated in reverse cycle mode to 
provide cooling. Heat pumps perform better in houses with low temperature heat emitters.42 

Micro-combined heat and power (CHP) – CHP is described below and, in the form of micro-CHP, 
can be used as an alternative to boilers to provide heat and electricity at building level. 

Solar thermal hot water – For buildings with sufficient south-facing roof space, solar panels can 
be fitted and connected to a water tank to provide hot water. This will not usually be sufficient to 
meet all of a building’s hot water needs year round, but it can be an effective, low carbon way to 
supplement other sources of water heating. 

Network-level technologies 

Combined heat and power (CHP) – Technologies that generate both heat and electricity are 
collectively known as CHP. These can use a range of fuels (not necessarily low carbon) including 
biomass, wastes and bioliquids. At present, CHP is most commonly used by industry to provide heat 
and electricity for large sites. It can also be used to provide a source of heat for heating networks. 

Gas grid biomethane injection – Sustainable biomass and wastes can be converted to gas and 
upgraded to biomethane, a gas that can directly replace or blend with natural gas in the grid and is 
compatible with existing boilers. This could be done at a large scale, or in smaller areas of the grid 
ringfenced for this purpose. 

Heating networks – Heat can be generated by commercial-scale low carbon heat installations such 
as heat pumps or biomass boilers, or using low-grade heat generated in thermal power stations. Heat 
exchangers then transfer the heat into buildings via a network of steam/hot water pipes to provide 
space heating and hot water. 

42 Most houses’ heat emitters in the UK have small surface area and consequently must operate at higher temperature to maintain comfort. Therefore, heat pump 
installation is usually accompanied by replacement of radiators (e.g. with underfloor heating, or with radiators more appropriate for use with heat pumps). 




42 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

Building-level technologies 
2.60 Decarbonisation at the level of individual 
buildings substitutes current heating systems (such 
as gas boilers) for low carbon alternatives such as 
heat pumps or biomass boilers. Of the technology 
choices described in box 7, heat pumps are likely 
to be a particularly attractive option. Their ability 
to operate at efficiencies of up to 300%, to use 
electricity – which will also be decarbonised in the 
medium to long term – as a fuel, and the flexibility 
for some to provide cooling as well as heating, 
makes them a strong candidate to provide space 
heating, hot water and cooling for domestic and 
commercial buildings into the future. 

2.61 The portfolio of options above have specific 
strengths and applications for which they are 
best suited. There are also technical and practical 
barriers to these technologies and measures, which 
will need to be addressed if we are to see large-
scale deployment. 

2.62 All households and businesses will need to 
play a part in this transformation. The Government 
aims to create the right conditions for homes and 
businesses to generate their own heat using low 
carbon technologies or make use of low carbon 
heat from a heat network, but there are a number 
of key obstacles to overcome, including the 
following: 

•	 Low carbon heat technologies such as heat 
pumps and biomass boilers are still expensive 
relative to conventional boilers, costing in 
excess of £5,000, and payback periods for this 
investment are often long. This is by far the 
biggest barrier to deployment. 

•	 Low carbon heat technologies take longer to 
install compared with a conventional boiler, 
which offers a particular barrier given that 
heating systems are often ‘distress purchases’ – 
bought only when the old system breaks down. 

•	 The installation of technologies such as ground-
source heat pumps requires a specialist skill set, 

meaning that finding installers with adequate 
training and skills is a potential barrier to 
deployment. 

•	 Heat pumps in particular can place added strain 
on the electricity grid. This can partially be 
managed through the use of storage, such as 
hot water cylinders to store heat, or batteries 
to store electricity generated off-peak. 

2.63 While we do not expect mass market 
deployment ahead of the 2020s, there are 
important opportunities now to build a market 
for low carbon heat in buildings, particularly in 
commercial buildings and off-gas grid homes. 
Many public and commercial buildings have already 
taken up energy efficiency measures, and work 
to develop low carbon heating in public and 
commercial buildings will help to build the supply 
chain for low carbon heat in the UK. Cooling 
demand is also expected to rise significantly in 
these buildings, so increasing the efficiency of 
air conditioning units and installing low carbon 
alternatives such as reversible heat pumps will also 
be important. In the residential sector, 4 million 
households are not currently heated by mains 
gas, and many have to rely on expensive, higher 
carbon forms of heating. Heating oil is still used 
in around 2 million homes, for example. These 
households will gain more from switching to low 
carbon heating because their heating bills and 
carbon emissions are higher than average and they 
currently suffer the inconvenience of having to 
have fuel delivered. 

2.64 The Government is therefore committed 
to providing financial support for low carbon heat 
consistent with the UK’s 2020 renewables target.43 

The Renewable Heat Incentive (RHI) is the first 
financial support mechanism of its kind in the 
world to increase the deployment of renewable 
heat. Under phase 1 of the scheme, communities, 
charities, and public and private sector 
organisations can apply to receive a payment for 
generating heat using eligible low carbon heat 
technologies. The support levels will be set out 
in legislation. 

43 The 2009 Renewable Energy Directive sets a target for the UK to achieve 15% of its energy consumption from renewable sources by 2020. 




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 43 

2.65 Under phase 1 of the RHI, the Government 
expects to deliver:44 

•	 an additional 56.5 TWh of low carbon heat by 
2020 (of which, 30.5 TWh will be delivered 
to buildings – up to 112,000 low carbon heat 
installations), saving 43 MtCO


2

e overall (of which 

over half is from buildings) over the period 
2011–20; and 

•	 11% of our heat coming from new and 
diversified renewable sources, as part of an 
overall ambition to achieve 12% by 2020. 

2.66 The quality of installations and the supply 
chain to support low carbon heat need to be 
first class to ensure consumer confidence. The 
Government is requiring all RHI installations (up to 
and including 45 kWh) be installed by an accredited 
Microgeneration Certification Scheme installer. 

2.67 The Government expects to introduce 
support for the domestic sector under the 
second phase of the scheme. In the interim, the 
Government has launched the Renewable Heat 
Premium Payment (RHPP). The RHPP provides 
a single payment to households that install low 
carbon heat, and could deliver up to 25,000 
installations. A crucial part of the RHPP is then 
monitoring a significant number of installations 
made under the scheme. This information will 
inform the Government’s longer-term approach to 
support for low carbon heat. 

Network-level technologies 
2.68 At network level, substituting natural gas with 
sustainable biomethane in the grid is, at first glance, 
the least disruptive option. Decarbonising our heat 
and hot water supply without having to change 
our heating systems, and while using a gas grid that 
is already built, initially appears like an attractive 
option. 

2.69 However, injecting biomethane into the 
gas grid presents a number of challenges. With 
biomass likely to be needed for sectors that are 

hard to electrify, such as freight and some industrial 
processes, combined with doubts over the scale 
of sustainable global biomass supply, it would be 
high risk to assume that large-scale biomethane 
injection into the grid is a viable option. The 
gasification process or anaerobic digestion of 
UK-sourced  waste(s) or biomass could only 
meet a small proportion of UK demand, with gas 
consumption in buildings currently running at close 
to 500 TWh a year. Relying on imports would 
leave the UK exposed to international bioenergy 
prices that may rise substantially. Heat networks, 
where heat is generated remotely and supplied to 
buildings, offer a more promising option. 

2.70 Up to half the heat demand in England, 
and much of it in other parts of the UK, is found 
in areas that potentially have heat loads dense 
enough to make heat networks a viable means of 
delivering heating direct to homes and businesses. 
Combined in the medium and long term with 
low carbon heat sources, this offers a valuable 
alternative to building-level heating as a means of 
decarbonising the UK’s heat supply. 

2.71 Heating networks have the advantage of 
convenience and flexibility, and would allow for 
the cost effective deployment of transitional 
heat sources. For example, in the nearer term, 
it may make most sense for heat networks to 
be supplied by combined heat and power plants 
fuelled by natural gas but, in the long run, this may 
be supplanted by heat from nuclear or carbon 
capture and storage power plants, energy from 
waste plants or from dedicated large-scale heat 
generation through heat pumps or biomass boilers 
large enough to supply whole cities. This approach 
allows for a portfolio of heating sources to be 
deployed which best suit local contexts. 

2.72 Heat networks require significant 
deployment of new infrastructure and therefore 
face a number of barriers, notably the cost 
of installing the pipes, as well as questions of 
regulation, ownership and charging structures. 
Practicalities of geography can also restrict the 

44 The following figures include savings in industry which account for around 26 TWh of renewable heat in 2020, unless specified. These also reflect the 
impacts of the change in the large biomass tariff as a result of the EU ruling (however, this is not reflected in the annexes to this document). 




44 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

deployment of heating networks. The Government 
will set out in the new year how it will work with 
local authorities and other stakeholders to address 
barriers to district heating, along with barriers to 
other approaches to low carbon heat. 

2.73 The Government will therefore work with 
local authorities and other stakeholders to explore 
potential to remove barriers in these areas. 

2.74 The interactions between the different 
technologies and approaches described here 
for decarbonising our heat supply are complex, 
and will make a big difference to how we heat 
and cool our homes and businesses in future. 
The Government recognises the importance 
of low carbon heat to achieving our ambitions 
for decarbonising the economy and deploying 
renewable energy, as well as the importance to 
consumers of heating our homes and businesses in 
a secure, affordable way, and will therefore publish 
a document on its strategy for decarbonising 
heat in the new year. 




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 47 

TrAnsporT


 

Where we are now 
2.75 Domestic transport emitted around 137 


Mt CO2

e in 2009, accounting for around 24% of UK 

domestic greenhouse gas emissions (see chart 13 
below).45 Domestic emissions from transport rose 
steadily between 1990 and 2007, driven primarily 
by rising road traffic levels. They have since fallen 
back to roughly what they were in 1990. This fall is 
partly the result of the recent economic downturn, 
but statistical data suggests that the main factors 
have been improvements in new car fuel efficiency 
and the increased uptake of biofuels, driven by 
existing government and EU policy. 

2.76 By 2030 we project that current policies 
could mean that transport emissions reduce to 
around 116 MtCO


2

e.46 

2.77 By 2050 the transport system will need to 
emit significantly less carbon than today, while 
continuing to play its vital role in enabling economic 
growth, and provide many additional benefits such 
as lower fuel costs and better energy security. 

Where we will be in 2050 
2.78 There are many different types of transport 
and in this report they have been broken down 
into cars and vans, rail, local sustainable travel, 
freight, aviation and shipping, as well as considering 
the role of biofuels. 

2.79 The Government’s vision is that by 2050 
almost every car and van will be an ultra-low 
emission vehicle (ULEV), with the UK automotive 
industry remaining at the forefront of global 
ULEV production, delivering investment, jobs and 
growth. Due to the time needed for fleet turnover, 
this requires almost all new cars and vans sold 
to be near-zero emission at the tailpipe by 2040. 
These ULEVs could be powered by batteries, 
hydrogen fuel cells, sustainable biofuels, or a mix 
of these and other technologies. We cannot say 
for sure which technologies will emerge as the 
most effective means of decarbonising car travel, 
so it is essential that the Government takes a 
technology neutral approach, allowing us to achieve 

Chart 13: Proportion of UK greenhouse gas emissions from the transport sector, 2009 

Emissions by sector 
(end user basis) 

Industry 23% 

Buildings 38% 

Transport 24% 

Agriculture and 
land use 9% 

Waste 3% 

Exports 3% 



24% 


Emissions by transport sub-sector 

Cars 58% 

Vans 12% 

Heavy goods 
vehicles 17% 
Buses 4% 

Rail 3% 

Domestic aviation 
and shipping 5% 
Other 1% 

45 The equivalent figures by source are 121.6 MtCO


2

e, or 22% of UK emissions. 

46	 Transport emissions in the Updated Energy and Emissions Projections include off-road emissions, which are not included in transport emissions as reported 
on the National Communication basis. This means that 2030 emissions shown here are higher than those reported in emissions statistics. Figures exclude 
emissions from international aviation and shipping. 




48 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

emissions reductions in the most cost effective 
way. Rail travel will be substantially decarbonised 
through further electrification, more efficient 
trains and lower carbon fuels. If the Government’s 
proposals for high speed rail go ahead, a new 
national network linking London to Birmingham, 
Manchester and Leeds will transform rail capacity 
and connectivity, promoting long-term and 
sustainable economic growth. Passengers choosing 
sustainable travel options such as travel by public 
transport, cycling and walking will continue to 
deliver major social and economic benefits, and 
alternatives to travel, such as working from home, 
could increasingly do so too. 

2.80 The freight sector will have found lower 
carbon ways of working, such as modal shift to rail 
and water and more efficient driving techniques, 
and adopted the necessary ultra-low carbon 
technologies to continue to supply the UK’s 
factories and consumers while cutting back carbon 
emissions dramatically. 

2.81 Domestic aviation and shipping are already 
included in UK carbon budgets and so will 
need to contribute to meeting the 2050 target. 
International aviation and shipping are not currently 
included; a decision whether to include them is due 
by the end of 2012. 

2.82 Sustainable biofuels could play a key role in 
reducing emissions across the different transport 
sectors, although concerns about sustainable 
supply may limit their use. 

2.83 There are several interdependencies to 
be considered. Electrifying the car fleet or rail 
network would reduce tailpipe emissions from 
individual vehicles to zero, although the positive 
impact on economy-wide emissions relies on 
a low carbon grid. As a result there could be 
substantial benefits in local air quality and reducing 
traffic noise. Uptake of alternatives to travel could 
mean more emissions from heating and lighting 
commercial and residential buildings. There may 
also be competition for sustainable feedstocks 
between transport biofuels and bioenergy in 
other sectors. 

How we will make the transition 
2.84 Over the next decade, the Government will 
seek to make significant progress towards achieving 
the ‘easy wins’ in cutting emissions from transport. 
Cars and vans make up the largest share of 
emissions. Incentivising more efficient combustion 
engines and the use of sustainable biofuels is a 
central plank of the plan to reduce these emissions. 
Looking ahead, the emergence of ULEVs and 
hybrid and electric cars over this period will be 
crucial in preparing for progress in the 2020s. 

2.85 Other transport sectors will also need to 
take steps towards decarbonisation in the next 
decade. The freight industry will begin to reduce 
its emissions through increased efficiency and 
government support on infrastructure. Further 
electrification of the rail network will support low 
carbon modal shift in the future. Emissions from 
domestic aviation will be capped as part of the EU 
ETS. And the public will be encouraged to make 
lower carbon travel choices, such as taking public 
transport or cycling more often. 

2.86 With deeper cuts required through the 
2020s, we will move towards the mass market 
roll-out of ULEVs, such as those powered by 
electric batteries, hydrogen fuel cells and plug-in 
hybrid technology. Further improvements to the 
efficiency of conventional vehicles and sustainable 
biofuels are expected to play a vital role. Other 
sectors will need to continue to play a role. 

2.87 Chart 14 illustrates some possible emissions 
trajectories for decarbonising the transport sector 
overall over the next decade, over the fourth 
carbon budget and out to 2050. 

2.88 Details on action needed across the different 
modes of transport over the next decade and 
then during the fourth carbon budget are set 
out below. Chart 15 on pages 50 and 51 gives a 
summary of some of the key actions and decision 
points that will set us on the way to decarbonising 
transport. 




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 49 

Chart 14: Emissions projections in the transport sector in the first three carbon budgets and 
illustrative ranges of emissions abatement potential in the fourth carbon budget period and in 205047 



160 




140 




120 




100 80 60 40 20 0 e 2 Mt CO


CB1 CB2 CB3 CB4 

Projected emissions 
over the first four 
carbon budget 
periods 

Range of additional 
emissions abatement 
potential over fourth 
carbon budget period 

Illustrative range of 
deployment in 2050 

The UK will continue to rely on 
conventional technologies for 
many years, although efficiency 
will improve. 

The 2020s are a key transitional 
decade, with millions of ULEVs 
coming to market. 

Most cars have a lifespan of 
around a decade, so every new 
car and van will need to be near 
zero carbon by 2040 to achieve 
higher levels of ambition. 


2008201320182023202820332038204320482050 

Year 

47	 The emissions projections derive from Updated Energy and Emissions Projections data. The illustrative ranges for emissions abatement potential for the 
fourth carbon budget and 2050 derive from the 2050 futures and fourth carbon budget scenarios – these are discussed in Parts 1 and 3 of this report 
respectively. 




2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030



gets


    with EU targets

schemes and more efficient stock and intelligent systems

  measurement of  the car and van emissions target

Possible
future EU
car targets

Possible
future EU
van targets

50 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

Chart 15: Decision points for transport to 2030 

    with EU tar

2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 

Emissions from UK cars continue to decline in line  

EU target of 
130 gCO


2/km 


EU indicative target
 of 95 gCO


2/km 


Government support for early growth of  the ULEV market through incentives and support for infrastructure 

Ongoing review of development of ULEV market, including infrastructure requirements and need for additional incentives 

Emissions from UK vans continue to decline in line  

EU target


of 

175 gCO


2/km EU 

indicative 
target of

147 gCO


2/

kmEU agreement
on 2020 
targets 

Possible 
EU decisions 

on 2025 
targets 

Ongoing review of  the application and  

Electrification of  the Great Western Main Line and North West schemes Potential further electrification 
and energy efficiency improvements


 

The Local Sustainable Transport Fund supports local low carbon transport solutions


 

Industry-led Logistics Reduction Scheme to reduce its members’ emissions by 8% from 2010 

Review of 
industry-led
approach 

Government support for shift from road to rail and water


 

Review


 

Decision made on 
whether to include 

international aviation 
and shipping in

UK carbon budgets 

Development of  a Sustainable Aviation Framework 

Sustainable Aviation
Framework published


Cars and vans Rail Localainableel vt tra suseight Frtionalnaertion andvi




a shipping Inta Biofuel

s Increasing biofuel use to 5% by energy


 

Assessment of road biofuel potential 
Further biofuels contribution to 2020 renewable targets 
between 2014 and 2020 

Decision taken 
on biofuel use 

by 2020 

EU RED and 
FQD targets 




2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Emissions from UK cars continue to dec

Emissions from UK vans continue to dec


Cars and vans Rail Freight Biofuels

line in line      

ne      

nd    

line in li

 the application a

2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 

with EU targets 

Possible 
future EU 
car targets 

with EU targets 

Possible 
future EU 
van targets 

measurement of  the car and van emissions target 

schemes and more efficient stock and intelligent systems 


Internationalaviation andshipping Local sustainabletravel

Government support for early growth of  the ULEV market through incentives and support for infrastructure

Electrification of  the Great Western Main Line and North West schemes
and energy efficiency improvements

Potential further electrification

The Local Sustainable Transport Fund supports local low carbon transport solutions

Industry-led Logistics Reduction Scheme to reduce its members’ emissions by 8% from 2010

Government support for shift from road to rail and water

Review

Development of  a Sustainable Aviation Framework

Increasing biofuel use to 5% by energy

Assessment of road biofuel potential 
between 2014 and 2020

Further biofuels contribution to 2020 renewable targets

Ongoing review of development of ULEV market, including infrastructure requirements and need for additional incentives

Ongoing review of

EU target of 
130 gCO


2/km

EU target


of 

175 gCO


2/km

EU indicative target
 of 95 gCO


2/km EU

indicative
target of

147 gCO


2/km

Review of
industry-led
approach

Decision taken
on biofuel use

by 2020

Decision made on
whether to include 

international aviation
and shipping in

UK carbon budgets

Sustainable Aviation
Framework published


EU

agreement
on 2020
targets

Possible
EU decisions

on 2025
targets

EU RED and
FQD targets

Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 51 




52 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

Cars and vans 
2.89 Over the next decade, the focus will be 
on continuing improvements to the efficiency of 
conventional petrol and diesel cars, welcoming 
ULEVs to market, and supporting research and 
development into new ULEV technologies. 
Many major motor manufacturers have already 
taken a lead in bringing forward ULEV models 
and entering the growing UK market. The UK 
automotive industry is well placed to stay ahead 
of international competitors and remain a vibrant 
source of growth in the coming decades. 

2.90 The Government’s existing policy mix puts 
it on track to progressively reduce the carbon 
impact of cars and vans. Currently, a major driver 
of emissions reductions for both cars and vans are 
the EU new vehicle CO


2

 targets. These are set at 

130 gCO


2

/km in 2015 and 95 gCO


2

/km in 2020 for 

cars, and 175 gCO


2

/km in 2017 and 147 gCO


2

/km  

in 2020 for vans. EU emissions standards will 
continue to be vital in delivering the Government’s 
carbon reduction goals for cars and vans. 

2.91 A review of the 2020 car and van targets is 
due to complete by 1 January 2013, and in the next 
few years we expect the European Commission 
to make proposals for post-2020 new car and van 
emissions standards. As part of the Government’s 
mission to rebalance the UK economy and foster 
sustainable economic growth, it is important to 
create the conditions for long-term investment 
in the UK automotive industry. We will therefore 
work towards ambitious but realistic targets 
for vehicle standards beyond 2020 which, when 
considered alongside domestic policies, are 
consistent with both meeting the fourth carbon 
budget and reaching near-zero average new car 
emissions by 2040. 

2.92 To support early growth of the ULEV 
market, the Government is taking an integrated 
and pragmatic approach: 

•	 The 2010 Spending Review made provision 
for around £300 million over the life of this 
Parliament for consumer incentives to reduce 
the upfront cost of eligible ULEV vehicles to 
consumers and businesses. The Plug-In Car 
Grant provides 25% (up to £5,000) of the 

cost of an eligible vehicle and will be reviewed 
regularly to ensure that it remains the most 
effective way of incentivising uptake. Consumers 
and businesses also benefit from a favourable 
tax regime, with plug-in vehicles receiving 
exemptions from Vehicle Excise Duty and 
Company Car Tax, as well as Enhanced Capital 
Allowances. 

•	 The £30 million Plugged-In Places programme 
is the key mechanism for commencing the 
roll-out of recharging infrastructure in the 
UK and providing learning to inform future 
development of a national network. 

•	 The Government published an electric vehicle 
infrastructure strategy, which set out a clear 
vision and the steps the Government is taking 
to remove barriers. There is potential for the 
Green Investment Bank to provide targeted 
financial solutions for appropriate plug-in vehicle 
infrastructure projects in the future. 

•	 To ensure necessary technological development 
the Government is supporting low and ultra-low 
emission vehicle research, development 
and demonstration (RD&D), focusing on 
priorities identified in conjunction with the 
UK Automotive Council. We will continue to 
monitor the level of RD&D support to ensure 
that barriers to the development of ULEV 
technologies through the 2020s are identified 
and tackled. 

2.93 The Government will continue its role in 
working with industry to identify and remove 
potential barriers to ULEV uptake as the market 
develops, for example in the provision of hydrogen 
infrastructure should the market develop this way. 

2.94 Over the fourth carbon budget, the 
efficiency of the car and van fleet will need to 
continue to improve, with accelerated uptake of 
ULEVs required in order to meet the 2050 target. 

2.95 The Government’s analysis for the fourth 
carbon budget has considered what level of 
average new car and van emissions might be 
necessary in the 2020s, independent of technology 
type. For new cars we consider a range of 
emissions between 50 gCO


2

/km and 70 gCO


2

/ km 




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 53

in 2030 to be plausible, and for vans a range 
between 75 gCO


2

/km and 105 gCO


2

/km. These 

scenarios are seen as credible but challenging by 
industry, and they are all consistent with the goal 
of ensuring that average emissions of new cars 
and vans are near-zero at the tailpipe by 2040 
(see chart 16). 

2.96 By pursuing a framework for improvements 
in average fuel efficiency as opposed to specific 
technology targets, the Government intends to 
create the incentives for industry to develop the 
emissions reduction technologies that work best 
for consumers.

2.97 Barriers to ULEV uptake include costs 
of ownership including insurance; consumer 
acceptability, for example over the range of 
battery electric vehicles, or payload requirements 
for vans; availability, and cost of natural resources 
such as lithium and rare earth metals; and the 
appropriate infrastructure for different ULEV 
technologies, providing adequate re-charging 
access and speed. Our strategy is designed to 
tackle these barriers as detailed at paragraph 2.92. 
Nevertheless uncertainties around when these 
barriers will come down could mean mass ULEV 
uptake is delayed into the 2030s.

Chart 16: Projected average new car and van emissions over the first three carbon budgets and 
illustrative ranges of average new car and van emissions in the fourth carbon budget period and 
to 2050


250200150100500Cars and vans (g CO2/km)

Vans (2030: 105 gCO2/km)Vans (2030: 90 gCO2 /km)Vans (2030: 75 gCO2/km)
Cars (2030: 70 gCO2/km)Cars (2030: 60 gCO2/km)Cars (2030: 50 gCO2/km)


205020472044204120382035203220292026202320202017201420112008

Increasing internal combustion engine e�ciency

Increasing uptake of ultra-low emission vehicles



Year

54 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

Box 8: Some technology options for road transport 

Battery electric vehicle: A vehicle driven by an electric motor and powered by rechargeable 
batteries, as opposed to a hydrogen fuel cell or a petrol/diesel combustion engine. 

Flywheel hybrid vehicle: A vehicle with a mechanical flywheel energy storage device that captures 
kinetic energy when braking, returning the energy to the wheels on acceleration. 

Gas-fuelled heavy goods vehicle: A heavy goods vehicle (HGV) powered by natural gas or biogas 
rather than diesel. 

Hybrid electric vehicle: A vehicle powered by a combustion engine with varying levels of electrical 
energy storage captured when braking and stored in a battery or supercapacitor. 

Hydrogen fuel cell electric vehicle: A vehicle driven by an electric motor powered by a hydrogen 
fuel cell which creates electricity on board. 

Plug-in hybrid electric vehicle: A plug-in version of a full hybrid, usually with a larger battery and a 
greater electric driving range. In addition to capturing energy when braking, the on-board battery can 
be charged from an external source when the vehicle is not in use. 

Series hybrid: A plug-in hybrid where the wheels are driven exclusively by an electric motor with an 
additional internal combustion engine connected in series. The engine runs at optimum efficiency to 
power an on-board generator to charge the battery. ‘Range extenders’, which use a small combustion 
engine to charge the battery to enable longer-distance journeys, are a type of series hybrid. 

Ultra-low emission vehicle (ULEV): Any vehicle that emits extremely low levels of carbon emissions 
compared with current conventional vehicles. 

Rail 
2.98 Over the next decade, the Government 
will make and start to implement decisions 
about rail which will continue over the fourth 
carbon budget. Government has committed to 
the electrification of the Great Western Main 
Line as far west as Cardiff, and routes in the 
North West, and, as announced in the recent 
Autumn Statement, will also take forward the 
electrification of the North Trans-Pennine 
route from Manchester to York via Leeds. 
Other schemes are also under consideration for 
electrification, including of the Midland Mainline 
and the Welsh Valleys. While additional abatement 
is likely to be modest, it can nevertheless be a cost 
effective way to cut carbon, particularly where 
the technical difficulties of electrifying are small, 
and the lines are well used delivering considerable 
wider economic benefits. 

2.99 The Government is also working closely with 
the rail industry to improve energy efficiency and 
reduce emissions across the rail network. Next 
year the rail industry will publish its second Rail 
Technical Strategy assessing how, over the longer 
term, technology can help to deliver a more cost 
effective, higher capacity, higher performance and 
lower carbon railway. 

2.100 A decision on the Government’s strategy 
for a national high speed rail network, and on 
the proposed route of the initial London–West 
Midlands link, is due in December 2011. This initial 
phase would be broadly carbon neutral, with 
the potential for valuable carbon reductions as 
the network is expanded further north. Such a 
national network could see as many as 6 million 
air trips and 9 million road trips switching to high 
speed rail each year, reducing carbon and cutting 
congestion on roads and at airports. 




Local sustainable travel 
2.101 Over the next decade, sustainable travel 
measures, such as encouraging the use of local 
public transport, cycling or walking, will enable 
people to make lower carbon travel choices. 
In doing so they will reduce emissions, boost the 
local economy through reduced congestion, and 
improve air quality and health. Alternatives to 
travel could also grow in prominence: technological 
advances (such as video conferencing) have the 
potential to shift the location and pattern of travel 
for both work and leisure, with potential carbon 
benefits from reduced travel demand, as well as 
economic, social, and environmental gains. 

2.102 The Government has introduced the Local 
Sustainable Transport Fund (worth £560 million 
over the lifetime of the current Parliament) to 
enable local authorities to deliver transport 
solutions that build strong local economies and 
cut carbon emissions. In the recent Autumn 
Statement the Government announced a 
further £50 million to be used by local transport 
authorities for small transport improvement 
schemes costing less than £5 million, as well as up 
to a further £25 million for the Green Bus Fund 
for the purchase of low carbon emission buses. 

2.103 Over the fourth carbon budget, more 
people choosing to take public transport, walk 
or cycle could mean up to a 5% reduction in 
urban car trips. However, uncertainties around 
the impact of individual initiatives, and barriers 
such as convenience, safety and appropriateness 
to journey, may prevent the highest levels of 
abatement from being realised. 

Freight 
2.104 Over the next decade there are likely to 
be a range of measures that will help to reduce the 
carbon impact of freight. These include eco-driving 
techniques, better management of logistics supply 
chains, improved vehicle design using lower carbon 
fuels, and making best use of other modes such 
as rail. 

Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 55 

2.105 Industry and the Government are already 
taking a range of actions to drive down emissions 
from freight: 

•	 There is considerable industry appetite to 
take the lead in making cost effective carbon 
reduction happen. The Government has 
endorsed the Freight Transport Association-
led Logistics Carbon Reduction Scheme, which 
records and reports emissions reductions 
from road freight and has set a target for its 
members of an 8% reduction in emissions 
between 2010 and 2015. The success of this 
industry-led approach will be reviewed in 2012. 

•	 The Government provides the Mode Shift 
Revenue Support and Waterborne Freight 
Grant schemes in England and Wales, to 
support modal shift which is not always 
commercially viable for the operator. The 
Government is also facilitating provision of 
infrastructure, such as improved capacity at 
our ports by consenting for major container 
terminal developments. In addition, Network 
Rail is funded to deliver over £200 million 
in Strategic Freight Network enhancements 
through to 2014, with an additional £55 million 
funding being made available in the Logistics 
Growth Review to improve rail connectivity to 
Felixstowe port. 

2.106 The Government has also launched a trial of 
longer semi-trailers which will help to identify the 
potential carbon benefits that could be achieved 
from their wider introduction and the consequent 
reduction in the number of lorries on the roads.48 

The recently published Logistics Growth Review 
also includes a package of measures to overcome 
some of these barriers and uncertainties and to 
help put the UK on track to deliver a deep cut in 
road freight emissions by 2050. These measures 
will support green growth by encouraging the 
adoption of low emissions HGV technologies and 
the development of the UK manufacturing base 
in these technologies. The Government is making 
available £8 million to pump-prime investment 
in low emissions HGVs and their supporting 
infrastructure. 

48 See: www.dft.gov.uk/publications/longer-semi-trailers 

http://www.dft.gov.uk/publications/longer-semi-trailers




56 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

2.107 Over the fourth carbon budget, significant 
further efficiency improvements could be possible, 
although there are considerable uncertainties. In 
the longer term the sector will require alternative 
technologies and fuels to deliver more substantial 
carbon reductions. The Government believes 
that initial market take-up of some of these low 
emission technologies, such as gas-fuelled lorries 
and flywheel hybrids, is challenging but achievable 
during the fourth carbon budget. This would 
require barriers, such as uncertainties over costs 
and infrastructure requirements, and concerns 
over vehicle range, weight and size issues with 
some low emissions options, to be overcome. 

Aviation and shipping 
2.108 Over the next decade, emissions from 
domestic aviation are included in the EU Emissions 
Trading System (EU ETS). Domestic aviation 
and shipping are included in UK carbon budgets, 
although they contribute a very small proportion 
of total emissions. 

2.109 International aviation and shipping emissions 
are not currently included in the UK’s 2050 
target and carbon budget system, although 
international aviation is included in the EU ETS. 
The Government must decide whether to include 
them by the end of 2012, or explain to Parliament 
why it has not done so. This decision will need to 
be considered alongside development of the UK’s 
sustainable aviation policy framework through 
2012/13, which will also consider whether to 
adopt the previous administration’s 2050 aviation 


CO2

 target. 

Biofuels 
2.110 Over the next decade, use of biofuels in 
the UK is covered by the EU Renewable Energy 
Directive (RED),49 which requires that 15% of 
total energy consumption and 10% of energy for 

transport come from renewable sources by 2020, 
and the EU Fuel Quality Directive, which requires 
a 6% reduction in the greenhouse gas intensity of 
fuel by 2020.50 The Government has committed 
to the target of 5% biofuels use by volume by 
2014 but has not yet decided on an appropriate 
level of biofuel ambition post-2014, pending 
further consideration of sustainability issues 
(including those about indirect land use change) 
and cost effective delivery of the 15% target. The 
Government proposes to consult in 2012 on the 
approach for biofuels to 2020. 

2.111 The main driver of increasing biofuel uptake 
is the Renewable Transport Fuels Obligation. This 
requires suppliers of liquid fossil fuel intended 
for road transport to increase the proportion 
of biofuel in their fuel annually until April 2013, 
when it will reach 5% of total road transport fuel 
supplied by volume. The Government consulted 
on changes to this legislation earlier this year and 
published a response in November 2011.51 

2.112 It is important to ensure that the negative 
indirect impacts of biofuels are minimised, and 
that in the longer term there remains scope to 
deploy biofuels in sectors where there are few 
other options to decarbonise. The Government’s 
forthcoming Bioenergy Strategy will address 
these issues. 

2.113 Over the fourth carbon budget, given 
this uncertainty, for the purposes of analysis for 
the fourth carbon budget we have assumed 
biofuel uptake in 2020 of 8% by energy, in line 
with recommendations of the Committee on 
Climate Change. Over the fourth carbon budget 
period, we have modelled scenarios in which this 
level increases to 10%, decreases to 6%, or stays 
constant at 8% out to 2030. These scenarios do 
not prejudge the policy decisions to be made. 

49 Under the RED some biofuels, such as those made from waste, can be double counted towards the 10% target, although not towards the 15% target. 

50 Relative to the lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions from fossil fuels.


 

51 See: www.dft.gov.uk/consultations/dft-2011-05


 

http://www.dft.gov.uk/consultations/dft-2011-05




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 57 

next steps 
2.114 The key challenge in transport is 
decarbonising travel in a way that is both cost 
effective and acceptable to consumers. In the 
fourth carbon budget, increasing efficiency 
in cars, vans and freight practices, ultra-low 
emission vehicle technologies, sustainable biofuels, 
sustainable travel choices and electrified rail will 
all have a role to play, and the Government’s 
technology neutral approach will allow industry 
to develop the low carbon technologies most 
appropriate for users. The existing policy mix puts 
the Government on a pathway to realise this vision 
for low carbon transport, but it will continue to 
be reviewed regularly, and in future will require 
further ambitious measures such as EU car and 
van emissions targets for beyond 2020. 




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 59 

indusTry 

Where we are now 
2.115 UK industry was responsible for 131.6 


Mt CO2

e of emissions in 2009, accounting for 

23% of the UK’s total emissions.52 Over 80% of 
these emissions originate from generating the 
heat that is needed for industrial processes such 
as manufacturing steel and ceramics, and the 
remainder from chemical reactions involved in 
processes such as cement production. 

2.116 Between 1990 and 2009, end user emissions 
from industry have reduced by 111 MtCO


2

e. While 

the UK industrial sector has grown by an average 
of 1% a year over the last 40 years, the sector’s 
emissions have fallen by 46% since 1990. Embracing 
cost effective, energy efficiency measures, as well 
as sectoral readjustments towards higher-value 
products, has helped to drive this lower carbon 
growth. The energy intensity of UK industry has 
fallen on average by 2.7% a year since 1970. Since 
1990 this average has declined to 1.3% a year.53 

2.117 Around a quarter of UK energy demand is 
consumed by industry. Natural gas, electricity and 
oil/petroleum are the main energy sources for the 
sector. UK industry employs over 4 million people, 
accounting for around 15% of the UK workforce 
and a third of the national GDP.54 The sector is 
varied and complex, covering very different modes 
of production, material demands, ownership and 
end products. It is one of the main drivers of a 
flexible and strong UK economy. 

Where we will be in 2050 
2.118 If industrial emissions were to remain steady 
over the coming decades, they would grow from 
23% now to over half of the emissions allowed 

by the 2050 target. In order to achieve the UK’s 
commitment to cutting emissions by 80% by 2050, 
this level of industry emissions would require an 
excessive reduction from other sectors. Thus, the 
industry sector has to contribute its fair share. 

2.119 Decarbonising the UK economy could 
require a reduction in overall industry emissions of 
up to 70% by 2050. Achieving this while maintaining 
competitive growth in the sector could entail the 
following:55 

•	 The historical growth trend of 1970 to 2009 
continues, leading to industrial output increasing 
by over 30% to 2050. 

•	 Energy demand by industry decreases by up to 
a quarter from today’s levels. 

•	 Industry achieves a decrease of up to 40% in 
energy intensity through a mix of fuel switching 
and taking up remaining efficiency opportunities. 

•	 Over half of industrial energy demand is 
supplied by either bioenergy or electricity. 

•	 Carbon capture and storage rolls out during 
the 2020s, and by 2050 could capture around a 
third of industry’s emissions.56 

2.120 This low carbon transition will inevitably 
be challenging, but at the same time it has the 
potential to bring real benefits for UK industry: 

•	 Taking up the remaining opportunities for 
energy, material and process efficiency will 
reduce manufacturing costs and boost the 
competitiveness of UK industry. 

52 The equivalent figure by source is 129.1 MtCO


2

e (23% of UK emissions). 

53	 See DECC (2010) Energy Consumption in the UK: Industrial data tables. Available at: www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/statistics/publications/ecuk/ecuk.aspx, 
table 4.5. 

54 Office for National Statistics (2009) Annual Business Survey, Production and Consumption Sectors (B–E). 
55 See Annex A of this document and, for more detail, 2050 Futures from the 2050 Pathways Calculator spreadsheet. 
56 AEA Technology (2010) Analysing the Opportunities for Abatement in Major Emitting Industrial Sectors: Report for The Committee on Climate Change. 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/statistics/publications/ecuk/ecuk.aspx




60 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

•	 Low carbon manufacturing, using inputs such 
as sustainable biomass and future supplies of 
decarbonised electricity may increasingly be 
demanded by both UK and export markets. 

•	 Moving to low carbon technologies in other 
sectors of the economy will create new markets 
for the goods produced by UK industry: the 
steel for wind turbines, the aluminium for 
electric vehicles and the cement for new homes. 
We also depend on industry to manufacture 
components for power stations, ships, planes 
and home appliances – products which need 
to become ever more energy efficient and low 
carbon over the coming decades.57 

How we will make the transition 
2.121 A number of technologies will be needed to 
make the transition to low carbon industry. These 
technologies are at varying stages of development 
and commercialisation, and range from well 
established, mature technologies to those which 
are still at laboratory stage, meaning there remains 
significant uncertainty about how and where they 
will be deployed. 

2.122 This decade, we expect industry to focus 
on cost effective measures such as energy, process 
and material efficiency. Industry needs to continue 
to seize opportunities to boost energy, process 
and material efficiency, and new opportunities 
will arise as new technologies and materials are 
developed. As technologies mature, energy 
efficiency is likely to continue to improve over the 
coming decades, albeit at a decreasing rate. 

2.123 Action this decade will also help industry 
prepare for the future, to support the innovation 
needed for more technically challenging or costly 

measures involving advanced fuel switching or 
carbon capture and storage. 

2.124 The 2020s and beyond will see the 
continued take-up of remaining efficiency 
measures, but also greater deployment of more 
advanced decarbonisation measures in two 
main areas: 

•	 Fuel switching – The majority of industrial 
emissions arise from generating heat from fossil 
fuels for manufacturing processes, meaning 
that changing to lower carbon fuels such as 
sustainable biomass and biogas represents one 
of the most important means by which the 
sector can decarbonise over time. The type of 
fuel switching possible will differ between sub­
sectors.58 For lower temperature processes a 
range of options may be possible, for example 
using biomass boilers to generate the steam 
required, or ‘process integration’ for exploiting 
heat already used in higher temperature 
processes. Higher temperature processes 
often present a greater challenge, and may 
need innovative solutions such as sustainable 
biomass to replace coke, or a shift towards 
the electrification of processes. Fuel switching 
will develop gradually, depending on the needs 
of each sub-sector of UK industry and, in 
particular, the temperature of the heat required. 

•	 Carbon capture and storage (CCS) – For 
some industrial processes, greenhouse gas 
emissions are an intrinsic part of the chemistry 
and can only be mitigated through innovative 
options such as CCS. In the long term, the 
deployment of a combination of sustainable 
biomass and further CCS should be able to 
address remaining combustion and the carbon 
dioxide component of process emissions. 

57	 See, for example, CBI (2011) Protecting the UK’s Foundations: A blueprint for energy-intensive industries. Available at: www.cbi.org.uk/media-centre/policy­
briefs/2011/08/protecting-the-uks-foundations-a-blueprint-for-energy-intensive-industries/ 

58	 The industrial sector can be disaggregated into the energy-intensive industry (EII) sector, which tends to require significant amounts of high grade heat 
at 1,000°C and above (e.g. iron and steel or aluminium), and the non-EII sector, for which demand is generally for lower grade heat, typically around  
100–300°C (e.g. food and drink, pharmaceuticals). 

http://www.cbi.org.uk/media-centre/policy-briefs/2011/08/protecting-the-uks-foundations-a-blueprint-for-energy-intensive-industries/




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 61 

2.125 Process emissions will also need to be 
tackled. Fluorinated gas (F-gas) emissions from air 
conditioning and refrigeration currently make up 
around 2% of UK emissions. They are expected 
to decrease as a result of the impact of the 
current regulatory framework and voluntary 
moves by businesses to replace F-gases with other 
refrigerants with lower global warming potential. 

Energy, process and material efficiency 
2.126 The Government’s latest projections suggest 
that industrial energy consumption will fall by 12% 
by 2030 compared with 2008 levels (see chart 17 
overleaf). The main drivers of this drop in energy 
consumption will be as follows: 

•	 Conventional energy efficiency – While much 
has been achieved, there remain opportunities 
for greater energy efficiency in some areas, 
for instance through process optimisation and 
control or use of continuous processes rather 
than having to start and stop equipment. Many 
measures can be retrofitted, with rapid payback 
periods and little upfront capital investment. 

•	 Process and thermal efficiency – There are 
additional opportunities to reduce emissions 
through changing processes as well as making 
them more efficient, for instance through 
changes to improve process integration, or 
recovering and re-using heat. 

•	 Material efficiency – A number of measures 
can reduce the economy’s demand for the 
primary manufacture of energy-intensive goods 
and therefore reduce associated emissions. 
These include greater recycling, greater reuse 
with re-melting and greater commoditisation 
of products. 

2.127 The Government will continue to incentivise 
these efficiency improvements during this decade 
and beyond via a set of European and national 
policy frameworks: 

•	 European Union Emissions Trading System 
(EU ETS) – The cap-and-trade system covers 
over 70% of direct and indirect industrial sector 
emissions. The main incentive mechanism 
for emissions savings within this system is 
the gradual tightening of the cap as well as a 
resulting carbon price. The Government intends 
the EU ETS to remain a critical driver for the 
UK’s industrial low carbon transition for this 
decade and beyond. 

•	 Climate Change Levy (CCL) and Climate 
Change Agreements (CCAs) – Cost effective 
energy efficiency measures are also being 
supported by government policy instruments 
through the CCL. This is a tax charged on high 
carbon energy supplied to businesses and the 
public sector. The Government introduced 
the CCAs to reduce the impact of the CCL 
on the competiveness of energy-intensive 
industry, while still incentivising industry to take 
action to reduce emissions. These voluntary 
agreements provide a discount on the CCL 
for eligible industries in return for meeting 
challenging energy efficiency or emissions 
reduction targets.59 

59	 Current CCAs entitle participants to claim CCL discount until the end of March 2013. The Government announced in the 2011 Budget that the scheme 
will be extended to 2023, and is currently developing proposals that will simplify the scheme. These proposals will provide targeted financial benefits to 
business in the range of £2.4–£3.4 million from 2012 to 2020. 




62 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

Fuel switching 
2.128 Alongside energy efficiency-driven 
reductions in demand, government projections 
show a shift in energy consumption patterns. 
Industry currently receives the majority of energy 
from gas use. Towards 2030 government predicts 
a switch to more low carbon energy sources, such 
as bioenergy and electricity.60 

Chart 17: Energy use in 2008 and 2030 by fuel type and total for UK industry 

35,000 

30,000 


Thousand tonnes of oil-equivalent 


25,000 

20,000 

15,000 

10,000 

5,000 


0 

Electricity Gas Petroleum Solid/ Renewables Total energy 
manufactured fuels 

2008 2030 

Source: Department of Energy and Climate Change (Updated Energy and Emissions Projections)61 

60	 Analysis using the Energy End-Use Simulation Model (ENUSIM) suggests that there is remaining potential for further energy efficiency improvements. 
Further detail on future abatement potential has been derived from work undertaken by AEA Technology. We have undertaken analysis to expand the 
potential abatement beyond those considered in the AEA work (AEA Technology (2010) Analysing the Opportunities for Abatement in Major Emitting 
Industrial Sectors: Report for The Committee on Climate Change). In addition, we have undertaken modelling to calculate abatement due to the uptake of 
renewable heat and the initial deployment of CCS. 

61	 See: DECC (2011) Energy and Emissions Projections Annex C. Available at: www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/about/ec_social_res/analytic_projs/en_emis_ 
projs/en_emis_projs.aspx. Note: offshore refinery processes are excluded from this chart. 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/about/ec_social_res/analytic_projs/en_emis_projs/en_emis_projs.aspx




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 63 

2.129 Fuel switching in the industry sector is 
expected to take place via several routes: 

•	 Cogeneration/combined heat and power 
(CHP) – The combined production of heat and 
electricity can reduce primary energy demand 
by up to 15% regardless of the fuel input, 
making gas CHP an efficient way of using fossil 
fuels in industrial processes. Biomass and biogas 
can be used for the combined production of 
heat and electricity to provide further emissions 
reductions. 

•	 Sustainable biomass and biogas – Sustainable 
biomass and biogas offer a direct alternative to 
fossil fuels as a means of generating hot water 
and steam for low temperature processes up to 
around 300°C. To maximise energy efficiency 
in the use of sustainable biomass, it can be 
combined with cogeneration of electricity and 
heat. Some high temperature applications, such 
as cement kilns, may be suitable for biomass or 
waste combustion. Some applications, such as 
ceramics or glass furnaces, require high calorific 
value and clean burning fuels, and may therefore 
require the use of biogas. 

•	 Electrification of processes – As the grid 
decarbonises, electricity will become an 
important source of low carbon energy for 
industrial processes. Electricity is currently used 
to drive motors and machinery, compressors 
and refrigeration. It is also used to supply 
heat demand, particularly where volatile 
or flammable products are used or low 
temperature controllable heat is required. Some 
sectors already make extensive use of electricity 
especially where this is the only commercially 

available process, as it is for aluminium. Other 
processes may require further innovation and 
capital investment before being able to use low 
carbon electricity. 

2.130 In practice, it is likely that in the short 
term industry will exploit large-scale CHP 
opportunities, and will take up the cost effective 
potential for fuel switching to sustainable biomass 
(including energy from waste). In the 2020s and 
beyond, we may see deployment of options with 
longer payback periods and those which require 
greater innovation such as use of biomass in high 
temperature processes and, as we move towards 
a decarbonised electrical grid, electrification of 
industrial processes. 

2.131 Some critical technologies for fuel switching 
(such as advanced forms of sustainable bioenergy 
and electrolysis) are not yet at commercial stage. 
Public and private support to address innovation 
gaps, both in the UK and internationally, will be 
critical if we are to make these technologies a 
viable part of a low carbon future. 

2.132 The Renewable Heat Incentive (RHI) will 
support substantial deployment of bioenergy 
for the generation of low carbon heat within 
the commercial and industrial sectors. The 
Government estimates that up to 48% of the 
additional low carbon heat anticipated to provide 
the 12% low carbon heat necessary to meet the 
overall renewable energy target in 2020 will come 
from the industrial sector, including the generation 
of energy from waste. 

2.133 The Government will continue to incentivise 
a combination of natural gas-fired and renewable 




64 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

Chart 18: Emissions projections in industry for the first three carbon budgets and illustrative ranges 
of emissions abatement potential in the fourth carbon budget period and in 205062 



140 




120 




100 


e 80 2 


Mt CO60 40 20 0 

Projected emissions 
over the first four 
carbon budget 
periods 

Range of additional 
emissions abatement 
potential over 
the fourth carbon 
budget period 

Illustrative range of 
emissions abatement 
potential in 2050 

Over the coming decade, industry 
is likely to realise much of the 
remaining potential for cost 
effective energy efficiency. 

Options such as electrification, 
advanced uses of biomass and 
CCS will only happen in later 
decades with early efforts on 
innovation. 

The long (20–30 year) lifecycles 
of capital intensive equipment 
means that the 2020s could be 
a key decade for decarbonising 
large installations. 


2008201320182023202820332038204320482050 

Year 

Source: Department of Energy and Climate Change 

CHP. CHP, especially for large-scale industrial 
plants, constitutes a significant opportunity to 
enhance energy efficiency and lower emissions 
from the industrial sector. 

2.134 Chart 18 above illustrates the emissions 
trajectory for decarbonising the UK industry 
sector up to 2050, focusing in particular on the 
range of abatement potential over the fourth 
carbon budget period. 

2.135 The fourth carbon budget range on the 
above chart indicates the level of emissions 
abatement industry could achieve by taking up 
cost effective (that is, measures whose cost is 
lower than the projected carbon price) energy 
efficiency and fuel switching measures over the 
coming one and a half decades. These include 
measures incentivised through the European Union 
Emissions Trading System and Climate Change 
Agreements, for example process optimisation, 
and the Renewable Heat Incentive (RHI), using 

62	 The emissions projections derive from Updated Energy and Emissions Projections data for the industry and refineries sectors for CO


2

 emissions and the 

National Communication industrial processes and energy supply sectors for non-CO


2

 emissions. The illustrative ranges for emissions abatement potential 

for 2050 and the fourth carbon budget derive from the 2050 futures and fourth carbon budget scenarios – these are discussed in Parts 1 and 3 of this 
report respectively. Please also see: AEA Technology (2010) Analysing the Opportunities for Abatement in Major Emitting Industrial Sectors: Report for The 
Committee on Climate Change. 




bioenergy to produce hot water and steam for 
industrial processes. The variation between the 
fourth carbon budget range is due to different 
levels of low carbon heat take-up incentivised 
under the RHI. A central set of assumptions on 
what energy efficiency and CCS measures industry 
may choose to take up is included in the range. 
We recognise that there is uncertainty around the 
precise choices that will be made in such a diverse 
sector of the economy.63 

Industrial carbon capture and storage 
2.136 CCS has a role to play in capturing emissions 
from combustion of industrial heat, for example 
from the continued use of coke-fired blast furnaces 
for steel production, or for processes where 
emissions result directly from the chemistry of the 
process itself, such as the manufacture of cement 
or lime. Initial deployment of CCS technology is 
expected during the fourth carbon budget period, 
particularly for sectors with lower capture costs, 
e.g. ammonia production. 

2.137 Today, CCS technology research projects 
are supported by UK and international sources of 
funding – with the aim of turning it into a viable 
option for the coming decades.64 

2.138 Deployment of CCS needs to be planned 
within sufficiently long time spans. In the industrial 
sector, assets are typically of high capital value, 
with lifetimes of up to 40 years. It is often only 

Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 65 

possible to make significant changes or innovations 
to integrated processes when these assets are 
replaced or renewed, which may limit the rate at 
which technology can be adopted. 

2.139 Critical technologies – such as industrial 
CCS, high temperature use of biomass, or further 
electrification of thermal processes – may not 
be available at commercial scale for 10–15 years. 
While the exact phasing of the low carbon 
transition is uncertain and depends on investment 
choices by industry as well as international action 
and competition, we can identify some possible 
stages and decision points along the way (see 
chart 19 on pages 66 and 67). 

2.140 The Government will work with industry to 
address key risks of this low carbon transition, such 
as reducing the impact of the anticipated increasing 
cost of energy, to ensure that UK industry 
remains competitive internationally. This will be 
particularly important in those sectors which are 
especially exposed to rising energy costs as well 
as to international competition, where there is a 
role for government in helping these industries to 
manage the transition. As part of this work, the 
Government recently announced a package of 
measures to support sectors which are particularly 
exposed to these risks. 

63	 There have been significant revisions undertaken to the 2011 Updated Energy and Emissions Projections (www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/about/ 
ec_social_res/analytic_projs/en_emis_projs/en_emis_projs.aspx). This may impact upon previously undertaken analysis of abatement potential from, for 
example, AEA Technology. Therefore, we have taken up a lower level of ‘realistic’ energy efficiency abatement in our projections. For further information 
see: AEA Technology (2010) Analysing the Opportunities for Abatement in Major Emitting Industrial Sectors: Report for The Committee on Climate Change. 

64 See, for example, the EU-funded project for industrial CCS where CO


2

 capture is being applied at a steel plant in Florange, France. 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/about/ec_social_res/analytic_projs/en_emis_projs/en_emis_projs.aspx
http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/about/ec_social_res/analytic_projs/en_emis_projs/en_emis_projs.aspx




2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030

Post-2020 EU ETS in place

Negotiations with industry on deployment of CCS, especially for blast furnace investments

First deployment of industrial CCS

12% of


heatfrom


renewable
sources

66 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

Chart 19: Decision points for industry to 2030


 

2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 

European Union Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) 


erallvy otr Indusy efficeincy Energchingwit Fuel s S trial CCIndus

Climate Change Agreements 

CRC Energy Efficiency Scheme 

Renewable Heat Incentive 

Possible further legislative action on EU F-gas regulations 

Energy 
Intensive 
Industry 
Package 

International demonstration projects on CCS for power stations and industry 




2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

European Union Emissions Trading System (EU ETS)


Industry overall Energy efficeincy Fuel switching Industrial CCS

Climate Change Agreements

CRC Energy Efficiency Scheme 

Renewable Heat Incentive

Possible further legislative action on EU F-gas regulations

Energy
Intensive
Industry
Package

International demonstration projects on CCS for power stations and industry

2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 

Post-2020 EU ETS in place 

Negotiations with industry on deployment of CCS, especially for blast furnace investments 

First deployment of industrial CCS 

12% of 
heat 
from 

renewable 
sources 

Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 67 




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 69

Secure, loW carbon electricity 

Where we are now
2.141 The power sector is the single largest 
source of UK emissions today, accounting for 27% 
of emissions – 156 MtCO


2

e – in 2010. By 2050, 

emissions from the power sector need to be 
close to zero. Historically, the UK has benefited 
from robust security of supply, due to domestic 
natural resources and to competitive markets 
underpinned by independent regulation. We 
currently have around 90 GW65 of generating 
capacity, giving us around 16%66 surplus capacity 
(known as a capacity margin) over electricity 
demand at peak times.

2.142 Emissions from power stations have fallen 
by 23% since 1990. While demand has increased 
by 18% since 1990, the carbon intensity of power 
generation has fallen from 690 gCO


2

/kWh in 1990 

to 448 gCO


2

/kWh in 2009. This is primarily due 

to the switch from coal-fired generation to less 
carbon intensive gas-fired generation during the 
1990s, with use of coal roughly halving, as well as 
increased power station efficiency.67 Generation 
from renewable sources has steadily increased 
since 2006, reaching over 7% of electricity 
generation in 2010.68 

Chart 20: Cumulative renewable electricity installed capacity, by technology, from 2000 to 2010


1210city/GW8paalled ca6t Ins420

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010



Year


O�shore wind Onshore wind

Solar photovoltaic Hydro

Biomass and waste, including co-firing Wave/tidal (2.55 MW in 2010)

65 DECC (2011) Digest of UK Energy Statistics 2011 Table 5.7 Plant Capacity.
66 National Grid (2011) Winter Outlook 2011/12.
67 DECC/Defra (2011) 2011 Guidelines to Defra/DECC’s GHG Conversion Factors for Company Reporting Annex 3 Table 3a.
68 DECC (2011) Energy Trends, June 2011.




70 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

2.143 Latest projections show that as a result of 
government policies, emissions from the power 
sector are expected to fall by around two thirds 
during the next two decades, to 49 MtCO


2

e a year 

in 2030. Over the five years of the fourth carbon 
budget period, power stations are projected to 
emit 357 MtCO


2

e.69 

Where we will be in 2050 
2.144 By 2050, we are likely to need much more 
electricity. The 2050 futures set out in Part 1 
suggest that electricity supply may need to increase 
by around 30–60%. We may need as much as 
double today’s electricity capacity to deal with 
peak demand. While more energy efficiency 
will reduce demand per head of population by 
30–50%, this will be outweighed by rising demand 
from electrification of heating, transport and parts 
of industry, and economic and population growth. 

2.145 By 2050, electricity supply will need to be 
almost completely decarbonised. Power will be 
generated largely from renewables, and nuclear 
and fossil fuel stations fitted with CCS technology. 
Experience from other countries demonstrates 
that this is possible: almost 90% of the electricity 
supply of both Sweden and France is zero carbon, 
using mainly nuclear and hydro power. 

2.146 The nature of the electricity system will 
also need to change. Wind and solar power are 
intermittent. Nuclear power is hard to turn on 
or off quickly. Meanwhile, demand for electricity, 
if heating and cars are plugged into the grid, will 
also be more variable. As a result, our electricity 
system will need to become smarter at balancing 
demand and supply. This will mean a combination 
of back-up generation capacity, bulk storage of 
electricity and greater interconnection, but also 
smarter ways of managing energy demand. On 

Chart 21: Emissions projections for electricity for the first three carbon budgets and illustrative 
ranges of emissions abatement potential in the fourth carbon budget period and in 205070 



200 




e 2 Mt CO


CB1 CB2 CB3 CB4 



150 

Projected emissions 
over the first 
four carbon budget 
periods 



100 50 0 –50 


Range of additional 
emissions abatement 
potential over the 
fourth carbon 
budget period 

Illustrative range of 
emissions abatement 
potential in 2050 


2008201320182023202820332038204320482050 

Year 

69	 DECC (2011) Updated Energy and Emissions Projections 2011. Available at: www.decc.gov.k/en/content/cms/about/ec_social_res/analytic_projs/en_emis_ 
projs/en_emiss_projs.aspx. These do not take into account the measures due to be introduced as a result of the Electricity Market Reform. 

70	 The emissions projections derive from Updated Energy and Emissions Projections data. The illustrative ranges for emissions abatement potential for 
2050 and the fourth carbon budget derive from the 2050 futures and fourth carbon budget scenarios – these are discussed in Parts 1 and 3 of this 
report respectively. 

http://www.decc.gov.k/en/content/cms/about/ec_social_res/analytic_projs/en_emis_projs/en_emiss_projs.aspx




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 71 

Chart 22: Projected deployment of low carbon generation over the first three carbon budgets and 
illustrative ranges of deployment potential in the fourth carbon budget period and in 2050 



160 




140 




120 tion/GW 100 80 al low carbon genera60 ot T40 20 0 

CB1 CB2 CB3 CB4 

Projected low carbon 
generation over 
the first four carbon 
budget periods 

Around 40–70 GW of new 
low-carbon capacity will be 
needed by 2030, in addition to 
10 GW of existing capacity that 
will still be operating 

Range of additional 
total low carbon 
generation during 
the fourth carbon 
budget period 

Illustrative range of 
total low carbon 
generation in 2050 


2008201320182023202820332038204320482050 

Year 

Source: Department of Energy and Climate Change, Redpoint modelling, 2050 Calculator 

the way to 2050, some flexible fossil fuel plant is 
likely to be needed to ensure security of supply. 
In 2050, the role of fossil fuels is likely to be limited 
to power stations fitted with CCS, although it is 
possible that some unabated gas could still be used 
as back-up capacity without compromising our 
emissions targets. 

How we will make the transition 
2.147 Over the next decade, the UK will need 
to invest in new generation capacity to replace 
the coal and nuclear power stations that are set 
to close by the early 2020s in order to maintain 
our energy security, while meeting our legal 
commitments to reduce carbon emissions and 
increase renewable electricity generation. 

2.148 To do this, the coming years will see a 
continuation of previous trends: more switching 
from coal to gas-powered generation, and 
renewable electricity rising to 30% of electricity 
generation by 2020. In common with other 
countries, the UK will move to a more diverse 
range of energy sources to increase energy 
security and reduce exposure to volatile fossil fuel 
prices, as well as to cut emissions.  

2.149 In addition to cutting emissions this decade, 
the UK also needs to prepare for the rapid 
decarbonisation required in the 2020s and 2030s 
by demonstrating and deploying the major low 
carbon technologies that we will need on the way 
to 2050. CCS, renewables and nuclear power 
need to be deployed during this decade, and costs 
minimised, if they are to be deployed at scale in 
the next. Industry will lead, but the Government is 
playing a facilitating role for each technology. 




72 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

2.150 During the 2020s, deep cuts in emissions 
from the power sector are necessary to keep 
us on a cost effective path to 2050. There is a 
clear opportunity for large-scale new low carbon 
capacity in the next two decades, created by 
the combination of existing plant closures and 
an increase in demand. Government modelling 
suggests that around 60–80 GW of new electricity 
capacity will need to be built by 2030, and of this 
around 40–70 GW will need to come from low 
carbon technologies, such as nuclear, renewables 
and fossil fuel stations with CCS.71 

2.151 The Government does not have targets 
for particular generation technologies for 2030. 
As the 2050 futures in Part 1 illustrate, different 
combinations of the three key low carbon 
technologies are all plausible. The Government’s 
aim is therefore to run a low carbon technology 
race between CCS, renewables and nuclear 
power. Diversity will bring competition between 
technologies that will drive innovation and cost 
reduction, and will hedge against the risk of one 
technology failing to reduce costs or become 
publicly acceptable. The low carbon power 
that can deliver at least cost will gain the largest 
market share. 

2.152 The transition to low carbon power 
will not happen overnight. Over the next two 
decades, gas-fired power plants will provide the 

flexibility that we will need to meet peak demand 
and manage intermittent generation from some 
renewables, as well as baseload generation capacity, 
while new nuclear and renewable capacity is built. 

2.153 Beyond 2030, as transport, heating, and 
industry electrification occurs, low carbon capacity 
will need to rise significantly. The futures described 
in Part 1 show that we are likely to need 100 
GW or more of new low carbon generation 
capacity in 2050; the exact amount will depend 
on the technology mix and electricity demand. 
We currently have only 20 GW of low carbon 
capacity,72  meaning that we need to build an 
average of around 2.5 GW of new low carbon 
capacity a year for the next 40 years. Although 
challenging, these build rates are achievable: the UK 
has built coal-fired power stations at an equivalent 
rate in the past, and nuclear power stations have 
been built at a rate of up to 4.5 GW a year.73 As 
set out in the Electricity Market Reform White 
Paper,74 the mix of low carbon technologies that 
is built on the way to 2050 is for the market to 
decide: the technologies with the lowest costs will 
win the biggest market share. 

71 Based on modelling by Redpoint Energy commissioned for the Carbon Plan. Please see Annex B for further details.


 

72 DECC (2011) Digest of UK Energy Statistics 2011 Table 5.7. Plant capacity – 9.6 GW renewable capacity and 10.9 GW nuclear.


 

73 Nuclear Energy Association (2008) Nuclear Energy Outlook 2008 p.318 – France, 1979–88, an average of 4.5 GW a year.


 

74 DECC (2011) Planning Our Electric Future: A White Paper for secure, affordable and low carbon electricity. Available at: www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/


 

legislation/white_papers/emr_wp_2011/emr_wp_2011.aspx 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/legislation/white_papers/emr_wp_2011/emr_wp_2011.aspx




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 73 

Box 9: Decarbonisation of the power sector to 2030 

There are many different ways to achieve the decarbonisation of the power sector. It is impossible 
to predict which will be the most cost effective route and what the power generation sector will 
look like in 2030. Nevertheless, we can use economic models to produce projections using the best 
evidence currently available. The scenarios modelled for this report suggest that around 40–70 GW 
of new low carbon electricity generating capacity will be needed by 2030, depending on demand 
and the mix of generation that is built. 

The analysis considered a range of decarbonisation scenarios which are consistent with meeting 
carbon budgets and the 2050 goal. The Government is not setting an explicit decarbonisation goal for 
2030 now given the uncertainties involved in setting a target this far in the future – but the actions 
being taken now are intended to ensure that we are keeping a range of options in play. 

These outcomes should not be interpreted as government technology targets. The Government 
is happy for fossil fuels with CCS, nuclear or renewables to make up as much as possible of the  
40–70 GW we think we may need. The Government would like to see the three low carbon 
technologies competing on cost in the 2020s to win their share of the market. 

•	 Nuclear is currently projected to be the cheapest low carbon technology in the future. Depending 
on assumed possible build rates, new nuclear contributed anywhere from 10–15 GW by 2030 
in the scenarios modelled. Actual build rates could make this range higher or lower: industry has 
announced ambitions to build 16 GW by 2025, and if one reactor could be completed each year 
from 2019 onwards, it would be possible to reach around 20 GW by 2030. 

•	 Fossil fuel generation with CCS could make a significant contribution by 2030, depending on 
whether it can compete on cost with other low carbon technologies. CCS contributed as much 
as 10 GW by 2030 in the scenarios modelled. This should not be seen as an upper limit to its 
potential – more could be deployed if costs reduce quickly as a result of government and industry 
actions. Industry has set out in their strategy for CCS ambition for at least 20 GW of fossil plant 
with CCS in operation by 2030. 

•	 The role of renewable electricity during the 2020s will depend on the extent of deployment 
to 2020 and the pace at which costs reduce as a result of the ongoing joint government/industry 
work. The analysis showed that renewable electricity could provide 35–50 GW by 2030, with the 
upper end assuming either high electricity demand or significant cost reductions. The Committee 
on Climate Change’s Renewable Energy Review suggests that we could have over 55 GW of 
renewable electricity capacity by 2030, subject to resolution of current uncertainties such as cost 
reductions and barriers to deployment, and industry has expressed similar levels of ambition. 




74 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

2.154 The rest of this section looks in more 
detail at six key areas that will enable the low 
carbon transition: reform of the electricity market; 
and specific action to facilitate nuclear, CCS, 
renewables, unabated gas and investment in the 
electricity system. More detail on energy efficiency 
is set out in the sections on buildings (page 29) and 
industry (page 59). 

Overcoming barriers to low carbon 
generation 
2.155 There are common problems faced by all 
low carbon generators: 

•	 The carbon price has not been high or certain 
enough to encourage sufficient investment in 
low carbon generation. 

•	 The current electricity price is driven mainly by 
gas power stations. Gas plant has much lower 
fixed costs relative to its running costs than low 
carbon plant, which tends to be expensive to 
build but cheap to run. It is therefore difficult 
to make the case for capital investment in low 
carbon in a market where electricity prices 
move in line with the price of gas. 

•	 There are high barriers to market entry, 
including poor market liquidity and regulatory 
burdens. 

2.156 The reforms that the Government has 
proposed in the Electricity Market Reform White 
Paper are designed to address these problems, 
creating a level playing field for low carbon 
technologies: 

•	 A Carbon Price Floor to be introduced from 
April 2013 to reduce investor uncertainty, place 
a fair price on carbon and provide a stronger 
incentive to invest in low carbon generation 
now. 

•	 The introduction of new long-term contracts 
from 2014 (Feed-in Tariffs with Contracts for 
Difference), to provide stable financial incentives 
to invest in all forms of low carbon electricity 
generation. These will replace the existing 
Renewables Obligation (although they will run 
in parallel with it to 2017); 

•	 An Emissions Performance Standard set at 
450 gCO


2

/kWh starting in 2013, to reinforce 

the requirement that no new coal-fired power 
stations are built without CCS, while allowing 
the necessary short-term investment in gas to 
take place. 

2.157 The Government is concerned that by the 
end of this decade there will be a risk of insufficient 
electricity capacity to meet peak demand, and 
therefore it recently consulted on options for a 
capacity mechanism to ensure future security of 
electricity supply. The options are either a targeted 
mechanism in the form of a strategic reserve 
(whereby an amount of generating capacity is 
procured and held outside of the normal market 
and only despatched when required) or a market-
wide mechanism (whereby all reliable capacity – 
either generation or non-generation technologies 
such as demand-side response – is rewarded). 
Further detail on this and the institutional 
arrangements needed to deliver Electricity Market 
Reform will be published at the turn of the year, as 
part of a Technical Update. 

2.158 Timely planning decisions are also critical to 
the deployment of low carbon infrastructure. The 
Government is reforming the major infrastructure 
planning regime as follows: 

•	 To ensure accountability, the Planning 
Inspectorate will consider applications for 
energy infrastructure over 50 megawatts (MW) 
and advise the Secretary of State for Energy  
and Climate Change, who will make the  
final decision. 




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 75 

•	 To provide a clear decision-making framework 
for applications for nationally significant energy 
infrastructure, the Secretary of State designated 
six National Policy Statements for energy in 
July 2011. 

2.159 Electricity Market Reform and planning 
reform will address the main barriers that face all 
low carbon generation. But the Government is also 
addressing barriers specific to each technology, as 
outlined below. 

Nuclear 
2.160 Nuclear power is a proven technology able 
to provide continuous low carbon generation, 
and to reduce the UK’s dependence on fossil fuel 
imports. New nuclear power stations will help 
to ensure a diverse mix of technology and fuel 
sources, which will increase the resilience of the 
UK’s energy system. 

2.161 Nuclear is currently cost-competitive with 
other electricity generation technologies, and 
recent independent studies indicate that new 
nuclear is likely to become the least expensive 
generation technology in the future.75 The recent 
Weightman Report on lessons from Fukushima 
confirmed that there are no fundamental safety 
weaknesses in the UK’s nuclear industry.76 

2.162 The Government believes that new 
nuclear power should be free to contribute as 
much as possible towards the UK’s need for 
new low carbon capacity. The Nuclear National 
Policy Statement identifies those sites which the 
Government believes are potentially suitable for 
deployment by 2025,77 although it is for energy 
companies to develop new nuclear power stations, 
and to decide at what point they wish to develop 
a site. An application for a new nuclear power 
station at Hinkley Point (3,260 MW output) 
was submitted to the Infrastructure Planning 
Commission by EDF Energy on 31 October 2011.78 

Energy companies have announced intentions 
to bring forward 16 GW of new nuclear power 
stations by 2025 (see chart 24). To enable this to 
happen, the Government has taken forward a 
series of targeted facilitative actions, including  
the following: 

•	 Reducing regulatory and planning risks 
for investors and ensuring that owners and 
operators have robust funding plans for waste 
management and decommissioning.79 

•	 Ensuring that there is an appropriately skilled 
workforce to deliver industry’s ambitions 
on new nuclear build – Cogent, the Sector 
Skills Council, has produced labour market 
intelligence that allows the Government to 
identify, monitor and, working with skills bodies, 
take action where necessary to address skills 
gaps. The Nuclear Energy Skills Alliance, a 
grouping of key skills bodies, has been set up to 
continue to identify mitigating actions and track 
progress against them. 

75	 Parsons Brinckerhoff (2011) Electricity Generation Cost Model 2011 Update Revision 1. Available at: www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/meeting-energy-demand/ 
nuclear/2153-electricity-generation-cost-model-2011.pdf. This includes the costs of decommissioning. 

76	 Office for Nuclear Regulation (2011) Japanese Earthquake and Tsunami: Implications for the UK nuclear industry. Available at: www.hse.gov.uk/nuclear/ 
fukushima/ 

77 HM Government (2011) National Policy Statement for Nuclear Power Generation (EN-6). 
78	 The Infrastructure Planning Commission has 28 days from the day after the date of receipt to review the application and decide whether or not they 

can accept it. 
79 These are National Policy Statement; Regulatory Justification; Funded Decommissioning Programme; and Generic Design Assessment. 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/meeting-energy-demand/nuclear/2153-electricity-generation-cost-model-2011.pdf
http://www.hse.gov.uk/nuclear/fukushima/




76 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets

Chart 23: Decarbonisation of the power sector to 2030

2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Starts operating
Development and
preparatory work


Nuclear First new nuclearpower station80Next generationof new nuclear CCSRenewables Gas Electricity systsem

Early plants operating

Piloting of  Contracts for Di�erence (CfD) auctions for renewables

Opportunity this decade to reduce costs and remove barriers to deployment

Gradual shift in role of  unabated gas    

Planning
application

to IPC
Development

consent
issued

Electricity
systems
policy

published

Develop shared view
on future expectations

from system

Negotiations start
on Distribution Network

Operator investment
plans for next price

control period

Smart Meters mass roll-out

RIIO-ED1 price control review

Carbon Price
Floor in force

First CfD
contracts

signed

Renewables
Obligation

closed


CCS

programme
launched in


Q1

Investment decisions
on full scale

commercial plants
taken

2020 renew    
          target 

Site licence Construction

Around 30%
of electricity



from

renewable

sources

Smart
Meters
roll-out
starts

80 All subject to development consent.




2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020

Starts operating
Development and
preparatory work


Nuclear First new nuclearpower station80Next generationof new nuclear CCSRenewables Gas Electricity systsem

Early plants operating

Piloting of  Contracts for Difference (CfD) auctions for renewables

Opportunity this decade to reduce costs and remove barriers to deployment

Gradual shift in role of

Planning
application

to IPC
Development

consent
issued

Electricity
systems
policy

published

Develop shared view
on future expectations

from system

Negotiations start
on Distribution Network

Operator investment
plans for next price

control period

Smart Meters mass roll-out

RIIO-ED1 price control review

Carbon Price
Floor in force

First CfD
contracts

signed

Renewables
Obligation

closed


CCS

programme
launched in


Q1

Investment decisions
on full scale

commercial plants
taken

2020 rene
          target 

Site licence Construction

Around 30%
of electricity



from

renewable

sources

Smart
Meters
roll-out
starts

 unabated gas       

w     

2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 

Operating 

Next tranche of  nuclear plants come on line over this period 

Full scale commercial plants operating 

Gradually introduce more competition between low carbon technologies 

Renewables increasingly competing on cost with other forms of  low carbon generation 

power stations to increasing use as flexible and back-up generation 

ables 

Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 77 




78 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

•	 Rebuilding the nuclear supply chain – The 
Government is working with the industry-led 
‘sc@nuclear’ programme, which aims to engage 
companies with the nuclear sector and raise 
the profile of opportunities presented by new 
build. The Government is collaborating with 
the Nuclear Advanced Manufacturing Research 
Centre as it works to attract and improve the 
capabilities of UK companies through the Fit 
4 Nuclear programme. It is also working with 
the Nuclear Industry Association to facilitate 
increased co-ordination across those with 
contracts to let, in order to make best use of 
supply chain capacity. 

carbon capture and storage 
2.163 CCS is a chain of processes for capturing, 
transporting and storing greenhouse gases 
underground to reduce emissions from large 
sources such as fossil fuel power stations. CCS has 
the potential to become an important low carbon 

technology over the next 40 years (see chart 25). 
Successful deployment of CCS will allow fossil fuels 
to continue to contribute to security of supply by 
providing flexible electricity generating capacity 
that will help to balance continuous nuclear 
power, intermittent wind power and variable 
demand. Without CCS, the role of unabated 
fossil fuels in the electricity market by 2050 will be 
limited to back-up for periods of high demand. 

2.164 As yet there are no full-chain commercial-
scale CCS power projects in the world, but there 
are eight operational CCS plants, nearly all linked 
to natural gas processing. Each of the individual 
components is already used in other applications, 
such as injection facilities for the use of CO


2 in 


enhanced oil recovery operations. Studies show 
that in the 2020s fossil fuel generation with CCS is 
expected to be cost-competitive with some other 
low carbon electricity generation technologies, and 
will provide a flexible generation source.81 

Chart 24: Trajectory for new nuclear capacity to 2050 


80 70 New nuclear capacity/GW




 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 

2050 – low 

2050 – high 


201020122014201620182020202220242026202820302032203420362038204020422044204620482050 

Year 

Industry ambition for 2025 2030 – one reactor every year 2019–30 
2030 – one reactor every other year 2019–24, 
then one reactor a year to 2030 
2030 – one reactor every other year 2019–30 

Source: Modelling by Redpoint Energy for the Carbon Plan; Department of Energy and Climate Change 

81	 Parsons Brinckeroff (2011) Electricity Generation Cost Model 2011 Update Revision 1. Available at: www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/meeting-energy-demand/ 
nuclear/2153-electricity-generation-cost-model-2011.pdf 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/meeting-energy-demand/nuclear/2153-electricity-generation-cost-model-2011.pdfnuclear/2153-electricity-generation-cost-model-2011.pdf




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 79 

2.165 The next step is to bring down costs and 
risks by supporting development of the technology 
at scale in a commercial environment. That is why 
the Government is firmly committed to CCS. 
There are a number of promising CCS projects 
proposed in England and Scotland and we expect 
to commence a selection process as soon as 
possible, with £1 billion set aside to support the 
programme. Progress is also being made around 
the world – the US and Canada have both just 
broken ground on their first industrial-scale CCS 
projects on power plants. 

2.166 The Government is also undertaking other 
actions which will be set out in the CCS Roadmap 
that will be launched alongside the call for projects.  
These include development and implementation 
of the regulatory framework necessary to facilitate 
CCS projects, and implementation of the policy 
that there can be no new coal without CCS 
(enforced by an Emissions Performance Standard). 

renewable electricity 
2.167 The Government is committed to 
dramatically increasing the amount of renewable 
electricity generation in the UK. Meeting the 2020 
renewables target is likely to require renewables to 
provide over 30% of electricity generation in 2020. 
Making use of some of the best wind and marine 
resources in Europe will help to lower emissions 
and the demand for fossil fuels. 

2.168 Looking out to the fourth carbon budget 
period and beyond, the Government agrees with 
the conclusions of the Committee on Climate 
Change’s (CCC’s) Renewable Energy Review that 
renewable electricity has the potential to provide 
over 40% of power generation by 2030 (see chart 
26). However, delivering this will require costs to 
be significantly reduced. To drive cost reductions 
in offshore wind to £100/MWh by 2020, the 
Government has established an industry-led Task 
Force, which will report by spring 2012. It has also 
committed up to £50 million over the next four 

Chart 25: Trajectory for CCS capacity to 2050 


45 


40 2050 – high 


35 New low carbon capacity/GW30 25 20 15 10 5 

2050 – low 


0 201020122014201620182020202220242026202820302032203420362038204020422044204620482050 

Year 

2030 – minimum industry ambition 
2030 – high build rate 
2030 – low build rate 

Source: Modelling by Redpoint Energy for the Carbon Plan; Department of Energy and Climate Change. 




80 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

years to support innovation in offshore and marine 
technologies. 

2.169 Levels of renewable energy penetration 
greater than 40% by 2030 may be technically 
feasible, but the Government also needs to 
consider the costs, sustainability and deliverability 
of such deployment levels, including the 
challenges for balancing variable electricity supply 
with demand. 

2.170 The Government’s immediate focus for 
renewables is on delivery. In addition to tackling 
the common barriers to deployment across all 
low carbon technologies described above, the 
Government is taking further targeted action 
on renewables as follows: 

•	 Reforming the local planning system to 
make it simpler and swifter – In addition to 
reforming the major infrastructure planning 
regime, the Government recently consulted 

on a draft National Planning Policy Framework, 
setting out its objectives for the local planning 
system, including information on how local plans 
and development management decisions should 
support the delivery of renewable and low 
carbon energy and supporting infrastructure. 
The Government is also looking at how the 
planning application process can be improved, 
including reducing the amount of information 
expected from applicants and introducing a 
Planning Guarantee that no application should 
take longer than one year to reach a final 
decision, including any appeal. 

•	 Introducing a new system of marine 
planning and licensing to deliver sustainable 
development in the marine environment – 
The UK administrations are introducing new 
marine planning and licensing systems designed 
to provide regulatory simplicity and certainty for 
developers.82 

Chart 26: Trajectory for renewable electricity capacity to 2050 



120 


2050 – high


100 


2050 – low 
(assumes no 
repowering) 


New electricity capacity/GW 

Year 

Current Renewables CCC Renewable Energy Review, central scenario 
capacity Roadmap – high 2030 – cost reductions on high demand 


80 60 40 20 0 201020122014201620182020202220242026202820302032203420362038204020422044204620482050 

Renewables 2030 – no cost reduction
Roadmap – low 

Source: Modelling by Redpoint Energy for the Carbon Plan; Department of Energy and Climate Change. 

82	 Marine plans will for a framework for the sustainable development of marine renewables, informing licensing decisions and major infrastructure decisions 
for larger offshore projects. 




•	 Access to investment capital – Offshore wind 
and energy from waste are likely to be priorities 
for support from the Green Investment Bank 
(GIB), which should be able to lend money from 
2015, when most funding for the construction 
of Round 3 offshore wind is required.83 Prior 
to the GIB’s creation, there will be £775 million 
of government funding available in 2012/13 to 
invest in the low carbon economy. 

•	 Ensuring sustainable bioenergy feedstock 
supply – The Government is currently 
developing a Bioenergy Strategy, which will 
help to provide strategic direction in ensuring 
that biomass feedstocks used for bioenergy are 
sustainable and that they are directed towards 
the most appropriate uses in electricity, heat 
and transport. 

•	 Facilitating development of renewable supply 
chains – The Government has committed up 
to £60 million to encourage the development 
of port and manufacturing facilities for offshore 
wind and marine energy parks. 

•	 Facilitating access to the electricity grid – The 
Government has reformed grid access, and is 
now working to ensure the delivery of new 
onshore grid investment, and to establish the 
offshore framework necessary to deploy future 
levels of renewable electricity. 

Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 81 

unabated gas 
2.171 Gas generation capacity will continue to 
play an important role in providing flexibility and 
balancing the system. We are likely to need new 
gas plant within the next decade to replace coal 
and nuclear closures. There is currently 8.7 GW 
of gas power station capacity with consent to 
build and around 4.3 GW under construction. 
The capacity mechanism should continue to ensure 
sufficient reliable capacity, including gas, to meet 
our electricity needs. 

2.172 The precise share of gas in the overall 
energy mix over the fourth carbon budget will be 
determined by a number of factors. Government 
modelling suggests that unabated gas could retain a 
significant role in electricity generation through the 
2020s, potentially still producing up to two thirds 
of today’s generation levels in 2030.84 As the share 
of renewables in the electricity mix rises, increasing 
the amount of intermittency on the system, we 
are likely to need increased back-up gas generation. 

2.173 In the longer term, there will be a more 
fundamental shift in the role of gas in electricity 
supply. From 2030 onwards, a major role for gas 
as a baseload source of electricity is only realistic 
with large numbers of gas CCS plants.85 However, 
we may still need unabated gas for back-up even in 
2050 – the 2050 futures in Part I suggest the need 
for significant volumes of back-up gas operating 
at low load factors in scenarios with high levels of 
renewable generation. 

83 Third round of offshore wind site allocations by the Crown Estate. 
84 Based on modelling by Redpoint Energy commissioned for the Carbon Plan. Please see Annex B for further details. 
85 HM Government (2011) 2050 Pathways Analysis: Response to the Call for Evidence. 




82 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

reducing electricity demand and 
balancing the electricity system 
2.174 The Government is also currently assessing 
whether sufficient support and incentives 
already exist to make efficiency improvements in 
electricity usage, or whether there is a need for 
additional measures. The results of this work will 
be published in summer 2012. At the same time, 
the Government will publish its policy on balancing 
the future electricity system. This will cover the 
whole electricity system and set out the role for 
government in ensuring that the electricity system 
supports the low carbon transition in the most 
secure and affordable way, the most efficient use 
of assets. 

Ensuring that the grid is able to deliver 
2.175 The scale of investment required in the 
electricity network is unprecedented. This is 
illustrated by plans submitted to Ofgem by the 
GB electricity Transmission Owners (TOs) for 
up to £15 billion of new network investment for 
2013–21. The Government is working with Ofgem 
and industry to help meet the network challenges 
to support a secure, efficient and affordable, 
low carbon future. 

2.176 Onshore, a new grid connection regime 
introduced in 2010 has meant that projects, 
particularly renewables, are now getting much 
speedier connection dates. To date, 73 large 
projects – with a total capacity of 26 GW – have 
advanced their connection dates by an average 
of six years. Work is under way to ensure that 
the transmission system can be extended and 
reinforced to connect newer generation that 
will increasingly be in areas located further away 
from the main network, in particular through 
Ofgem’s new investment framework, RIIO  
(Revenue=Incentives+Innovation+Outputs). In 
2009 the Electricity Networks Strategy Group 
(ENSG), a high-level industry group chaired by 
the Department of Energy and Climate Change 

and Ofgem, assessed the potential transmission 
network investment required to 2020. Since 
then, the TOs have been submitting their priority 
investments to Ofgem, which has resulted in 
approval of around £400 million of investment to 
date. The ENSG is currently refreshing this ‘2020 
vision’ and considering analysing possible network 
requirements post-2020. 

2.177 The Government is taking action now to 
ensure that distribution networks can cope in the 
future. The Department of Energy and Climate 
Change and Ofgem co-chaired Smart Grid 
Forum is developing shared assumptions of future 
electricity demands and necessary investment 
levels. At the same time Ofgem has set up the 
Low Carbon Networks Fund, which is making 
£500 million available to networks that introduce 
new innovation and commercial models onto 
the network. 

2.178 Connecting offshore renewable electricity 
quickly will also require significant investment in 
offshore transmission assets. The Government 
has put in place an innovative regulatory regime 
to deliver offshore energy connections in a cost 
effective, timely and secure manner. A key element 
of the regime is the competitive tender process 
run by Ofgem to appoint Offshore Transmission 
Owners (OFTOs) to construct (where a generator 
chooses not to do so itself), and own and operate 
the offshore transmission assets. 

2.179 In recognition of the importance of 
developing a co-ordinated offshore and onshore 
transmission network and the potential benefits 
this could bring, the Government and Ofgem are 
currently undertaking an Offshore Transmission 
Co-ordination Project to consider whether 
additional measures are required within the 
competitive offshore transmission regime 
to further maximise the opportunity for  
co-ordination. Interim conclusions will be published 
this winter. 




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 85 

AgricuLTure, foresTry And  
LAnd MAnAgeMenT 

Where we are now 
2.180 Agriculture, forestry and land management 
together accounted for around 9% of UK 
emissions in 2009.86 We expect that emissions 
will be reduced further between now and 2050, 
but unlike some areas it will not be possible to 
eliminate those emissions entirely which, to a 
substantial degree, result from natural processes 
in soils and the digestive systems of farm animals. 

2.181 Good progress has already been made 
since 1990, with emissions from the agriculture 
sector down by more than 30%, partly due to 
lower livestock numbers, but also to the more 
efficient use of fertilisers in crop production and 
the decoupling of subsidies from production. 

Over the same period, the land use, land use 
change and forestry sector has changed from 
a net source of emissions to a net carbon sink. 
This is primarily because of lower emissions 
from soils due to less intensive agriculture, and 
increased removals by forests due to high levels of 
afforestation from the 1950s to the 1980s. 

2.182 Because the agricultural sector covers a 
diverse range of practices that are part of complex 
biological systems, emissions from agriculture are 
heavily affected by variable, uncontrolled elements 
such as climate, weather and soil conditions, as 
well as by controlled activities such as livestock 
diet. One element of uncertainty arises from the 
fact that there are considerable variations in the 
level of emissions created, even where farmers are 

Chart 27: Proportion of UK greenhouse gas emissions from the agriculture, forestry and land 
management sector, 2009 

Emissions and removals from the agriculture, 
forestry and land management sector, 2009 


60 50 40 30 20 10 0 


Livestock
 Fertiliser use Other


 

Net removals from land use change


 

Total emissions net of removals


 

UK 2009 GHG emissions by sector 
(end user basis) 


9% 


Industry 23% 

Buildings 38% 

Transport 24% 

Agriculture and 
land use 9% 

Waste 3% 

Exports 3% 

86 On source and end user basis. The figure by end user is slightly higher (48 MtCO


2

e compared with 45 MtCO


2

e by source). This includes both emissions and 

the removal of carbon from the atmosphere by sinks such as forests. 




86 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

adopting the same practices. For example, different 
soil types and moisture conditions will lead to 
different levels of emissions from the same degree 
and method of fertiliser application. As a result, 
estimates for emissions from agriculture lie within 
an uncertainty range of around +250%/–90%. 
This is the reason for the Government’s focus on 
research to expand the evidence base. 

Where we will be in 2050 
2.183 The Government is committed to 
reducing emissions from agriculture and land 
use, and the strategy is to focus on the following 
practical action: 

•	 In the agriculture sector, improvements in 
crop nutrient management and in breeding and 
feeding practices will reduce emissions, are likely 
to increase productivity and save money, and in 
many cases may also bring environmental co­
benefits. 

•	 Sustainable forest management can deliver 
significant emissions savings through carbon 
sequestration in new woodlands, and through 
increased use of sustainable wood products 
which store carbon and act as substitutes for 
materials with higher emissions associated with 
their production. 

•	 Soils, which naturally store carbon and are 
important in climate regulation, need to be 
managed in a way that protects – and, where 
possible, increases – these stores, particularly 
as climate change may affect natural processes 
in a way that could cause some of the store to 
be lost.87 

2.184 The pressures of a growing global 
population and increasing demands for a more 
resource intensive diet were highlighted in 
the Foresight Report on the future of food 
and farming,88 which identified managing the 
contribution of the food system to the mitigation 

of climate change as one of the most important 
challenges for policy makers. The Government 
has committed to champion a more integrated 
approach to global food security by governments 
and international institutions that makes the links 
with climate change, poverty, biodiversity, energy, 
water and other policies. The Government has also 
committed to work in partnership with the whole 
food chain, including consumers, to ensure that 
the UK leads the way in sustainable intensification 
of agriculture. This will ensure that agriculture 
and the food sector can contribute fully to the 
low carbon economy by increasing productivity 
and competitiveness while reducing emissions, 
protecting and enhancing the natural environment, 
and using resources more sustainably. 

2.185 The sector could also play a role in 
supporting the diversification of our energy supply 
by providing sustainable feedstocks for bioenergy.89 

How we will make the transition 
2.186 Whereas in other sectors of the economy 
a portfolio approach has been proposed – where 
the most cost effective technologies are supported 
and a range of possible abatement levels in the 
fourth carbon budget period are presented – 
the uncertainties in the agriculture and land 
management sector mean that our analysis 
assumes one level of possible emissions abatement 
potential that might be delivered in the first four 
carbon budgets. The trajectory graph in chart 28 
below provides an illustrative view of this emissions 
reduction scenario. 

2.187 In agriculture the Government is taking 
a phased approach to reducing emissions. Over 
the next decade it will focus on encouraging 
production efficiencies such as improving crop 
nutrient management, and breeding and feeding 
practices, which save both money and emissions. 
The Government recognises that further action 
will be needed in the future that goes beyond this, 
but that there is a great deal of uncertainty around 

87	 UK soils hold around 10 billion tonnes of carbon, half of which is in peat habitats. This is more than in all the trees in the forests of Europe (excluding 
Russia), and equivalent to more than 50 times the UK’s current annual greenhouse gas emissions. Source: Defra (2009) Safeguarding Our Soils: A strategy for 
England. Available at: http://archive.defra.gov.uk/environment/quality/land/soil/documents/soil-strategy.pdf 

88	 Government Office for Science (2011) The Future of Food and Farming: Challenges and choices for global sustainability. Available at:   
www.bis.gov.uk/assets/bispartners/foresight/docs/food-and-farming/11-546-future-of-food-and-farming-report.pdf 

89 Annex A sets out the amount of demand for sustainable bioenergy in the three 2050 futures. 

http://archive.defra.gov.uk/environment/quality/land/soil/documents/soil-strategy.pdf
http://www.bis.gov.uk/assets/bispartners/foresight/docs/food-and-farming/11-546-future-of-food-and-farming-report.pdf




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 87 

what actions can successfully reduce emissions 
to the levels that will be required by 2050. We 
are therefore also putting in place the research 
and structures that will give us the knowledge 
and practical tools to reduce emissions in the 
longer term. 

2.188 Chart 29 on page 90 shows some of the key 
actions and decision points that will set us on the 
way to further reducing emissions from the sector 
to 2030. 

Agriculture 
2.189 Over the next decade, a range of actions 
are being taken in the agriculture sector – both 
industry- and government-led – which will keep us 
on track towards the level of emissions abatement 
identified in the fourth carbon budget period. 

2.190 In England, the agricultural industry 
partnership published the Agriculture Industry GHG 
Action Plan: Framework for Action in 2010, outlining 
how reductions could be delivered by the end of 
the third carbon budget period through the  
uptake of more resource efficient practices.90 

It has committed to reducing emissions by 
3 MtCO


2

e a year during the third carbon budget 

period, and in 2011 published a Phase 1 Delivery 
Plan which explained how the Action Plan will be 
implemented. Many of the measures identified –  
such as better use of nutrients, improving 
livestock productivity and better use of on-farm 
energy and fuel – could be adopted at minimal 
or no cost and would help to improve industry 
competitiveness. The meat and dairy sector bodies 
have also delivered industry-led environmental 
product roadmaps, which encourage farmers to 
employ more sustainable farming practices and 
management techniques.91 

Chart 28: Greenhouse gas emissions projections in the agriculture sector in the first three  
carbon budgets and illustrative emissions abatement potential in the fourth carbon budget period92 


50 45 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 

CB1 CB2 CB3 CB4 

Projected emissions 
over the first four 
carbon budgets 


e 

Additional emissions 


Mt CO2

abatement potential 
over the fourth carbon 
budget period 


2008201320182023202820332038204320482050 

Year 

90 For further information see: www.nfuonline.com/ghgap 
91	 See: www.eblex.org.uk/documents/content/publications/p_cp_testingthewater061210.pdf and www.dairyco.net/library/research-development/environment/ 

dairy-roadmap.aspx 
92	 The emissions projections derive from Updated Energy and Emissions Projections data. The illustrative emissions abatement potential for the fourth carbon 

budget derives from the fourth carbon budget scenarios discussed in Part 3 of this report. 

http://www.nfuonline.com/ghgap
http://www.eblex.org.uk/documents/content/publications/p_cp_testingthewater061210.pdf
http://www.dairyco.net/library/research-development/environment/dairy-roadmap.aspx




88 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

2.191 To support these industry-led efforts to 
reduce emissions, the Government has undertaken 
a number of initiatives, including the following: 

•	 Investing £12.6 million, in partnership with 
the Devolved Administrations, to strengthen 
understanding of on-farm emissions, and enable 
better reporting of actions taken on the ground 
and more targeted advice. 

•	 Investing in a wider programme of research on 
measures with potential to reduce emissions, 
for example the impact and cost effectiveness 
of tackling endemic diseases in cattle, improving 
nutrient use through better feed management 
and optimising lifetime protein use for milk 
production. 

•	 Engaging in partnerships with Research Councils 
and industry through the Technology Strategy 
Board, and internationally through the Global 
Research Alliance, to promote exchange of 
data, training and research to help improve 
how agricultural greenhouse gas research is 
conducted and to enhance scientific capability. 

•	 Funding a pilot project to trial methods for 
delivering integrated environmental advice 
for farmers – including on greenhouse gas 
emissions – with a view to wider delivery by the 
Government and industry advisors. 

•	 Including climate change mitigation as a topic 
of advice under the Farm Advisory System 
contract during 2012 and 2013. 

•	 Committing, in the Natural Environment White 
Paper, to review use of advice and incentives 
for farmers and land managers, to create a 
more integrated, streamlined and efficient 
approach that is clear and that can yield better 
environmental results. 

2.192 There is a close relationship between the 
level of agricultural production and emissions from 

the sector. The Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) 
and other factors that impact on production 
levels are likely to be strong drivers of action on 
emissions. Alongside the EU’s budget negotiations 
for 2014–20, the shape of the CAP for this period 
is currently being re-negotiated. The European 
Commission’s proposals for the future of the CAP 
were formally released on 12 October 2011.93 

These will be negotiated by Member States in the 
Agriculture Council and, for the first time, with 
the European Parliament through co-decision.94 

Through funding for the UK’s agri-environment 
programme, the CAP already incentivises 
actions that deliver emissions reductions and the 
Government is committed to making the CAP 
more effective in delivering environmental benefits. 
The negotiations are expected to last throughout 
2012 and 2013, and final legislation is due to come 
into effect on 1 January 2014. 

2.193 In 2012 the Government will involve a 
number of interested organisations in evaluating 
the likely impact of all these policies in England, 
as well as in assessing the progress being made 
by the industry-led Action Plan, in order to 
identify the policy options for the future.95 It is 
probable that the sector will reduce emissions 
through a combination of on-farm measures that 
can be successfully implemented (and others 
that may emerge over time or as a result of 
further improvements in technology), supported 
by developments in the broader policy and 
economic landscape. 

2.194 Over the fourth carbon budget period, 
the Government’s analysis (based on a review 
of the Scottish Agricultural College’s (SAC’s) 
analysis for the Committee on Climate Change) 
suggests that, at a carbon price of zero, there is 
around 7.5 MtCO


2

e a year (central estimate, of 

which 5 MtCO


2

e is in England) of total annual 

abatement potential from the application of 
on-farm measures.96 

93 See: www.defra.gov.uk/food-farm/farm-manage/cap-reform/ 
94 This means joint decision making by both the European Parliament and the Council.


 

95 See: www.defra.gov.uk/corporate/about/what/business-planning/


 

96 In their 2008 advice on the level of the first three carbon budgets, the Committee on Climate Change relied on analysis carried out by SAC, which 




considered a range of measures that can be adopted by farmers, including measures to improve crop nutrient management, manure treatment and storage, 
plant breeding, soil drainage and the modification of livestock diets. The central estimate includes the abatement that industry expects to deliver during the 
third carbon budget period. This is within a range of between 3 MtCO


2

e and 19 MtCO


2

e by the end of the fourth carbon budget period. 

http://www.defra.gov.uk/food-farm/farm-manage/cap-reform/
http://www.defra.gov.uk/corporate/about/what/business-planning/




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 89 

2.195 While in theory this represents an additional 
16.9 MtCO


2

e of abatement over the fourth carbon 

budget period compared with baseline projections, 
the uncertainty in our data means that it is difficult 
to determine the exact potential for reductions 
in the fourth carbon budget period and beyond.97 

Work is under way to improve the agriculture 
greenhouse gas inventory, which will help to refine 
the analysis of what is feasible. 

Forestry and land management 
2.196 The Government is committed to strong 
support for woodland creation and for bringing 
more woodland into active management. An 
independent panel will provide advice to the 
Government in spring 2012 on the future direction 
of forestry and woodland policy.98 The measures 
outlined in this section are therefore subject to the 
panel’s findings and the Government’s response. 

2.197 Over the next decade, the Government 
will continue to support woodland creation 
through a number of measures, including 
the following: 

•	 Rural Development Programme funding and 
the Woodland Carbon Task Force – The 
Government will continue to support woodland 
creation through woodland grant schemes. The 
Woodland Carbon Task Force was set up by the 
Forestry Commission to enable a step-change 
in the level of woodland creation to help deliver 
abatement in the sector. It will help to ensure 
that the contribution of woodland creation to 
carbon budgets is recognised, and will develop 
a spatial framework to identify where woodland 
creation will have the most benefit. 

•	 The Woodland Carbon Code, which helps 
to promote high quality UK-based forest 
carbon projects, and – together with recent 
changes to the guidance for businesses on 
measuring and reporting greenhouse gas 
emissions99 – encourages investment in 
domestic woodland creation projects by helping 
organisations to report these reductions as 
part of their net emissions.100 The Woodfuel 
Implementation Plan, which outlines the actions 
that Forestry Commission England will take to 
support the development of a robust woodfuel 
supply chain over the next four years.101 This 
helps to fulfil commitments made under the 
EU Renewable Energy Directive, and is part 
of a wider programme to increase sustainable 
timber production from privately owned 
woodlands. 

•	 A revised UK Forestry Standard, supported 
by new Forests and Climate Change Guidelines, 
promotes carbon management in the UK’s 
woodlands,102 and also provides guidance on 
adapting woodlands to the impacts of climate 
change, promoting resilience and ensuring that 
future abatement is delivered.103 

2.198 However, in the land use, land change 
and forestry (LULUCF) sector there are still 
significant uncertainties about current emissions, 
future trends, and the potential for permanent 
sequestration of greenhouse gas emissions through 
land management. Further work is therefore 
being carried out to explore the potential to 
refine further the LULUCF inventory and also 
to understand the effect of land management 
practices on soil carbon within current policies. 

97	 It is also important to note that some of the mitigation measures SAC identified are likely to be unacceptable because of the potential adverse impacts on 
biodiversity or animal welfare, and some may even have perverse effects on greenhouse gas emissions which have yet to be fully assessed. The estimates of 
abatement potential make no allowance for such issues, so the level of cost effective abatement achieved from these measures is unlikely to be at the upper 
bound suggested by the analysis. 

98 See: www.defra.gov.uk/forestrypanel/ 
99 See: www.defra.gov.uk/environment/economy/business-efficiency/reporting/ 
100 See: www.forestry.gov.uk/carboncode 
101 See: www.forestry.gov.uk/england-woodfuel 
102 See: www.forestry.gov.uk/ukfs 
103 In this context the Defra and Forestry Commission’s Action Plan for Tree Health and Plant Biosecurity addresses the risk of future tree pest and disease 

outbreaks to forest carbon storage. 

http://www.defra.gov.uk/forestrypanel/
http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/economy/business-efficiency/reporting/
http://www.forestry.gov.uk/carboncode
http://www.forestry.gov.uk/england-woodfuel
http://www.forestry.gov.uk/ukfs




2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030

90 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

Chart 29: Decision points for agriculture, forestry and land management to 2030 


etur Agriculy and land management tresor F

Phase 1 

Annual 
Report 

Project considering improvements to the agricultural greenhouse gas inventory 

Integrated advice pilot project 

EU Common Agricultural Policy 2007–13 

CAP 2014–20 negotiations EU Common Agricultural Policy 2014–20 

Phase 2 Phase 3 

Woodland Carbon Task Force 

Woodfuel Implementation Plan 

Engagement with and support of  the Forest Law Enforcement, Governance and 
Trade process for public procurement of  timber products 

Management of  the Woodland Carbon Code 

Independent panel reviewing forestry policy in England 

Identification/development/implementation of  possible future policy options 

Industry-led Greenhouse Gas Action Plan 

Phase 2 
delivery plan 

Integrated 
advice proposals 

Agricultural greenhouse 
gas inventory project 

complete 

Government response 
to Independent Panel 
on Forestry report 

Research to better understand emissions from peat 

Sustainable Growing 
Media Task Force 

roadmap published 

Annual 
review 

Annual 
review 

Annual 
review 

Annual 
review 

Policy review of 
horticultural use 

of peat 

Decision required 
on how to proceed 



CAP 

2014–20 
proposals 
published 

2012 
progress 
review 

Phase-out of 
horticultural peat 

in England in 
amateur sector 

Phase-out of 
horticultural peat 

in England in 
professional sector 

2020 

Research to refine LULUCF inventory and better 
understand the effect of  land management 2030 
practices on soil carbon 

2030 

2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 91 

2.199 Internationally, continuing support for 
the Forest Law Enforcement, Governance and 
Trade process and chain of custody requirements 
for public procurement of timber products,104 

together with the development of biomass 
sustainability criteria for renewable energy 
production, will promote sustainable approaches 
to forest management, helping to reduce emissions 
from deforestation and forest degradation globally. 

2.200 The Soil Protection Review105 addresses 
threats to soil degradation and contains measures 
to protect soil organic matter, and so soil carbon. 
In addition, given the importance of peatlands as 
carbon stores, the Government is undertaking 
research to further our knowledge of emissions 
from peat. This includes a review of restoration 
methods used in blanket peatlands to assess which 
could provide the best outcomes for reducing 
peatland emissions. Peat extraction in the UK 
causes around 0.4 MtCO


2

e of emissions annually, 

and in the Natural Environment White Paper the 
Government committed to phase out the use of 
peat in horticulture in England by 2030.106 

2.201 Over the fourth carbon budget, the 
Committee on Climate Change has indicated 
that increased woodland creation could deliver 
1–3 MtCO


2

e abatement a year by 2030,107 although 

assessing the cost effectiveness of abatement is 
complex because of the dynamics of forest growth 
and carbon uptake, the nature of the woodland 
and approaches to its management, and the end 
use of harvested wood products. 

2.202 Looking ahead to 2050, current projections 
indicate that increasing woodland planting to an 
average of 24,000 hectares per annum across the 
UK between now and 2050 would increase forest 
carbon uptake by 7.7 MtCO


2

e per annum in 2050, 

compared with the level which would be achieved 
by maintaining 2010 planting rates (6,000 hectares 
per annum).108 

next steps 
2.203 The uncertainty in the agricultural 
greenhouse gas emissions inventory means that 
a continued focus is required on research and 
statistics. For example, the Farm Practices Survey 
provides information on behaviours for a range of 
on-farm practices across the whole sector.109 The 
2012 progress review will evaluate the results of 
evidence such as this with interested organisations. 

104 The Government’s timber procurement policy is set out at: www.cpet.org.uk/uk-government-timber-procurement-policy 
105 See: www.defra.gov.uk/food-farm/land-manage/soil 
106 In 2009, of the 3 million cubic metres of peat sold in the UK as growing media and soil improvers, around 80% was sold in England. 
107 Indicative estimates of the cost of abatement through woodland creation are of the order of £0–£70 per tonne CO


2e. 

108 This is based on the analysis presented in Read, DJ, Freer-Smith, PH, Morrison, JIL et al. (eds) (2009) Combating Climate Change – A role for UK forests (the 
Read Report). Available at: www.forestry/gov/uk/readreport 

109 See: www.defra.gov.uk/statistics/foodfarm/enviro/farmpractice/ 

http://www.cpet.org.uk/uk-government-timber-procurement-policy
http://www.defra.gov.uk/food-farm/land-manage/soil
http://www.forestry/gov/uk/readreport
http://www.defra.gov.uk/statistics/foodfarm/enviro/farmpractice/




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 93 

WAsTe And resource efficiency


 

Where we are now 
2.204 In 2009, emissions from the waste 
management sector represented a little over 3% of 
the UK total.110 Between 1990 and 2009 emissions 
were reduced by nearly 70%, primarily due to the 
landfill tax – which incentivises reductions in the 
amount of biodegradable waste sent to landfill – 
and the increased capture and use of landfill gas 
for energy. 

2.205 It will not be possible to eliminate these 
emissions completely as some biodegradable waste 
takes a long time to fully decompose, but by 2050  
it is estimated that emissions of methane from 
landfill – which accounted for nearly 90% 
of emissions from the sector in 2009 – will 
be substantially below current levels. The 
Government is working to improve our scientific 
understanding of these emissions so they can be 
predicted with more certainty. 

2.206 The Government is committed to working 
towards a zero waste economy, and the three 
broad strands of the Government’s approach to 
tackle emissions from the sector relate to the 
following areas: 

•	 Preventing waste arising  – The best thing 
that can be done to minimise the greenhouse 
gas impacts of waste is not to produce it in the 
first place. This eliminates the need to manage 
waste, and removes the embedded carbon 
throughout the supply chain that went into the 
product, thereby reducing emissions both in 
other sectors of the UK economy and in other 
countries.111 More efficient use of resources – 
including energy and water – by businesses will 
help the UK to move to a greener economy and 
deliver economic and environmental benefits. 

Chart 30: Proportion of UK greenhouse gas emissions from the waste sector, 2009 

UK emissions by sector 
(end user basis) 


3% 


Industry 23% 

Buildings 38% 

Transport 24% 

Agriculture and 
land use 9% 

Waste 3% 

Exports 3% 

Emissions by waste sub-sector 

Landfill methane 89% 

Waste-water handling 10% 

Incineration 2% 

110 On source and end user basis. The waste management sector comprises emissions from landfill, waste-water handling and waste incineration. 
111 Direct emissions from the management and disposal of waste are only a small proportion of the total greenhouse gas emissions caused by wasteful  

use of resources. The majority of these emissions occur outside the UK. 




94 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

•	 Reducing methane emissions from landfill – 
There are three broad approaches that may be 
taken: preventing biodegradable waste from 
arising in the first place; diverting biodegradable 
waste that is produced away from landfill to 
other forms of treatment, such as recycling or 
waste to energy facilities; and reducing methane 
emissions from landfill sites, for example by 
increasing the proportion of methane that is 
captured and converted to energy. There are, 
however, considerable uncertainties in the way 
we calculate emissions from landfill, which the 
Government is working to address. 

•	 Efficient energy recovery from residual 
waste – Recovering energy from waste rather 
than sending it to landfill displaces energy 
produced from fossil fuels, avoids methane 
emissions from landfill and is generally a good 
source of feedstocks to meet UK bioenergy 
needs. 

How we will make the transition 
2.207 Emissions from waste management have 
already fallen by nearly 70% between 1990 
and 2009. In the next decade the Government 
will continue to take action on reducing waste 
with the increase of the landfill tax to £80 per 
tonne in 2014/15. We are also undertaking a 
consultation on restricting wood waste to landfill. 
Legacy issues mean that it will not be possible to 
eliminate emissions completely by 2050, as some 
biodegradable waste takes longer than this to fully 
decompose, but by 2050 we expect levels to be 
substantially below where they are now. 

2.208 Chart 33 on page 98 gives a summary of 
some of the key actions and decision points that 
will help to reduce emissions from the waste 
sector and improve resource efficiency. 

Preventing waste arising 
2.209 The Government’s approach to reducing 
waste is underpinned by the waste hierarchy 
(see chart 31), a framework that ranks waste 
management options according to what is best 
for the environment.112 

2.210 The further up the hierarchy waste 
is treated, the greater the emissions savings: 
preparing for re-use is often a less intensive way 
of replacing primary production of products 
than recycling.113 An example of this is textiles, 
where preparing 1 tonne for re-use could save 
12 tonnes more CO


2

e than recycling. However, 

waste prevention incorporates a wide number of 
different actions and behaviours, and the barriers 
to these behaviours becoming embedded are 
complex and will be different for individuals and 
businesses. They include the costs of innovation 
and market development of new products or 
business models, lack of access to information 
to enable decisions, and lack of incentives to 
change behaviours. 

2.211 Recent research has identified savings 
of around £23 billion and 29 MtCO


2

e a year 

available to UK business from resource efficiency 
measures to minimise waste and use of materials 
that pay back within a year or less, including 
around £18 billion from waste measures alone. 
This figure could be more when longer-term 
investment is considered – an estimated additional 
£33 billion, resulting in a total opportunity of 
around £55 million and 90 MtCO


2

e in total for 

all measures.114 

2.212 In addition, using water more efficiently 
helps both to adapt to the impacts of climate 
change, where more variable rainfall is expected, 
and to reduce the greenhouse gases associated 
with pumping and treatment, and heating.115 

112 Guidance on applying the principles of the waste hierarchy can be found at: www.defra.gov.uk/publications/files/pb13530-waste-hierarchy-guidance.pdf 
113 It is possible to deviate from the hierarchy where lifecycle evidence suggests that to do so would have a better environmental impact, such as for lower 

grade wood where energy recovery is better than recycling due to the level of contaminants; and for anaerobic digestion, which sits above recycling for food 
waste because it produces both energy and digestate (which can displace artificial fertilisers). 

114 This analysis is based on a 2009 base year and refers to annual savings from low or no cost measures which deliver within one year; all potential longer-term 
measures up to 2050. See: Oakdene Hollins (2011) The Further Benefits of Business Resource Efficiency at: http://randd.defra.gov.uk/Default. 
aspx?Document=EV0441_10072_FRP.pdf 

115 The water industry currently produces about 1% of the UK’s overall greenhouse gas emissions in the supply of water and treatment of waste water. 

http://www.defra.gov.uk/publications/files/pb13530-waste-hierarchy-guidance.pdf
http://randd.defra.gov.uk/Default.aspx?Document=EV0441_10072_FRP.pdf




The waste hierarchy

Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 95 

Measures that increase the efficiency of use of hot 
water may be financed under a Green Deal, as 
reductions in the energy used will generate savings. 

2.213 Over the next decade, government action 
will include the following: 

•	 Development of a comprehensive Waste 
Prevention Programme by the end of 2013, 
alongside a range of measures under a broader 
resource efficiency programme to drive waste 
reduction and re-use, working with businesses 
and other organisations across supply chains. 

•	 Working closely with business to explore the 
potential for responsibility deals in a number 
of sectors that would cover products and 
materials identified as having high embedded 
carbon. On packaging, the Government intends 
to launch a consultation on increased recycling 
targets for packaging producers in the period 
2013–17. 

•	 Working to make corporate reporting of 
greenhouse gas emissions – which helps 
organisations to manage their emissions, 
and allows informed decisions about how a 
company is managing climate change risks – 

more widespread and consistent. Guidance was 
published in 2009 to help organisations with this 
process, and the Government will announce 
whether it intends to introduce regulation in 
this area later in 2011. 

2.214 In addition, the Waste and Resources 
Action Programme (WRAP) works to help 
businesses realise the benefits of being more 
resource efficient, through partnerships and 
voluntary agreements. WRAP is focusing its 
work up the waste hierarchy to minimise waste 
production and associated greenhouse gas 
emissions. One priority for action is to tackle 
food waste and divert it from landfill, with a goal 
of aiming to reduce emissions associated with 
avoidable food and drink waste by 3.2 MtCO


2e 

by 2015. 

2.215 One of the ways this will be achieved is 
through the Love Food Hate Waste initiative, 
which helps consumers to reduce avoidable food 
waste. Overall, WRAP achieved like-for-like savings 
of 5.5 MtCO


2

e per annum between 2008 and 

2011.116 WRAP’s emissions target for the next 
period, from 2011–15, is for a further 4.8 MtCO


2e 

per annum savings (excluding water savings). 

Chart 31: The waste hierarchy 

Stages 
Includes 

Using less material in design and manufacture. Prevention 
Keeping products for longer; re-use. 
Using less hazardous material. 

Preparing for re-use 

Recycling 

Including anaerobic digestion, incineration with 
energy recovery, gasification and pyrolysis which 
produce energy (fuels, heat and power) and 

Other 
recovery 

Disposal 

Checking, cleaning, repairing, refurbishing, whole 

items or spare parts. 

Turning waste into a new substance or product. 

Includes composting if it meets quality protocols.


 

materials from waste; some backfilling operations. 

Landfill and incineration without energy recovery. 

116 From 1 April 2010 WRAP took on additional responsibilities for resource efficiency; therefore the figures quoted compare WRAP performance against 
original WRAP targets as set out at the beginning of the business plan period. 




96 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

Reducing landfill methane emissions 
2.216 Over the next decade, the Government’s 
actions to reduce landfill methane emissions 
include the following: 

•	 The landfill tax, which provides a financial 
incentive for local authorities and business waste 
producers to find alternative ways of handling 
their waste by gradually increasing the costs of 
landfill and which is the primary mechanism for 
reducing biodegradable waste to landfill. It was 
introduced in 1996 and set at £7 per tonne (for 
non-inert waste); it has increased to £56 per 
tonne and the Government has announced that 
it will continue to increase to £80 per tonne 
in 2014/15. 

•	 A commitment in the Government Review of 
Waste Policy in England 2011117 to a consultation 
on restricting sending wood waste to landfill. 
This is a significant source of biodegradable 
waste to landfill: on average, every tonne of 
wood waste diverted from landfill would save 
around 1 tonne of CO


2e. 

•	 A review of the case for restricting sending 
other wastes to landfill, including textiles and 
all biodegradable waste, before the end of 
this Parliament. 

2.217 Each of these measures will help to deliver 
emissions reductions over the fourth carbon 
budget: 

•	 The continued increases to the landfill tax are 
projected to further reduce methane emissions 
from landfill to a projected 84% reduction from 
1990 levels by 2025. 

•	 Any restriction on sending wood to landfill 
would likely start reducing emissions during 
the third and fourth carbon budget periods, 
depending on how and when it were to 
be implemented. 

•	 Any further restrictions on sending other waste 
to landfill would likely take effect – and start 
reducing landfill methane emissions – during the 
fourth carbon budget period. 

2.218 The steps outlined in the Review of Waste 
Policy, plus the continued increases to the landfill 
tax, mean that the Government’s central estimate 
of methane emissions from landfill in 2050 is that 
they will be around 61% below 2009 levels (see 
chart 32 below). 

2.219 However, unlike energy-related emissions, 
methane emissions from landfill are modelled, not 
measured. Calculations of total emissions from 
landfill are therefore very sensitive to the amount 
of methane that is assumed to be captured at 
landfill sites. While there has been a substantial 
investment programme in methane capture 
technology over the last two decades, the precise 
rate of methane capture remains highly uncertain 
and could potentially be lower than assumed. 
This is reflected in the uncertainty range in chart 
32, which shows estimated emissions in 2050 of 
between 1.7 and 17.6 MtCO


2

e (equal to reductions 

of 96.9% and 68.1% respectively from the 1990 
central case scenario). 

2.220 In addition, the volume of waste generated, 
the rate of change of this volume and the 
composition of the waste are dynamic, and 
experience has shown that these are difficult 
to model accurately over longer time frames. 
Developments in key variables such as economic 
growth, commodity markets, consumption 
patterns, consumer attitudes and behaviours, and 
waste treatment technology mean that there are 
markedly different pathways for how the UK waste 
system could evolve to 2050. 

2.221 The Government is keen to improve the 
accuracy of modelling projections and has put in 
place a programme of action to help improve our 
scientific understanding of both landfill methane 
formation and the amount of methane that is 
captured. This includes a survey of landfill sites, 
taking actual measurements of methane emission, 

117 See: www.defra.gov.uk/publications/files/pb13540-waste-policy-review110614.pdf 

http://www.defra.gov.uk/publications/files/pb13540-waste-policy-review110614.pdf




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 97 

Chart 32: Historical and projected emissions of methane from landfill, 1990–2050 

90.0 

Historical Projected 

80.0 

70.0 


e) UK emissions of landfill methane (Mt CO2 

60.0 

50.0 

40.0 

30.0 

20.0 

10.0 



0.0 


1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050 

Year 
Central case Uncertainty range 

Source: UK Greenhouse Gas Inventory and government analysis 

oxidation and capture. The results of the survey 
will inform further opportunities for capturing 
more methane at landfill sites. 

2.222 In addition, the Government is undertaking 
an ongoing programme of work in conjunction 
with the Environment Agency (EA) to improve 
the scientific understanding of landfill methane 
generation and capture rates at landfill sites. The 
Government is also committed to working closely 
with industry and the EA to continue reductions 
in the amount of methane emitted from landfill 
sites. This work will explore opportunities to 
capture methane from closed sites that do not 
have infrastructure for capturing landfill gas, and 
resulting improvements to methane capture rates 
could deliver emissions savings as early as the 
second carbon budget period. 

Energy from waste 
2.223 The Government’s aim is to get the 
most energy out of waste, not to get the most 
waste into energy recovery. Through effective 
prevention, re-use and recycling, residual waste 
will eventually become a finite and diminishing 
resource. However, until this becomes a reality, 
efficient energy recovery from residual waste 
can deliver environmental benefits and provide 
economic opportunities. 

2.224 Efficient energy recovery from waste 
prevents some of the negative greenhouse gas 
impacts of waste in landfill and helps to offset 
fossil fuel power generation. Over the next 
decade, the Government is taking forward a 
range of measures through the Review of Waste 
Policy Action Plan and the UK Renewable Energy 
Roadmap118 to overcome barriers to deployment of 
energy from waste through a range of existing and 
more innovative technologies. 

118 DECC (2011) UK Renewable Energy Roadmap. Available at: www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/meeting-energy-demand/renewable-energy/2167-uk­
renewable-energy-roadmap.pdf 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/meeting-energy-demand/renewable-energy/2167-uk-renewable-energy-roadmap.pdf




98 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

Chart 33: Decision points for waste to 2020


 

2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 

2008–11 WRAP target: to save 5 MtCO


2

e a year 


ce use Resour Landfill methane 

2011–15 WRAP target to save 4.8 MtCO


2

e a year 

Engagement with business and other organisations to drive waste reduction 
and re-use as part of  a broader resource efficiency programme 

Continuation of  landfill tax, which increases from £56 per tonne in 2011 to £80 per tonne in 2014/15 

Consideration of  further options for capturing landfill methane from closed sites 

Promote increased energy from waste through anaerobic digestion, 
which could deliver between 3 and 5 TWh of  electricity by 2020 

Comprehensive 
waste prevention 

programme 
in place 

Consultation on increased recycling targets for packaging producers in the period 2013–17 

Decision required 
on how to 
proceed 

Decision on 
whether to 
regulate for 
corporate 

reporting of 
emissions 

Consultation on restricting wood waste to landfill 

Decision on 
whether to 

restrict wood 
waste to 
landfill 

Review case for other landfill restrictions (e.g. textiles, all biodegradable waste) 

Decision 
required 

on how to 
proceed 

Research programme to improve understanding of  landfill methane formation and how it is captured 

Decision required on 
how to proceed 




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 99 

next steps 
2.225 The actions set out in the Review of Waste 
Policy, at each level of the waste hierarchy, will 
all contribute to reducing the volume of material 
that ends up in landfill and tackle emissions from 
the sector. 

2.226 The challenge for the Government is how 
to move beyond the existing trajectory to deliver 
the vision of a zero waste economy. It is likely that 
further action will be needed, working closely with 
local government, industry, civil society, consumers 
and communities, if the goals are to be achieved. 
The Government will continue to review how the 
measures outlined are contributing to the zero 
waste economy vision and identify areas where 
we can go further and faster. 




100 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

Working with the EU and 
Devolved Administrations 
The european union 
2.227 The UK’s policies should be seen in the 
context of the European Union’s (EU’s) wider 
objective of transition to a low carbon, resource 
efficient and climate resilient economy and its 
political commitment to reduce carbon emissions 
by at least 80% by 2050, while maintaining secure 
and affordable energy supplies and preserving 
the EU’s international competitiveness. The 
interconnected nature of Member States’ trading 
and energy supply relationships means that much 
of the change needed to achieve these objectives 
will need to be delivered at the EU as well as the 
national level. 

2.228 The EU has the opportunity to 
demonstrate to others the benefits of low carbon 
growth, and to strengthen economic and trading 
relationships with other countries that want to 
collaborate on low carbon development. Strong 
EU leadership will be crucial in building momentum 
internationally and, by making the transition to 
a sustainable low carbon economy, the EU can 
significantly enhance its long-term economic and 
energy security interests. The Government will 
work with its partners in Europe to look for 
opportunities to secure the transition to an EU low 
carbon economy, encouraging greater ambition 
in areas including energy, transport, product 
standards and finance. 

2.229 The Prime Minister and the Government 
are fully committed to increasing the EU’s 
emissions reduction target from 20% to 30% by 
2020 compared with 1990 levels. This should act as 
a means of showing its commitment to the longer-
term vision of a sustainable low carbon economy, 
and driving the investment in new technologies 
necessary to achieve the level of change that this 
would require. The Government will share with 
other Member States evidence which shows that 
the costs of greater ambition are manageable and 

can deliver tangible economic and environmental 
benefits, especially when compared with a scenario 
of delayed action. 

2.230 The Government will work with its 
European partners to build support for policies to 
promote energy efficiency, and facilitate investment 
in new energy infrastructure (with significant 
investment in low carbon infrastructure) and 
decarbonisation of transport through development 
of electric and other low carbon vehicles, as part 
of the delivery of these ambitious plans. 

northern ireland 
2.231 The Northern Ireland Executive is 
committed to tackling climate change and to 
building a sustainable low carbon economy that 
will bring prosperity for all. By demonstrating 
leadership, the Executive will inspire business, 
industry, the public sector and individuals to work 
together to help reduce UK emissions by 80% 
below 1990 levels by 2050. 

2.232 The Executive views the transition to a low 
carbon economy as a potentially powerful driver 
of economic growth, and is committed, through 
its Sustainable Development Strategy,119 to build 
a dynamic, innovative economy that delivers the 
prosperity required to tackle disadvantage and 
lift communities out of poverty. The Strategy sets 
strategic objectives to increase the number of jobs 
in the low carbon economy; increase the energy 
efficiency and resource efficiency of businesses; 
and ensure that our provision of learning and skills 
responds to the needs of the low carbon economy. 

2.233 Although current projections suggest 
that Northern Ireland is ahead of its 2025 
emissions reduction target, the Northern Ireland 
Environment Minister has pledged greater 
ambition and has tasked the Committee on 
Climate Change to consider the shape of further 
legislation to underpin longer-term targets. 

2.234 The agriculture sector in Northern Ireland 
is an instrumental part of our low carbon future. 

119 See: www.ofmdfmni.gov.uk/index/economic-policy/economic-policy-sustainable-development.htm 

http://www.ofmdfmni.gov.uk/index/economic-policy/economic-policy-sustainable-development.htm




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 101 

It encompasses wider social and economic 
sustainability factors in addition to environmental 
considerations, playing a larger role in the local 
economy when compared with the rest of the UK. 
The government-led Greenhouse Gas Stakeholder 
Group is developing a range of primary 
production-focused mitigation measures based on 
a review of available scientific evidence to support 
the sector. A forthcoming strategy will focus on 
delivering a steady reduction trajectory up to 2020 
and beyond. With improved measurement and 
inventories available from 2015, the sector will be 
able to prioritise actions to ensure that producers 
in Northern Ireland are at the forefront of 
demonstrating the sustainability of food production 
while ensuring their own business competiveness. 

2.235 Within Northern Ireland, we are almost 
entirely dependent on imported fossil fuels for 
most of our energy needs. The Northern Ireland 
Energy Minister leads an Interdepartmental 
Working Group on Sustainable Energy to ensure 
a co-ordinated approach across government to 
the promotion of sustainable energy. Looking to 
2050, we are seeking to shift the balance of our 
energy mix towards cost effective decarbonisation 
of our electricity supply as far as is practicable. The 
Executive’s Strategic Energy Framework120 seeks 
to achieve 40% of electricity consumption from 
both onshore and offshore renewable sources by 
2020. The Offshore Renewable Energy Strategic 
Action Plan121 sets out a target of at least 600 MW 
of offshore wind and 300 MW of tidal energy by 
2020 and provides the framework for the current 
Northern Ireland Offshore Leasing Round. The 
draft Onshore Renewable Electricity Action 
Plan,122 which has been subject to a Strategic 
Environmental Assessment, looks at potential 
onshore renewable energy mixes to contribute 
to that 40% target. In parallel, significant work 
is ongoing to underpin low carbon/renewables 
with an electricity infrastructure that is robust, 
flexible and able to respond to future demand for 
renewable energy and smart grids/demand-side 
management. 

2.236 The Northern Ireland Executive believes 
that current transport arrangements and the 
high level of dependency on the private car, 
particularly in urban areas, are not sustainable. 
Active Travel promotes travel alternatives that 
lead to public health benefits through walking, 
cycling and reducing our reliance on the car. 
Travelwise engages with businesses, schools and 
commuters to promote and encourage sustainable 
modes of travel. Measures are already in place to 
reduce carbon intensity in road construction and 
maintenance, and to recycle construction materials 
and by-products where feasible. Translink, the 
main public transport provider, has started a major 
investment in techniques to reduce fuel use on 
its bus fleet. A revised Regional Transportation 
Strategy123 proposes a range of high-level aims and 
strategic objectives that will inform how emissions 
will be reduced into the future. Consideration will 
also be given to new forms of transportation, such 
as light rail, and a pilot programme for electric 
vehicles is under way. 

2.237 Northern Ireland has a unique geographical 
position in the UK. Given the unavoidable 
reliance on aviation and shipping, both in terms 
of the economy and wider social considerations, 
there is a need to ensure that transport-related 
carbon policy interventions developed at UK 
and EU level do not have a disproportionate and 
differential impact. 

2.238 Social housing has already seen a significant 
drive to improve energy efficiency, as this is a key 
component in reducing not only carbon emissions 
but also rates of fuel poverty. Other pressures in 
the private residential sector, such as increased 
recycling and waste to landfill targets, planning 
policy and building regulations, and increased 
energy prices, will increase the need for improved 
energy efficiency. Behavioural changes and the 
availability of new renewable technology with 
condensed payback periods for householders 
will be key to reducing emissions. The Executive 
has set a target of a 10% increase in the amount 

120 See: www.detini.gov.uk/strategic_energy_framework__sef_2010_-3.pdf 
121 Following the recent completion of a Habitats Regulations Appraisal, the draft Plan is being finalised for publication. See: www.offshorenergyni.co.uk/data/ 

draft_strategic_action_plan.pdf 
122 See: www.detini.gov.uk/deti-energy-index/draft_onshore_renewable_electricity_action_plan.htm 
123 See: www.drdni.gov.uk/rts_2011_consultation_document.pdf 

http://www.detini.gov.uk/strategic_energy_framework__sef_2010_-3.pdf
http://www.offshorenergyni.co.uk/data/draft_strategic_action_plan.pdf
http://www.detini.gov.uk/deti-energy-index/draft_onshore_renewable_electricity_action_plan.htm
http://www.drdni.gov.uk/rts_2011_consultation_document.pdf




102 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

of heat from renewable sources by 2020, 
supported by a Northern Ireland Renewable 
Heat Incentive.124 In addition, natural gas roll-out 
continues to around 150,000 gas customers in 
Northern Ireland and, if greater gas roll-out were 
to follow, this would reduce emissions in a region 
where some 70% of energy consumers remain 
dependent on oil for their heating needs. 

2.239 The Cross-Departmental Working Group 
on Climate Change will support sectoral initiatives 
by bringing together government departments to 
ensure that they are working towards a common 
goal, reporting annually to the Executive to ensure 
that they are on course to achieve set targets. The 
group will improve data sources and measurement, 
and accountability and governance, and strengthen 
the delivery framework through focused strategies 
and policies. 

2.240 The Northern Ireland Executive is 
committed to creating a low carbon future, 
ensuring that by 2050 Northern Ireland is 
economically competitive, socially prosperous and 
delivering an environmental legacy to be proud of. 

scotland 
2.241 The Scottish Government is committed 
to the low carbon agenda over the long term. 
Scotland has a competitive advantage in attracting 
low carbon jobs, investment and trade which 
will drive economic growth. Through our world-
leading Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009, we 
have provided certainty for business and the public 
about Scotland’s low carbon future. 

2.242 The Scottish Government believes that 
decarbonisation of electricity supply, heat use 
and transport will be key to meeting Scotland’s 
emissions targets, particularly those in the 
2020s and beyond. This should be achieved 

without resorting to new nuclear generation 
development.125 Increasing the amount of available 
clean electricity will be important in lowering the 
carbon intensity of other sectors of the Scottish 
economy, notably heat and transport which, as 
they reduce their reliance on gas, petrol and diesel, 
will increasingly draw on electricity for power. 

2.243 To create a transition to a low carbon 
economy, continuing development and deployment 
of technologies that enable more efficient use 
of the energy we produce will also become 
increasingly important. 

2.244 The two cornerstones of energy supply 
transition in Scotland are renewables and 
carbon capture and storage (CCS). The Scottish 
Government believes that Scotland is well placed 
to take a leading role in the development and 
commercialisation of renewables and CCS126 into 
the 2020s, and has targeted developing renewable 
generation in Scotland to be equivalent to 100% of 
demand by that time.127 

2.245 Heat makes up about half of all energy 
demand and is integrally linked to the Scottish 
Government’s aims to improve energy efficiency. 
The target to provide 11% of heat demand from 
renewables by 2020 is the platform for renewable 
heat to play an increasingly significant role in the 
following decades. The Scottish Government is 
taking a number of steps to assist the penetration 
of heat-based technologies in future years.128 

2.246 Progress towards a decarbonised road 
transport system by around 2030 will continue, 
as will efforts to develop more sustainable 
communities which encourage active travel and 
other positive travel choices. Digital technologies 
offer the prospect of an overall reduction in 
travel demand, while freight policy will continue to 
encourage more sustainable goods movement. 

124 See: www.detini.gov.uk/the_development_of_the_northern_ireland_renewable_heat_incentive.pdf 
125 The UK Government works in partnership with the Devolved Administrations in Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales to deliver the targets set by the 

Climate Change Act 2008. While the administrations have a shared goal of reducing the impacts of climate change, policies on how to achieve this vary 
across the administrations – the Scottish Government, for example, is opposed to the development of new nuclear power stations in Scotland. It believes 
that renewables, fossil fuels with carbon capture and storage, and energy efficiency represent the best long-term solution to Scotland’s energy security. 

126 Scottish Government (2010) Carbon Capture and Storage – A Roadmap for Scotland. Available at: www.scotland.gov.uk/Publications/2010/03/18094835/0 
127 Scottish Government (2011) 2020 Routemap for Renewable Energy in Scotland. Available at: www.scotland.gov.uk/Publications/2011/08/04110353/0 
128 Scottish Government (2009) Renewable Heat Action Plan for Scotland: A plan for the promotion of the use of heat from renewable sources. Available at:  

www.scotland.gov.uk/Publications/2009/11/04154534/0 

http://www.detini.gov.uk/the_development_of_the_northern_ireland_renewable_heat_incentive.pdf
http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Publications/2010/03/18094835/0
http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Publications/2011/08/04110353/0
http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Publications/2009/11/04154534/0




Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 103 

2.247 Indications are that fuel prices are likely to 
increase further over the next decade. Improving 
the energy efficiency of the homes and heating 
of those at risk from fuel poverty will therefore 
continue to be a vital part of the Scottish 
Government’s efforts to reduce emissions and 
increase energy security. A strategic group will 
co-ordinate stakeholder input into the delivery 
on commitments on sustainable housing and help 
to develop a Strategy for Sustainable Housing 
in Scotland. 

2.248 It is not just the impacts of climate change 
itself that can have particular consequences for 
remote, rural and island communities, but also the 
effects of measures intended to reduce emissions. 
It will be important to ensure that, in moving to a 
low carbon economy, the differential impacts of 
policies on these communities are fully considered 
and tailored, and flexible solutions found for 
the future. 

Wales 
2.249 The Welsh Government remains fully 
committed to leading and delivering meaningful 
action to tackle the causes and consequences of 
climate change. The Climate Change Strategy for 
Wales, published in 2010, confirms its commitment 
to drive down emissions and sets out the action 
it will take in specific sectors.129 The Welsh 
Government is now taking forward work 
to deliver on its commitments, and solid progress 
has been achieved since the Strategy’s publication. 

2.250 The Strategy confirms the Welsh 
Government’s principal target to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions in areas of devolved 
competence by 3% a year from 2011 against a 
baseline of average emissions between 2006 
and 2010. The Welsh Government is also 
committed to achieving at least a 40% reduction 
in all emissions in Wales by 2020 against a 1990 
baseline. The Strategy confirms a range of sector 
specific emissions reduction targets in the following 
areas: transport, agriculture and land use, waste, 
residential, public and business. 

2.251 The Welsh Government’s approach to 
tackling climate change is managed as part of 
its wider agenda on sustainable development. 
The Welsh Government is one of only a few 
administrations in the world that has a legal duty in 
relation to sustainable development. As a result, its 
approach focuses on enhancing people’s quality of 
life, both now and in the future. This principle has 
informed the selection of measures it has adopted 
to reduce emissions as the action it is taking to 
ensure that Wales is well prepared to manage the 
consequences of a changing climate. 

2.252 An example of this is arbed, the Welsh 
Government’s flagship strategic energy efficiency 
programme. By the end of the first phase of 
arbed earlier this year, the scheme had provided 
£30 million of funding for energy efficient homes, 
skills and long-term jobs. As a result, at least 
6,000 homes have benefited from the arbed 
scheme to date. 

2.253 The second phase of arbed shares the same 
objectives as the first phase, but, in order to fulfil 
EU funding requirements, the delivery model will 
be adjusted. The first set of project proposals for 
the second phase of arbed will be reviewed by the 
end of 2011. 

2.254 Over the next five years, Nest, the Welsh 
Government’s fuel poverty scheme, is expected to 
help up to 15,000 households a year in Wales with 
advice and home energy improvements to reduce 
their fuel bills, maximise their income and improve 
the energy efficiency of their homes. Around 
4,000 households a year are expected to receive 
energy improvement packages. 

2.255 The three key elements of the Welsh 
Government’s energy policy – energy savings and 
efficiency, low carbon energy generation and the 
maximisation of long-term job opportunities for 
Wales – will ensure that it makes the most of 
Wales’ potential and the predicted investment. 
Ultimately, the goal is to place Wales at the 
forefront of the drive towards a low carbon 
energy economy. 

129 Welsh Government (2010) Climate Change Strategy for Wales. Available at: http://wales.gov.uk/topics/environmentcountryside/climatechange/tacklingchange/ 
strategy/walesstrategy/?lang=en 

http://wales.gov.uk/topics/environmentcountryside/climatechange/tacklingchange/strategy/walesstrategy/?lang=en




104 Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets 

2.256 Wales has the potential annually to 
produce up to 40 TWh of electricity from 
renewable sources by 2025, with 25% of this 
from marine, 50% from wind (both offshore 
and onshore), and the majority of the remainder 
secured from sustainable biomass power or 
smaller local (including micro) heat and electricity 
generation projects using wind, solar, hydro 
or indigenous biomass. 

2.257 Practical measures include the Ynni’r Fro 
programme, which supports investment in 
community-scale energy generation projects 
and gives practical and financial support for 
installers to gain Microgeneration Certification 
Scheme accreditation. 

2.258 To date, Wales has some 830 MW of 
renewable energy operational, which represents 
a doubling in renewable energy operating capacity 
since 2007. This capacity represents enough 
electricity to power almost a half a million homes 
in Wales. 

2.259 If the Welsh Government is to deliver its 
emissions reduction targets, every sector and 
community in Wales will need to contribute. 
Consequently, it is working with the Climate 
Change Commission for Wales and other delivery 
partners to help achieve this. 

2.260 The Welsh Government’s approach, set 
out in its Climate Change Engagement Strategy 
published earlier this year,130 focuses on enabling 
people to act, and providing the tools at a national 
level which makes action at the local level effective. 
The Welsh Government will: 

•	 provide the vision of a low carbon future, which 
will inspire action at all levels; 

•	 develop the capacity for action at the local level; 


and 


•	 provide the evidence base to inform and focus 
action. 

2.261 To support its engagement work in this area, 
the Welsh Government launched the Support for 
Sustainable Living grant scheme in March 2011, 
which funds engagement on climate change and 
will also help to develop capacity within Wales 
to produce demonstrable outcomes from this 
engagement. It has also enabled access to expert 
advice and support for delivery and evaluation 
through its Support for Sustainable Living service. 
The combination of grant funding and expertise is 
already enabling local action across Wales. 

2.262 In terms of delivery of the Climate 
Change Strategy itself, the Welsh Government 
is putting in place a comprehensive monitoring 
framework to measure the progress it is making 
on meeting its emissions reduction targets. To 
do this, it is developing a suite of indicators to 
track implementation of each of the measures 
contained in the Delivery Plan for Emission 
Reduction131 to ensure that they are delivering the 
anticipated emissions savings. This framework is 
consistent with that being developed by the UK 
Government for monitoring progress against its 
own carbon budgets. 

2.263 The Welsh Government will also be 
monitoring external factors that drive emissions, 
such as wider economic performance, so that its 
performance in delivering its specific commitments 
can be reported in its annual report early in 2012 
within the context of wider emissions trends. 

130 See: http://wales.gov.uk/docs/desh/publications/111102engagementen.pdf 
131 See: http://wales.gov.uk/docs/desh/publications/101006ccstratdeliveryemissionsen.pdf 

http://wales.gov.uk/docs/desh/publications/111102engagementen.pdf
http://wales.gov.uk/docs/desh/publications/101006ccstratdeliveryemissionsen.pdf




Delivering the fourth carbon budget 




 107 

Part 3: Delivering the fourth
carbon budget 

Scenarios to deliver the 
fourth carbon budget 
3.1 Part 2 has set out the potential for each sector 
of the economy to deliver emissions reductions 
over the fourth carbon budget period. As the 
Government’s approach is to encourage a portfolio 
of technologies in each sector, there is uncertainty 
about the exact level of emissions reductions that 
will be delivered over the fourth budget period. 
In this part of the report we set out a series of 
illustrative scenarios that combine different levels 
of emissions from all sectors of the economy in 
order to deliver the fourth carbon budget. 

3.2 As well as delivering the fourth carbon budget, 
these scenarios would all put us on track to deliver 
the 2050 target (as illustrated in the 2050 futures 
in Part 1). 

Delivering non-traded sector 
emissions reductions 
3.3 The non-traded sector consists of those 
sectors of the economy not covered by the 
European Union Emissions Trading System (EU 
ETS). The level of emissions required in the non-
traded sector is 1,260 million tonnes carbon 
dioxide equivalent (MtCO


2

e) over the fourth 

budget period, in order to meet the overall budget 
of 1,950 MtCO


2

e. This section considers four 

illustrative scenarios showing how emissions could 
be reduced to meet this 1,260 MtCO


2

e level in 

the non-traded sector. Further details on these 
scenarios can be seen at Annex B. 

3.4 In these scenarios we focus on those areas that 
have the most potential to contribute to emissions 
reductions over the fourth budget period, in line 
with our vision to 2050. These include: 

•	 replacing inefficient heating systems with more 
efficient, sustainable ones; 

•	 ensuring a step-change in our move towards 
ultra-low carbon vehicles, such as electric 
vehicles; and 

•	 ensuring that our homes are better insulated to 
improve their energy efficiency. 




108 Part 3: Delivering the fourth carbon budget 

3.5 In the scenarios that follow, we flex the level of 
deployment and consequent emissions expected 
from these major sectors. Other sectors, such 
as industry and agriculture, are also assumed to 
deliver additional emissions reductions. However, 
given their relatively small impact on the fourth 
carbon budget, we do not flex the amount 
delivered by these sectors in the scenarios.   

scenario 1: High abatement in 
low carbon heat 
3.6 This scenario assumes a very high level of 
emissions reductions from the uptake of low 
carbon heat in buildings and industry, along with 
significant emissions reductions from other  
sectors. The scenario would deliver emissions  
of 1,253 MtCO


2

e in the non-traded sector  

over the fourth carbon budget period. 

3.7 This scenario assumes that: 

•	 around 8.6 million low carbon heat installations 
have been deployed in buildings by 2030, in 
domestic, commercial and public buildings, 
delivering 165 terawatt hours (TWh) of low 
carbon heat, and a further 38 TWh from 
heating networks; 

•	 significant improvements to the thermal 
efficiency of buildings, including completing 
most cavity wall and loft insulations by 2020 
and insulating up to 5.2 million solid walls by 
2030; and 

•	 average fuel efficiency of new cars and vans  
in 2030 of 60 gCO


2

/km and 90 gCO


2

/km  

respectively, and sustainable biofuel penetration 
of 8% through the 2020s. 

scenario 2: High abatement in 
transport and bioenergy demand 
3.8 This scenario assumes a very high level 
of emissions reductions from transport and 
bioenergy, with comparatively lower reductions 
from low carbon heat. This scenario reflects 
a situation where bioenergy is plentiful, with 

sustainability concerns addressed effectively and 
technological innovation leading to more advanced 
feedstocks becoming viable. Significant uptake of 
ultra-low emission vehicles is driven by increased 
consumer demand following reductions in cost 
or improvements in range, or strong policy 
drivers such as an EU-wide car and van emissions 
target. The scenario would deliver emissions of 
1,248 MtCO


2

e in the non-traded sector over the 

fourth carbon budget period. 

3.9 Scenario 2 assumes:  

•	 average fuel efficiency of new cars and vans  
in 2030 at 50 gCO


2

/km and 75 gCO


2

/km  

respectively, and sustainable biofuel penetration 
of 10% in 2030; 

•	 approximately 7.2 million low carbon heat 
installations in buildings by 2030, delivering 
138 TWh of low carbon heat, and a further  
10 TWh from heating networks; and 

•	 significant improvements to the thermal 
efficiency of buildings, including completing 
most cavity wall and loft insulations by 2020 and 
insulating up to 5.2 million solid walls by 2030. 

scenario 3: focus on high 
electrification 
3.10 This scenario assumes the very high levels 
of emissions reductions in both low carbon 
heat (as in Scenario 1) and transport (as in 
Scenario 2), alongside comparatively lower 
emissions reductions from domestic energy 
efficiency upgrades and lower uptake of biomass 
in industry. This scenario might reflect a situation 
where consumer acceptance of new technologies, 
such as electric or hydrogen fuel cell vehicles, 
and low carbon heat installations, is high, or 
where exogenous factors, such as high fossil fuel 
prices, drive a consumer search for low carbon 
alternatives. Although a situation where low 
carbon heat installations are deployed in homes 
that already have insulation would clearly be 
most cost effective, this scenario represents the 
possibility of consumer reluctance to take up solid 




Part 3: Delivering the fourth carbon budget 109 

wall insulation. Finally in this scenario, bioenergy 
supply is constrained (perhaps due to sustainability 
concerns), leading to a prioritisation of its use in 
industry rather than transport and buildings. The 
scenario would deliver emissions of 1,249 MtCO


2e 

in the non-traded sector over the fourth carbon 
budget period. 

3.11 This scenario assumes:  

•	 around 8.6 million low carbon heat installations 
in buildings by 2030, delivering 165 TWh of 
low carbon heat, and a further 38 TWh from 
heating networks; 

•	 average fuel efficiency of new cars and vans  
in 2030 at 50 gCO


2

/km and 75 gCO


2

/km  

respectively, and sustainable biofuel penetration 
of 10% in 2030; and 

•	 most cavity wall and loft insulations completed 
by 2020 and up to 2.5 million solid walls 
insulated by 2030. 

scenario 4: purchase of 
international credits 
3.12 Under this scenario, some effort to hit the 
2050 target is delayed until the 2030s and 2040s, 
with a lower level of emissions reductions over the 
fourth budget period. This scenario would require 
greater action (and therefore potentially higher 
costs) during later decades in order to remain on 
track to hit the 2050 target. Emissions over the 
fourth carbon budget period would be reduced to 
1,345 MtCO


2

e in the non-traded sector, above the 

1,260 MtCO


2

e budget level. 

3.13 This scenario shows that achieving relatively 
lower levels of abatement in both low carbon heat 
and transport could necessitate the Government 
relying on other flexibility mechanisms under the 
Climate Change Act in order to meet the fourth 
carbon budget. In this scenario, the Government 
would need to purchase around 85 MtCO


2e 

worth of carbon credits. At the forecast carbon 

price of £32/tCO


2

e (average over the fourth 

budget period), this would cost the Government 
£2.7 billion. This cost will be at least partly offset 
by the lower cost of delivering less abatement in 
heat and transport. Alternatively or in addition 
to buying credits, the Government could bank 
over-achievement from earlier carbon budgets or 
borrow forwards from the fifth carbon budget. 

3.14 This scenario assumes:  

•	 1.6 million low carbon heat installations in 
buildings by 2030, delivering 83 TWh of low 
carbon heat – achieved through roll-out of a 
portfolio of heat pumps and biomass boilers in 
domestic, commercial and public buildings – and 
a further 10 TWh from heating networks;132 

•	 significant improvements to the thermal 
efficiency of buildings, including most cavity wall 
and loft insulations completed by 2020 and up 
to 4.5 million solid walls insulated by 2030; and 

•	 in transport, average fuel efficiency of  
new cars and vans in 2030 of 70 gCO


2

/km  

and 105 gCO


2

/km respectively, and 6% 

penetration of biofuels in 2030. 

132 In scenario 4, our modelling shows mainly commercial installations take up low carbon heat, with a large heat load per installation. In scenario 1, most of the 
additional installations come from domestic-level heat pumps and biomass boilers, with smaller heat loads per installation. 




110 Part 3: Delivering the fourth carbon budget 

Delivering traded sector 
emissions reductions 
3.15 The level of emissions reductions in the 
traded sector is dictated by the level of the EU ETS 
cap. In this section we will look at two illustrative 
scenarios showing how traded sector emissions 
could be reduced. In both scenarios, the level of 
emissions reductions in the UK would be sufficient 
to fall within an EU ETS cap of 690 MtCO


2

e. This is 

the level currently assumed for the fourth carbon 
budget period. However, this will be reviewed in 
2014, as set out in the ‘Achieving carbon budgets’ 
section on page 21. As a consequence, under 
these scenarios UK businesses covered by the EU 
ETS would be net sellers of EU ETS allowances. 
Both scenarios have been modelled under a 
central assumption of electricity demand and an 
assumption of high electricity demand. Further 
details on these scenarios can be seen at Annex B. 

scenario A: power sector carbon 
intensity of 50 gco2/kWh 
3.16 Under this scenario, emissions over the 
fourth carbon budget period would be reduced 
to 592–596 MtCO


2

e in the traded sector (based on 

central and high electricity demand respectively – 
see Annex B for more detail). 

3.17 This scenario assumes that emissions in 
the power sector are reduced significantly. To 
illustrate this, we have modelled a situation where 
the carbon intensity of generating electricity falls 
to 50 gCO


2

/kilowatt hour (kWh) by 2030. The 

‘Secure, low carbon electricity’ section on page 69 
sets out further detail on the implications of this 
scenario for the generation mix. Since this scenario 
reduces emissions to well below the required 690 


Mt CO2

e level, it would leave UK businesses in the 

EU ETS with 94–98 MtCO


2

e worth of surplus 

EU ETS allowances that could be sold to others, 
generating £4.8–5.0 billion at the forecast carbon 
price of £51/tCO


2

e, or banked for future use. 

scenario B: power sector carbon 
intensity of 100 gco2/kWh 
3.18 Under this scenario, emissions over the 
fourth carbon budget period would be reduced 
to 626–629 MtCO


2

e in the traded sector (based 

on central and high electricity demand respectively 
– see Annex B for more detail). 

3.19 Scenario B assumes that emissions in the 
power and heavy industry sectors are reduced, 
but at a lower level in the power sector than that 
assumed in Scenario A. This illustrative scenario 
assumes that the carbon intensity of electricity 
generation falls to 100 gCO


2

/kWh by 2030. In this 

scenario, emissions are still reduced sufficiently to 
meet the 690 MtCO


2

e level, leaving UK businesses 

in the EU ETS with 61–64 MtCO


2

e worth of 

surplus EU ETS allowances that could be sold to 
others, generating £3.1–3.3 billion at the forecast 
carbon price of  £51/tCO


2

e, or banked for 

future use. 




Part 3: Delivering the fourth carbon budget 111 

Considerations for achieving 
the fourth carbon budget 
3.20 In developing the scenarios presented in 
this report, the Government has explored and 
taken into account the wider impacts on the UK 
economy that this range of decarbonisation could 
produce, as well as weighing up costs and benefits. 
In this section, we set out these considerations in 
brief; Annex B provides further detail. 

Managing uncertainty 
3.21 The current EU ETS Directive sets a cap on 
net emissions from the power and industry sectors 
for the whole EU, and this cap shrinks by a fixed 
amount each year from 2013 to ensure that overall 
emissions reductions are delivered in these sectors 
across the EU. The Government will review the 
EU ETS trajectory in early 2014. If at that point 
our domestic commitments place us on a different 
emissions trajectory to the EU ETS trajectory 
agreed by the EU, we will, as appropriate, revise 
our budget up to align it with the actual EU 
trajectory. Before seeking Parliamentary approval 
to amend the level of the fourth carbon budget, 
the Government will take into account the advice 
of the Committee on Climate Change (CCC) and 
any representations made by the other national 
authorities. A change in the EU ETS cap will not 
change the level of emissions reductions required 
outside of the EU ETS. 

3.22 While it is not possible to speculate now on 
what the EU ETS cap will be in the future, we can 
consider some examples of what it might be, to 
analyse the potential implications. If the legislation 
setting out the trajectory of the EU ETS cap is 
not changed, then the UK cap on emissions in 
the traded sector over the fourth budget period 
could be around 860 MtCO


2

e and we could 

amend the fourth carbon budget to a level of 2,120 


Mt CO2

e (1,260 MtCO


2

e in the non-traded sector 

plus 860 MtCO


2

e in the traded sector). Under 

the two scenarios in the traded sector outlined 
above, this would mean UK businesses covered 
by the EU ETS having a greater number of surplus 

EU ETS allowances to sell – 264–268 MtCO


2

e in 

Scenario A and 231–234 MtCO


2

e in Scenario B. 

The revenues raised from this surplus would 
depend on the carbon price, which is likely to be 
a lower price than a scenario where the EU ETS 
cap is lower. Alternatively, the Government could 
decide to decarbonise at a slower rate, resulting 
in lower surplus EU ETS allowances, although 
this would have implications for the pace of 
decarbonisation required in later carbon budgets 
to reach the 2050 target. 

3.23 On the other hand, we are pushing strongly 
for the EU to move to a more ambitious target 
for 2020. As an example, if the EU agreed to a 
target to reduce emissions by 30% from 1990 
levels by 2020, this could potentially mean a tighter 
EU ETS cap which reduces the cap on traded 
sector emissions to 590 MtCO


2

e.133 In this instance, 

the fourth carbon budget could be amended to 
1,850 MtCO


2

e (1,260 MtCO


2

e in the non-traded 

sector and 590 MtCO


2

e in the traded sector). 

Scenario A would result in emissions falling to  
592–596 MtCO


2

e, 2–6 MtCO


2

e above the 

required level. UK-based businesses covered 
by the EU ETS would therefore need to buy 
corresponding EU ETS allowances. Scenario B 
would result in emissions in the traded sector 
falling short of the 590 MtCO


2

e required in the 

traded sector by 36–39 MtCO


2

e and UK-based 

businesses under the EU ETS would need to 
purchase EU ETS allowances. In these scenarios, 
the price of allowances would be likely to be 
greater due to the tighter EU ETS cap. 

Domestic action and international 
credits 
3.24 The Climate Change Act allows credits 
purchased from overseas to be used for 
compliance with UK carbon budgets. A limit on 
how many credits can be bought in any given 
carbon budget period must be set 18 months 
before the start of that period. As announced 
in May 2011, the Government intends to reduce 
emissions domestically as far as is practical and 
affordable. However, keeping open the option of 

133 This assumes that the tighter EU ETS cap agreed as part of an EU deal on moving to a 30% target would continue at the same rate of reduction 
beyond 2020. 




112 Part 3: Delivering the fourth carbon budget 

trading is prudent in order to retain maximum 
flexibility in minimising costs in the medium-to- 
long term. 

3.25 As explained in Part 2, emissions projections 
suggest that we will reduce emissions to below 
the level of the first three carbon budgets, and 
this over-achievement could in theory be banked 
for later use.134 It is not government policy to rely 
on over-achievement in a given carbon budget to 
help meet future carbon budgets, or to factor it 
into future plans and there are two reasons why 
this is a sensible approach. First, the UK is pushing 
Europe to adopt a more ambitious 2020 target and 
this would lead to tighter second and third carbon 
budgets, meaning that we would have less (or even 
no) over-achievement to bank. Second, there is 
significant uncertainty in projections – if emissions 
are higher than projected we may have little or no 
over-achievement. 

3.26 While we are aiming to meet future carbon 
budgets without counting on any over-achievement 
in previous carbon budgets, we do see a role 
for banking to provide flexibility for short-term 
adjustments and smoothing of unexpected 
fluctuations in emissions and as a contingency 
for unexpected events. We are therefore not 
ruling out the use of banking at this stage and may 
look to bank any over-achievement into future 
carbon budgets to maintain this contingency to 
manage uncertainty. Any future decisions on 
banking will need to be taken in the light of EU and 
international decisions. 

costs of meeting the fourth carbon 
budget 
3.27 The fourth carbon budget scenarios have 
been developed taking into account a number 
of factors: 

•	 static cost effectiveness – comparing the 
estimated cost of a measure with the forecast 
carbon price for the same time period; 

•	 dynamic cost effectiveness – considering what 
action needs to be taken in the fourth budget 
period to be on track to meet the 2050 target 
in the most cost effective way; 

•	 technical feasibility – taking account of likely 
technological development and necessary 
build rates; and 

•	 practical deliverability and public acceptability – 
considering potential barriers to delivery. 

3.28 As explained in the ‘Achieving carbon 
budgets’ section on page 21, the Government 
already has a robust policy framework in place 
to meet the first three carbon budgets that will 
continue to deliver emissions reductions over the 
fourth budget period. The total net present cost 
over the lifetime of the policies included in the 
current policy package is estimated at £9 billion 
(excluding the value of greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions savings in the non-traded sector). 
Including the value of GHG savings in the non-
traded sector results in the package delivering a 
net benefit, on central estimates, of £45 billion.135 

The fourth carbon budget is not expected to lead 
to any additional costs over the course of this 
Parliament. Beyond that, the cost of meeting the 
fourth carbon budget will depend on the policies 
that are implemented over the coming decade. 

3.29 The Impact Assessment on the level of 
the fourth carbon budget explained how an 
‘early action’ pathway – where greater emissions 
reductions are made early on – is more likely to 
be cost effective than an emissions pathway that 
leaves greater levels of emissions reductions to 
later years.136 Over the fourth budget period, this 

134 The Climate Change Act allows banking and borrowing and this offers a further flexibility mechanism in meeting our carbon budgets. Banking is where 
the Government reduces emissions to below the level of the carbon budget and ‘banks’ the savings into future carbon budgets, making them easier to 
meet. Borrowing is where the Government takes part of a future carbon budget and brings it forward to cover higher emissions in the current carbon 
budget period. No more than 1% of the future carbon budget can be borrowed and the future carbon budget is reduced (i.e. made tougher to meet) 
by the same amount as is borrowed. Before banking or borrowing the Government must obtain and take into account the views of the CCC and 
Devolved Administrations. 

135 Excludes EU ETS. 
136 The Impact Assessment is available at: www.decc.gov.uk/media/viewfile.ashx?filetype=4&filepath=What%20we%20do/A%20low%20carbon%20UK/ 

Carbon%20budgets/1685-ia-fourth-carbon-budget-level.pdf&minwidth=true. Further detail on the economic benefits of early action is set out at Annex B. 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/media/viewfile.ashx?filetype=4&filepath=What%20we%20do/A%20low%20carbon%20UK/Carbon%20budgets/1685-ia-fourth-carbon-budget-level.pdf&minwidth=true




Part 3: Delivering the fourth carbon budget 113 

may require implementing some measures that 
might not be cost effective when considering the 
fourth carbon budget alone, but would support 
a more efficient transition to meeting the 2050 
target.137 Doing so is likely to avoid higher costs 
in the longer term for a number of reasons. 
For instance, early innovation can help to bring 
new technologies to market and drive down 
costs, as well as avoiding expensive lock-in to 
sub-optimal transition technologies. Our current 
evidence suggests that the net cost of meeting the 
fourth carbon budget ranges from £26 billion to 
£56 billion (excluding the value of the reduction 
in greenhouse gas emissions).138 This includes 
the costs and benefits over the lifetime of the 
measures (which often stretches well beyond the 
fourth budget period), discounted to today’s prices. 
When the benefits of the carbon savings that will 
be delivered by our scenarios are also taken into 
account, the net present value ranges from a net 
benefit of £1 billion to a net cost of £20 billion. 

3.30 Action to meet the fourth carbon budget 
can be achieved without large impacts on overall 
economic output. The macro impact of meeting 
the fourth budget level is estimated to be an 
average cost of around 0.6% of GDP a year over 
the period 2023–27 (the average cost of meeting 
the first three carbon budgets is estimated at 
around 0.4% of GDP a year). This compares 
favourably with the expected cost of not tackling 
global climate change (see Annex B for more 
detail). For example, the Stern Review (2006) 
estimated the cost of not tackling climate change to 
be between 5% and 20% of global GDP. 

3.31 Importantly, the modelling results do not 
account for the benefit of tackling global climate 
change, which will lead to future changes in 
temperature and shifts in precipitation patterns. 
This benefit includes avoiding risks to future 
UK growth. 

3.32 Annex B provides further details on the 
breakdown of costs for the non-traded sector 
Scenarios 1–4 and traded sector Scenarios 
A and B, and an explanation of how we have 
combined scenarios to produce the cost 
estimates above. The costs quoted above are 
subject to significant uncertainty given the range 
of assumptions we need to make about the 
evolution of future economic growth, fossil fuel 
prices and technology costs so far out into the 
future. Sensitivity analysis of fossil fuel price and 
technology cost assumptions shows that the overall 
costs of delivering the fourth carbon budget could 
vary significantly. See box 10 overleaf for more 
detail on sensitivities. 

3.33 This uncertainty highlights the need to 
continue to appraise costs and abatement potential 
as the evidence base evolves. The Government will 
continue to draw up detailed impact assessments 
for individual policies before they are introduced, 
to assess as accurately as possible the costs and 
benefits of the specific policies necessary to deliver 
carbon budgets. 

3.34 In addition, the portfolio approach outlined 
earlier in this report ensures that the Government 
retains the flexibility to achieve a cost effective 
transition: if costs do not fall as fast as we have 
assumed in one sector, we would have to rely on 
greater savings from other sectors in order to 
meet the fourth carbon budget. 

137 More information on the cost effectiveness of the abatement potential considered for the fourth carbon budget scenarios can be found at Annex B. 
138 The costs of delivering the fourth carbon budget scenarios will depend on how the traded and non-traded sectors are combined. Scenarios 1–4 in the  

non-traded sector imply different levels of electricity demand. To understand the cross-economy picture it is important to combine these with the traded 
sector scenario that best reflects the implications for electricity demand from levels of electrification in the transport and heat sectors. For example, 
Scenario 3, which includes high levels of electrification in heat and transport, has the effect of increasing electricity demand by about 10% in 2030. This 
scenario is compatible with either traded sector Scenario A or B under high electricity demand. Levels of abatement in Scenario 4 suggest that Scenario A 
or B under central demand would be more appropriate. 




114 Part 3: Delivering the fourth carbon budget 

Box 10: Case study on transport costs 

The fourth carbon budget scenarios have been modelled on the basis of assumptions about the 
improvement to fleet average new car and van CO


2

 emissions. This improvement could be delivered 

by a number of different vehicle mixes, all of which will have different cost implications. The costs also 
depend heavily on the assumptions we make regarding factors such as technology costs, fossil fuel 
prices and the rebound effect (where people drive more as cars become more efficient and therefore 
cheaper to drive). For example, under central assumptions, Scenario 3 in the non-traded sector has 
a net present value (NPV) of –£2 billion (i.e. a net cost). But this number could vary widely under 
different assumptions: 

•	 Battery costs today are reported up to around $1,000/kWh. In our analysis we assumed battery 
costs falling to $300/kWh in 2030. If battery costs were lower in 2030 – $150/kWh (compared 
with the CCC’s assumption of $200/kWh) – then the NPV of Scenario 3 would be £7 billion (i.e. a 
net benefit). If battery costs only came down to $800/kWh then the NPV of Scenario 3 would be 
–£36 billion (i.e. a net cost). 

•	 In respect of fossil fuel prices, our analysis was based on the Government’s central view of fossil 
fuel prices. However, under high fossil fuel price assumptions, Scenario 3 would have an NPV of 
£4 billion (i.e. a net benefit), whereas under low fossil fuel price assumptions the NPV of Scenario 3 
could be –£10 billion. 

•	 We believe that a rebound effect from more efficient vehicles is likely. However, if we were to 
assume no rebound effect then Scenario 3 would have a zero NPV (i.e. the benefits would roughly 
equal the costs), as the additional costs associated with the rebound effect, such as increased 
congestion, would be avoided. 

These are all individual effects – in reality, a number of the assumptions could differ from our central 
forecasts, meaning that the scale of change to the cost numbers could be greater still. 

Innovation 
3.35 Innovation will be crucial to delivering the 
cost reductions we expect to see in technologies 
(such as ultra-low emission vehicles) that are 
critical to delivering the fourth carbon budget. 
This innovation will transform UK infrastructure to 
support the transition to a low carbon economic 
base. The long-term certainty provided to 
business by carbon budgets is a necessary but 
not sufficient factor in ensuring that investment 
in innovation takes place: success in this area over 
the coming years will depend on the policies that 
are implemented. 

3.36 The Government directly supports 
innovation through measures that support the 
research, development and demonstration 

(RD&D) of low carbon technologies. In the 2010 
Spending Review, the Department of Energy and 
Climate Change was allocated over £150 million 
to support innovation in energy generation and 
demand-side technologies. Programmes for 
innovation in offshore wind (£30 million), marine 
energy (£20 million) and buildings (£35 million) 
have already been announced and, subject to value 
for money assessments, these will be launched 
in the coming months. Together with other 
innovation funding streams, total public funding 
for low carbon energy innovation delivered by 
members of the Low Carbon Innovation Group 
(LCIG) will amount to over £800 million during the 
Spending Review period.139 

3.37 The Government also indirectly supports 
innovation by creating long-term, credible markets 

139 LCIG comprises representatives of the Department of Energy and Climate Change, the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, the Carbon Trust, 
the Energy Technologies Institute, the Technology Strategy Board and the Research Councils. 




Part 3: Delivering the fourth carbon budget 115 

for low carbon technologies and by removing 
barriers to their uptake, giving businesses and 
industry the confidence to invest in RD&D. 
The EU ETS and Electricity Market Reform in 
the power sector, or EU new vehicle emissions 
standards in the transport sector, are examples of 
policies which seek to create long-term certainty 
in markets. 

3.38 Low carbon innovation also creates 
opportunities for UK businesses to capture a 
greater share of the global low carbon market. 
This market was worth more than £3.2 trillion 
in 2009/10 and is projected to reach £4 trillion 
by 2015 as economies around the world invest 
in low carbon technologies across a broad range 
of sectors. The UK share of the market was 
more than £116 billion in 2009/10, and could be 
much larger.140 The Government provides support 
for UK businesses to maximise these opportunities 
and grow their low carbon exports, in particular 
through UK Trade & Investment’s Green Export 
Campaign and services for business. 

Cost, price and bill impacts and 
competitiveness 

Direct impacts 
3.39 A key factor when delivering the fourth 
carbon budget is understanding the potential 
impact on consumers, businesses and industry 
through energy prices and bills. Some policies, 
such as home energy efficiency measures or 
improving process efficiency in industry, can help 
to reduce bills. Today, the bulk of increases in 
domestic energy bills have been caused by the 
rise in wholesale gas prices, with costs of climate 
change and energy measures only contributing 
a small proportion of the overall increase. See 
box 11 below for more details. The Government is 
committed to keeping these impacts under review 
and updated estimates of the impact of policies on 
energy prices and bills will be published alongside 
future Annual Energy Statements. 

Box 11: Energy bill impacts 

Alongside the Annual Energy Statement on 23 November 2011, the Department of Energy and 
Climate Change published a comprehensive updated assessment of the estimated impacts of energy 
and climate change policies on energy prices and bills.141 This covers policies and proposals put forward 
by the previous Government, as well as changes to those policies and new policies announced by the 
current Government. Only those policies in place or that have been planned to a sufficient degree of 
detail (i.e. with quantified estimates of costs and benefits) have been included in the modelling. It does 
not estimate the impacts of scenarios to meet the fourth carbon budget as the policy mechanisms to 
deliver these have yet to be determined. The key messages were: 

•	 Recent increases in energy bills have been largely driven by rising international prices for fossil 
fuels, particularly gas, and not by energy and climate change policies. Energy bills are likely to  
continue on an upward trend over time, with or without policies, due to rising fossil fuel prices  
and network costs. 

•	 Government policies are estimated to be adding just 2% on average to a typical household energy 
bill in 2011, compared with a bill in the absence of policies.  By 2020 households will, on average, 
save money (£94 or 7%)142 on their energy bills compared with what they would have paid in 
the absence of policies. The impact of policies in helping people to save energy, or use it more 
efficiently, is expected to more than offset the impact that policies delivering low carbon investment 
will have on energy prices. 

140 BIS (2011) Low Carbon and Environmental Goods and Services Report for 2009/10. Available at: www.bis.gov.uk/assets/biscore/business-sectors/docs/l/11-992x­
low-carbon-and-environmental-goods-and-services-2009-10 

141 See: www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/meeting_energy/aes/impacts/impacts.aspx 
142 Real 2010 prices. 

http://www.bis.gov.uk/assets/biscore/business-sectors/docs/l/11-992x-low-carbon-and-environmental-goods-and-services-2009-10
http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/meeting_energy/aes/impacts/impacts.aspx




116 Part 3: Delivering the fourth carbon budget 

Box 11: Energy bill impacts (continued) 

The UK ranks well internationally for household energy prices. When compared with the EU 15, UK 
consumers have faced the lowest domestic gas prices for the last three years (2008–10) and the third 
or fourth lowest electricity prices for the past two years. 

The impact of policies on energy bills for businesses is typically larger than for households because 
households are supported by a greater number of energy efficiency policies than are available for the 
business sector. For most businesses, however, direct energy costs are a relatively small proportion 
of total costs. For example, in 2009 purchases of energy and water accounted for around 2.7% 
of total costs for the UK manufacturing sector. This means that a 10% rise in direct energy costs 
increases total costs by just 0.27%. In contrast, employment costs represented around 20% of total 
manufacturing sector costs in 2009. 

Businesses that are medium-sized users of energy currently face energy bills that are on average 18% 
higher as a result of policies. By 2020 the impact of policies is estimated to be 19%. 

Businesses that are large energy-intensive users – where energy costs represent a significant 
proportion of their total operating costs – face varying impacts depending on, among other things, 
their mixture of gas and electricity use, the extent to which they consume on-site generated 
electricity (exempt from a number of policy costs, such as the Renewables Obligation) and their ability 
to use their buying power to negotiate lower prices. Policies are estimated to be adding 3–12% to 
energy bills for these users in 2011 and between 2% and 20% in 2020. 

Average UK gas prices for all sizes of industrial users have been the lowest in the EU 15 since mid­
2009. UK electricity prices have historically been similar to the EU 15 median for both medium and 
large industrial users. 

The estimated impact of policies on household and business energy bills has fallen since the previous 
analysis that the Department of Energy and Climate Change published in July 2010. This reflects, 
among other things, the Coalition Government’s proposals on Electricity Market Reform (EMR), the 
Green Deal and proposed new cost effective levels of support for large-scale renewable electricity, 
as well as the decision to make a £40 million saving in 2014/15 on spending for the small-scale Feed-
in Tariffs scheme. It also reflects the decision to fund the Renewable Heat Incentive from general 
taxation rather than through a levy on fossil fuel suppliers, and to consider several alternative funding 
options for the Government’s CCS commitments rather than through their own levy. 

3.40 The Government is paying careful attention 
to distributional impacts of the transition to a 
low carbon economy. We are working to ensure 
that consumers are able to find information that 
allows them to compare and switch suppliers to 
get the best deals. In the domestic sector we are 
particularly conscious of lower income households 
at risk of fuel poverty. The Government is taking a 
range of actions, through mechanisms such as the 
Warm Home Discount Scheme and Winter Fuel 
Payments, to ensure that vulnerable households 
are protected. 

3.41 In the business sector, increased costs as a 
result of higher energy prices and climate change 
and government policies represent a potential 
challenge for energy-intensive industries. The 
Government recognises these issues, and the 
difficulties some face in remaining internationally 
competitive while driving down domestic 
emissions. Therefore, in addition to the measures 
set out in the 2011 Budget, the Government is 
taking steps to reduce the impact of policy on the 
cost of electricity for energy-intensive industries 
whose international competitiveness is most 




affected by energy and climate change policies, and 
to support energy-intensive industries in becoming 
more energy efficient, where it is cost effective for 
them to do so. 

3.42 In the short term, cost effective energy and 
resource efficiency measures can deliver both 
economic and environmental gains. The Carbon 
Trust found that a 35% improvement in the energy 
efficiency of UK buildings by 2020 would realise 
over £4 billion worth of benefits. Such energy 
efficiency measures could also stimulate activity 
in the construction sector where lack of effective 
demand is seen as the immediate constraint on 
growth. The Government continues to explore 
the opportunities presented by the low carbon 
transition and to help UK businesses to capitalise 
on these. The UK has a comparative advantage in 
traditional environmental goods and services such 
as recycling and water treatment, for example, and 
the strongest growth areas (both in terms of sales 
and employment) in the environmental goods and 
services sector are emerging sectors such as wind, 
solar, photovoltaics and carbon finance. 

3.43 In the longer term, establishing credible 
and consistent long-term commitments through 
the carbon budget framework helps to reduce 
uncertainty about the strength of the market 
for green alternatives, improving incentives for 
innovation. The low carbon transition will also 
increase UK resilience to volatility in international 
fossil fuel prices and the negative impacts on 
the economy that these can create. The macro 
economic implications of the transition are 
considered in more detail at Annex B. 

Indirect impacts – carbon leakage 
3.44 Not all other countries have yet matched 
the scale of the UK’s low carbon ambitions. There 
is a risk that imposing relatively higher costs on 
domestic producers of energy-intensive goods, 
through climate change policies, will lead companies 
to consider shifting production and investment 
to regions of the world with less stringent 
environmental policies. This potential for ‘carbon 
leakage’ is a concern. There is no advantage – 
either to the UK economy or for global emissions 

Part 3: Delivering the fourth carbon budget 117 

reductions – in businesses relocating to countries 
where emissions continue unabated.  

3.45 There are a number of options to manage 
the risk of carbon leakage. For instance, in the 
EU Emissions Trading System, which requires 
significant reductions from the power and heavy 
industry sectors, the risk of leakage is addressed 
and largely mitigated through the provision of free 
allowances to sectors that are considered to be 
at risk of leakage. Thus heavy industry is provided 
with an incentive to reduce emissions, without 
risks to competitiveness. 

Energy security 
3.46 There are three different, linked challenges 
that relate to security of electricity supply: 

•	 diversification of supply: how to ensure that 
we are not over-reliant on one energy source 
or technology; 

•	 operational security: how to ensure that, 
moment to moment, supply matches demand, 
given unforeseen changes in both; and 

•	 resource adequacy: how to ensure that there 
is sufficient reliable capacity to meet demand, 
for example during winter anticyclonic (high 
pressure) weather conditions when demand is 
high and wind generation low for a number of 
days. 

3.47 Increasing our sources of low carbon 
generation as we meet the carbon budgets will 
help to address the first challenge, though higher 
levels of intermittent generation potentially 
increase the second and third challenges. In 
addition, by 2020 the UK could be importing nearly 
50% of its oil and 55% or more of its gas. 

3.48 Our strategy for meeting the carbon budgets 
takes these impacts into account – more detail can 
be found in the ‘Secure, low carbon electricity’ 
section on page 69 and at Annex B. 

Sustainability 
3.49 The Government’s strategy for meeting the 
fourth carbon budget takes into account wider 




118 Part 3: Delivering the fourth carbon budget 

impacts on sustainability (including potential 
biodiversity considerations in relation to changes 
in land use for bioenergy, and the cumulative 
and indirect environmental impacts of a range of 
changes to our future energy mix). These impacts 
are considered in more depth at Annex B. 

Consumption emissions 
3.50 Finally, the focus of UK climate change 
policy is on the production of emissions. The 
Government recognises that the ‘consumption’ 
perspective – which accounts for all the emissions 
produced globally to support UK consumption 
(including emissions in other countries as a result 
of the production of goods that we import into the 
UK) – is increasingly important. 

3.51 The Government is working to better 
understand the impact of consumption emissions. 
This includes annual monitoring of total emissions 
associated with UK consumption,143 and analysis 
of where these emissions occur and which 
products they are associated with.144 This evidence 
will be used to help inform and target a range 
of actions including support for UK businesses 
to measure and reduce emissions throughout 
their supply chains, and the standards and 
labelling schemes which apply to products on 
the UK market. 

Managing our performance 
3.52 Ensuring delivery of the emissions reductions 
necessary to deliver carbon budgets requires a 
robust framework to track progress and flag when 
issues or policy changes mean that we risk going 
off track. 

3.53 The Climate Change Act provides an 
effective system of legal accountability. The 
independent Committee on Climate Change 
(CCC) publishes an annual report in which it 
scrutinises the Government’s progress in meeting 
carbon budgets. The Government has to lay a 
response to the points raised by the CCC before 
Parliament by 15 October each year. The statutory 
requirement to produce a report on policies after 
a new budget has been set also forms part of the 
accountability regime under the Climate Change 
Act. This report meets that obligation for the 
fourth carbon budget. 

3.54 In addition, the Government published 
the draft Carbon Plan in March 2011 to provide 
further transparency and accountability about the 
key actions that each government department 
and the Devolved Administrations are taking in 
each sector during the lifetime of this Parliament.145 

Annex C updates the Carbon Plan action 
summary milestones, including those that relate 
to the flagship actions in each sector set out in 
Part 2 of this document. These therefore assist 
Parliament and the public in assessing whether 
the Government is making sufficient progress 
in achieving the actions necessary to deliver 
carbon budgets. 

3.55 All departments that lead or have an impact 
on the majority of policies that affect emissions are 
held accountable for delivery through a framework 
of regular monitoring and reporting against their 
actions and indicators of progress.146 The wider 
actions of all government departments are kept 

143 Embedded Carbon Emissions Indicator: http://randd.defra.gov.uk/Default.aspx?Menu=Menu&Module=More&Location=None&ProjectID=17729&From 
Search=Y&Publisher=1&SearchText=emissions%20indicator&SortString=ProjectCode&SortOrder=Asc&Paging=10#Description 

144 UK Consumption Emissions by Sector and Origin: http://randd.defra.gov.uk/Default.aspx?Menu=Menu&Module=More&Location=None&ProjectID=17718 
&FromSearch=Y&Publisher=1&SearchText=consumption%20emissions&SortString=ProjectCode&SortOrder=Asc&Paging=10#Description 

145 See: www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/tackling/carbon_plan/carbon_plan.aspx 
146 These are the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills, the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, the Department for Communities 

and Local Government, the Department for Transport, the Department of Energy and Climate Change and HM Treasury. 

http://randd.defra.gov.uk/Default.aspx?Menu=Menu&Module=More&Location=None&ProjectID=17729&FromSearch=Y&Publisher=1&SearchText=emissions%20indicator&SortString=ProjectCode&SortOrder=Asc&Paging=10#Description
http://randd.defra.gov.uk/Default.aspx?Menu=Menu&Module=More&Location=None&ProjectID=17718&FromSearch=Y&Publisher=1&SearchText=consumption%20emissions&SortString=ProjectCode&SortOrder=Asc&Paging=10#Description
http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/tackling/carbon_plan/carbon_plan.aspx




Part 3: Delivering the fourth carbon budget 119 

under review, with particular attention paid to 
new initiatives that may have a knock-on effect 
on emissions. The Government as a whole then 
reports progress against the actions in the Carbon 
Plan on a quarterly basis via the Number 10 
website, to support Parliament and the public in 
holding the Government to account. 




2050 analytical annex 




 121 

Annex A: 2050 analytical annex


 

A1 This annex provides further detail on the 2050 
futures and their implications, in particular for 
costs. The analysis in this annex refers to impacts 
in 2050 and does not look at the trajectory for 
getting there. For details of the implications of 
climate and energy policy during the 2010s and 
2020s, please refer to Annex B. 

2050 futures 
Higher 

renewables; 
more energy 

efficiency 


Stt

change

echnolog
ep-change in beha

ep-change in C


C S

St and st

, r echnolog y , in 
po w er and ene


 t w

able 

industr ppli
cations y costs

y a Higher CCS;
 orage

viour 



more 

bioenergy
 Cor e MARKAL 


ame-changi

ng er


 y cost ough in pow No gtechnologeakthrbr

Higher nuclear; 
less energy 
efficiency 

A2 To illustrate a typical cost-optimising model 
run,1 we have described a core MARKAL 
(MARKet ALlocation) pathway, one of the 
runs produced as part of the analysis that the 
Government used to set the level of the fourth 
carbon budget target. This run provides a 
benchmark against which the three 2050 futures, 
referenced in Part 1 and constructed using the 
2050 Calculator, can be compared. It should be 
noted that some environmental impacts, such as 
noise, landscape and biodiversity, are not quantified 
here. These are discussed further at Annex B. 

A3 To develop 2050 futures, the Government 
has used the MARKAL and ESME (Energy System 
Modelling Environment) cost-optimising models in 
order to understand what levels of ambition in the 
deployment of technologies may be plausible in 40 
years’ time. There are many thousands of plausible 
pathway combinations which could be constructed 
using the Calculator, and the electricity generation 
mixes, levels of electrification and levels of demand 
reduction chosen in these futures should not be 
seen as the only likely or available combinations. 
The three futures are consistent with the 
Government’s stated ambitions on specific 
technologies up to 2020, but do not assume any 
specific policy measures thereafter. 

Cost-optimising models are explained in more detail later in this annex. 1 




122 Annex A: 2050 analytical annex 

core MArKAL 
Higher 

renewables; 
more energy 

efficiency 


Stt

change

echnolog
ep-change in beha

ep-change in C


C S

St and st

, r echnolog y , in 
po w er and ene


 t w

able 

industr ppli
cations y costs

y a Higher CCS;
 orage

viour 



more 

bioenergy
 Cor e MARKAL 


ame-changi

ng er


 y cost ough in pow No gtechnologeakthrbr

Higher nuclear; 
less energy 
efficiency 

Energy saving per capita: 50% 
Electricity demand: 470 TWh 

A4 The core MARKAL run was created using the 
UK MARKAL model. Further information on the 
assumptions and modelling structure supporting 
the core MARKAL (described as run ‘DECC-1A’) 
can be found at: www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/ 
cutting-emissions/carbon-budgets/2290-pathways­
to-2050-key-results.pdf 

A5 These outputs were produced with a number 
of underlying assumptions imposed on the model. 
The results below should be interpreted in the light 
of these assumptions. 

•	 The UK MARKAL model covers CO


2

 emissions 

from energy use and does not model non-CO


2 

greenhouse gases (GHGs), land use, land use 
change and forestry (LULUCF) and international 
aviation and shipping sectors. As a consequence, 
the 80% 2050 target covering all GHGs on the 
net UK carbon account was translated to a 
‘MARKAL equivalent’ of a 90% reduction for 
the core MARKAL run.2 

•	 The core MARKAL run included the impact of 
the draft Carbon Plan3 commitments to 2020 
on the basis that policy and initiatives are already 
in place to achieve them. For key technologies 
and policies this representation is explicit; 

actual penetrations of specific technologies and 
targets were included. For other policies the 
representation is indirect, and a UK-wide CO


2 

emissions constraint in 2020 was imposed to 
mimic the assumed impact. 

•	 The core MARKAL run was based on central 
estimates of fossil fuel prices and central 
estimates of service demands.4 

What is the sectoral picture in 2050? 
A6 Electricity generation capacity is split between 
carbon capture and storage (CCS) (29 gigawatts 
(GW)), nuclear (33 GW) and renewables (45 
GW). Wind power is installed earlier as part of 
the Carbon Plan commitments, with 28 GW in 
place by 2020. In terms of energy supplied, nuclear 
and CCS together deliver the majority (74%). 
Unabated gas plays a significant back-up role in 
2050 to balance the system, but largely fades out 
as a baseload technology from 2030 onwards. 
Electricity imports and small-scale combined heat 
and power (CHP) also contribute. CCS with 
power generation is an important technology 
from 2020 onwards, generating more than a 
third of all electricity. The MARKAL run uses this 
technology to achieve negative emissions rates 
for electricity by sequestering the CO


2

 associated 

with the biomass share (25% of fuel input to these 
generators in 2050 is biomass). 

A7 In buildings, a reduction in space and water 
heating demand is accompanied by a large 
reduction in final energy consumption. Natural 
gas disappears from heating almost entirely, while 
electricity consumption increases significantly. Heat 
pumps, which draw heat from the surrounding 
environment with the help of some electricity, 
serve a larger proportion of heating service 
demand than any other technology. 

A8 The chemicals, iron and steel, and non­
ferrous metals sectors all exhibit the maximum 
allowable demand reductions of 25% from the 
central estimate of service demand, driven by 

2 The core MARKAL run was constrained both to mimic the achievement of the UK’s 80% target in 2050 and to ensure a plausible trajectory for getting there.


 

3 HM Government and DECC (2011) Carbon Plan.


 

4 These two central conditions are also applied to the MARKAL runs used to cost the three 2050 futures which follow.


 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/cutting-emissions/carbon-budgets/2290-pathways-to-2050-key-results.pdf




Annex A: 2050 analytical annex 123 

MARKAL’s demand-response assumptions. This 
central estimate does not reflect the Updated 
Energy and Emissions Projections that the 
Government has used in this report, and posits 
a higher baseline level of demand. The MARKAL 
model suggests that some industries might scale 
back operations significantly. Industry also benefits 
from the ability to adopt CCS in the MARKAL 
model. By 2050, 48 million tonnes carbon dioxide 
equivalent (MtCO


2

e) a year is sequestered from 

industrial processes. 

A9 Of all the end-use sectors, transport shows 
the lowest demand response in the core MARKAL 
run, with approximately 5% reductions for most 
service demand categories. The mix of end-use 
technologies is extremely varied in 2050 when 
compared with today. Battery electric, biomass-to­
liquids and hydrogen fuelled vehicles are all used. 
However, conventionally fuelled vehicles are not 
expected to be significantly used by 2050 under 
this optimised pathway. 

A10 As the MARKAL model does not account 
for non-CO


2

 emissions, much of agriculture’s 

GHG impact is not explicitly accounted for (other 
than as part of the overall 90% decarbonisation 
constraint). LULUCF emissions and removals are 
also not considered. If domestic forestry were 
to make a significant contribution to bioenergy 
feedstock supplies, carbon sequestration associated 
with land use change would deliver additional 
abatement. The core MARKAL run demands 
350 terawatt hours (TWh) of bioenergy a year 
by 2050. 

What does this scenario imply for 
security of supply and wider impacts? 
A11 A balanced generation mix with a relatively 
high deployment of intermittent renewable 
generation technologies such as wind and marine 
power means that the back-up requirements of 
this run are significant. An additional 33 GW of 
gas plant is needed to meet the system balancing 
requirements imposed by the model. 

A12 Per capita energy demand falls by 50% 
compared with 2007, while total electricity 
demand increases by almost a quarter from 
2007 levels. 

A13 In order to meet the demands of CCS and 
system back-up generation, natural gas remains 
an important part of the fuel mix in 2050, with 
264 TWh of imports. Oil plays a much smaller role 
than it does today, with the UK importing roughly 
a sixth of what was brought into the country in 
2000, despite declining natural reserves. 

‘Higher renewables; more energy 
efficiency’ 

Higher 
renewables; 
more energy 

efficiency 


Stt

change

echnolog
ep-change in beha

ep-change in C


C S

St and st

, r echnolog y , in 
po w er and ene


 t w

able 

industr ppli
cations y costs

y a Higher CCS;
 orage

viour 



more 

bioenergy
 Cor e MARKAL 


ame-changi

ng er


 y cost ough in pow No gtechnologeakthrbr

Higher nuclear; 
less energy 
efficiency 

Energy saving per capita: 54% 
Electricity demand: 530 TWh 

A14 The ‘Higher renewables; more energy 
efficiency’ future was created using the 2050 
Calculator. This scenario is presented in the web 
tool of the Calculator which can be found at:  
http://2050-calculator-tool.decc.gov.uk 

A15 The ‘Higher renewables; more energy 
efficiency’ future is based on a step-change in per 
capita energy demand reductions and a major 
reduction in the cost of renewable generation. This 
is accompanied by innovations to develop a large 
expansion in electricity storage capacity to manage 
the challenges of intermittent generation.  

What is the sectoral picture in 2050? 
A16 ‘Higher renewables; more energy efficiency’ 
chooses a generation mix with a relatively high 
installation of renewable generation capacity 
compared with the other two futures, with wind 
delivering 55% of the total electricity supply. Other 
renewable technologies, such as solar PV, marine 
and hydroelectric power, also play a role. To meet 

http://2050-calculator-tool.decc.gov.uk




124 Annex A: 2050 analytical annex 

baseload needs and ensure security of supply, 
there is still a requirement for baseload capacity 
from nuclear and CCS. Some 20 GW of pumped 
storage provides 400 GWh of extra storage 
capacity, compared with 9 GWh today. 

A17 Some 7.7 million solid walls and 8.8 million 
cavity walls are insulated by 2050. In buildings, 
behaviour change and smarter heating controls 
result in lower average home temperatures (one 
and a half degrees below today) complementing 
more energy efficient homes. All domestic heating 
demand across the UK is met through house-level 
electrified heating systems. 

A18 Industry grows steadily and achieves energy 
demand reductions of a third. Some 48% of 
remaining emissions are captured by CCS. 

A19 All cars and buses are fuelled by batteries 
or hydrogen fuel cells. These technologies create 
improved energy efficiency, allowing people to 
drive as far as today while using less energy than 
they do today. There is an increase in the use of 
public transport, walking and cycling; 63% of the 
distance travelled domestically is made by cars in 
2050, compared with 83% in 2007. 

A20 Thanks to high levels of demand reduction, 
extensive electrification of both heating and 
transport, and the deployment of CCS in industrial 
applications, sustainable bioenergy has a relatively 
small role in comparison with the other scenarios, 
delivering 182 TWh of final energy demand. 

What does this scenario imply for 
security of supply and wider impacts? 
A21 A generation mix with a high proportion 
of intermittent generation means that there is a 
pressing need to balance the system to cope with 
adverse weather conditions, such as a drop in 
North Sea wind. Twenty-four GW of back-up gas 
plant is required to meet a five-day wind lull and 
demand peak across the UK as well as innovation 
success and cost reductions in electricity storage. 

A22 Because of efforts made to improve energy 
efficiency across the economy, the increase in 
electricity demand is not the highest of the three 
scenarios despite having the highest proportion of 

energy demand being met by electric low carbon 
technologies. However, electricity demand is still 
over a third higher than in 2007. 

A23 Apart from its electricity back-up role, gas 
plays a much smaller role than it does today, as 
the UK becomes more energy independent. Net 
natural gas imports are almost zero in 2050 with 
total domestic consumption at 100 TWh a year. 

A24 Bioenergy is harvested from approximately 
25,000 km2 of land area in the UK and other 
countries. Local air quality is likely to be better 
in this pathway than it is today. In particular, the 
damage to human health arising from air pollution, 
principally particulate matter, could be around 
60%–85% lower in 2050 compared with 2010. 

‘Higher nuclear; less energy 
efficiency’ 

Higher 
renewables; 
more energy 

efficiency 


Stt

change Step-change in


 CCS


and st
echnolog

 technology, in
 power and , rene pplications orage

ep-change in behay costs


w

able 

industry a Higher CCS; viour 

more 
bioenergy Core MARKAL 


ame-changingy cost er No gtechnologough in poweakthrbr

Higher nuclear; 
less energy 
efficiency 

Energy saving per capita: 31% 
Electricity demand: 610 TWh 

A25 The ‘Higher nuclear; less energy efficiency’ 
future was created using the 2050 Calculator. 
This scenario is presented in the web tool of the 
Calculator which can be found at:  
http://2050-calculator-tool.decc.gov.uk 

A26 The ‘Higher nuclear; less energy efficiency’ 
future describes what we might do if it proved 
difficult to deploy newer technologies (such as 
CCS technology in power and industry). The 
extent to which individuals change their behaviour 
and energy consumption patterns to reduce 
energy demand is lower in this future. 

http://2050-calculator-tool.decc.gov.uk




Annex A: 2050 analytical annex 125 

What is the sectoral picture in 2050? 
A27 ‘Higher nuclear; less energy efficiency’ relies 
heavily on nuclear power (75 GW of installed 
capacity) with the lowest deployment of CCS, 
wind and other renewable generation in 2050 
across the three futures. Although deployment is 
relatively low, there is still 20 GW of wind capacity 
present on the grid, as the UK’s natural advantages 
and previous investments in earlier years mean 
that some installations will remain cost effective. 

A28 Some 5.6 million solid walls and 6.9 million 
cavity walls are insulated by 2050. Average internal 
temperatures by 2050 are half a degree higher 
than they are today. Domestic and commercial 
heating is largely decarbonised through a 
combination of air- and ground-source heat 
pumps, while 10% of demand is met through  
local-level district heating. 

A29 CCS is not successful at a commercial scale  
and, alongside steady growth, this means that 
industry is responsible for a large proportion of 
remaining emissions, making up more than half of 
the total by 2050. 

A30 Around 80% of cars are ultra-low emission 
vehicles (ULEVs), powered by batteries or 
hydrogen fuel cells. People travel 6% further than 
today, but there is a gradual movement away from 
using cars towards more efficient public transport. 
Some 80% of distance travelled domestically is 
made by cars in 2050, 3% lower than in 2007. 

A31 As it is not possible for CCS to generate 
‘negative emissions’ in this scenario, sustainable 
bioenergy is extremely important for 
decarbonising ‘hard to reach’ sectors like industry. 
Bioenergy supply is 461 TWh of final energy 
demand, with industry the second highest demand 
sector after transport. 

What does this scenario imply for 
security of supply and wider impacts? 
A32 Nuclear power’s role means less back-up 
is required to balance the system. An additional 
14 GW of gas plant is required to meet a five-day 
wind lull and demand peak across the UK. 

A33 Per capita energy demand reductions are 
the smallest of the three futures. Because of 
electrification technologies being widely deployed 
for heating and transport, the demand for 
electricity is the highest, increasing by more than 
50% compared with 2007. 

A34 Natural gas imports fall by 2050 as the lack of 
CCS removes the most important long-term low 
carbon role for the fuel. The UK imports less than 
a quarter of the amount of gas bought in 2010, 
with total domestic use of 189 TWh in 2050. 

A35 Local air quality is likely to be better in 
this pathway than it is today. In particular, the 
damage to human health arising from air pollution, 
principally particulate matter, could be around  
45%–80% lower in 2050 compared with 2010. 
The land use impact is considerable – bioenergy is 
harvested from approximately 45,000 km2 of land 
area in the UK and other countries. 

‘Higher CCS; more bioenergy’ 
Higher 

renewables; 
more energy 

efficiency 


Stt

change Step-change in


 CCS


and st
echnolog

 technology, in
 power and , rene pplications orage

ep-change in behay costs


w

able 

industry a Higher CCS; viour 

more 
bioenergy Core MARKAL 


ame-changingy cost er No gtechnologough in poweakthrbr

Higher nuclear; 
less energy 
efficiency 

Energy saving per capita: 43% 
Electricity demand: 490 TWh 

A36 The ‘Higher CCS; more bioenergy’ future 
was created using the 2050 Calculator. This 
scenario is presented in the web tool of the 
Calculator which can be found at: http://2050­
calculator-tool.decc.gov.uk 

A37 The ‘Higher CCS; more bioenergy’ future 
assumes the successful deployment of CCS 
technology on a commercial scale and its use in 
power generation and industry, supported by 

http://2050-calculator-tool.decc.gov.uk
http://2050-calculator-tool.decc.gov.uk




126 Annex A: 2050 analytical annex 

significant gas use. CCS is also used with sustainable 
and plentiful biomass supplies (BECCS) to generate 
‘negative’ emissions. 

What is the sectoral picture in 2050? 
A38 Electricity generation is provided by a 
balanced mix of cost competitive renewables 
(36 GW of capacity), CCS (40 GW of capacity) 
and nuclear power (20 GW of capacity). Biomass-
fired CCS technology plays a major role, and helps 
to bring about negative net emissions from the 
power sector by 2050. 

A39 People embrace new technologies and 
smart controls in their homes, as well as insulation 
measures: 5.6 million solid walls and 6.9 million 
cavity walls are insulated, and domestic and 
commercial heating is almost entirely decarbonised. 
Half of domestic heat demand is met by house-
level electric heat pumps, with the other half 
generated using network-level systems such as 
district heating and CHP. 

A40 Industry grows steadily and achieves energy 
demand reductions of one third. Some 48% 
of remaining emissions are captured by CCS. 
Geosequestration has an appreciable impact, 
taking one million tonnes of CO


2

 out of the 

atmosphere every year by 2050. 

A41 Some 65% of cars and all buses are run 
using ultra-low emission fuel sources. People still 
travel 6% more than they do today, but there is a 
substantial shift towards cycling and using public 
transport more often. Some 74% of distance 
travelled domestically is still made by cars. 

A42 Sustainable bioenergy use in this future is 
highest of the three futures, delivering 471 TWh 
of final energy demand. Much of the supply is 
directed towards power generation in order to 
meet demand from CCS stations and help create 
‘headroom’ for the continued use of fossil fuels. 

What does this scenario imply for 
security of supply and wider impacts? 
A43 A balanced generation mix and a much lower 
reliance on electrified demand-side technologies 
mean that the back-up requirements of this 
scenario are the lowest of the three futures. No 
additional gas plant is required to meet a five-day 
wind lull and demand peak across the UK in 2050. 

A44 Per capita energy demand falls by 43% 
compared with 2007, while total electricity demand 
increases by 29% from 2007 levels. This is the 
lowest of the three scenarios, as a consequence of 
a widespread roll-out in non-electric low carbon 
technologies in heating and transport. 

A45 In order to meet the demands of gas-fired 
CCS, natural gas imports play a bigger role in 
this scenario, with 215 TWh of imports being 
the largest of the three scenarios, though still 
approximately half of what the UK imported 
in 2010. 

A46 Approximately 51,000 km2 of land area 
in the UK and other countries is used to grow 
bioenergy. Heavy use of bioenergy could have a 
negative impact on local air quality. In particular, 
the damage to human health arising from air 
pollution, principally particulate matter, could 
be between 80% lower to 60% higher in 2050 
compared with 2010. Given the scope for adverse 
implications for air quality, if the UK were to adopt 
this pathway, the Government would develop a 
policy framework that ensured that improved 
pollution abatement technology was fully deployed 
so that the health impacts of air pollution could 
be minimised. 




Annex A: 2050 analytical annex 127 

Understanding the costs of 
2050 futures 
A47 The Stern Review Report on the Economics 
of Climate Change5 concluded that tackling climate 
change is a rational and prudent macroeconomic 
strategy, with the benefits of strong, early action 
on climate change far outweighing the long-term 
costs of not acting. Figure A1 summarises the costs 
of action versus inaction on climate change. 

Figure A1: Costs of action versus inaction on climate change 

Costs of inaction on climate change: Costs and benefits of action 
on climate change: 

Damage costs of climate change: 
costs of population movements, 

deteriorated ecosystems and 
severe weather damages: up to 

20% of GDP globally 

Investment, operating and fuel costs: 
capital, operating and fuel costs associated 
with transition to a low carbon economy 

Efficiency savings and innovation: 
energy and resource efficiency and 

innovation spillovers 
Energy security: 

exposure to fossil fuel price 
volatility and shortages 

Wider macroeconomic impacts: 
structural change in the economy (e.g. jobs 

supported in the low carbon economy) 

A48 History shows us that it is extremely difficult 
to forecast future costs with any degree of 
accuracy. To understand the costs of the 2050 
futures we have used a range of models: MARKAL, 
ESME and the new 2050 Calculator, which includes 
costs data. The history and methodology of each 
of these models are set out below. 

Stern, N (2006) Report on the Economics of Climate Change. HM Treasury. 5 




128 Annex A: 2050 analytical annex 

Box A1: MARKAL fact box 

History MARKAL (MARKet ALlocation model) is an internationally peer-reviewed model 
that has been used in many countries over the last 30 years to model national 
energy system change over the long and medium term. UK MARKAL has been 
used extensively by the UK Government and the Committee on Climate Change 
(CCC) to estimate the costs of meeting the 80% GHG emissions reduction target 
in 2050. MARKAL results have been recently published in: 

• AEA (2011) Pathways to 2050 – Key Results. MARKAL Model Review and Scenarios 
for DECC’s 4th Carbon Budget Evidence Base. Final report;6 

• Usher, W and Strachan, N (2010) UK MARKAL Modelling – Examining 
Decarbonisation Pathways in the 2020s on the Way to Meeting the 2050 
Emissions Target. Final Report for the Committee on Climate Change. University 
College London;7 

• Department of Energy and Climate Change (2009) Climate Change Act 2008 
Impact Assessment. 8 

Methodology MARKAL is a cost-optimising model. Targets and assumptions are set in MARKAL 
(as described in the scenarios that the Government is exploring) to define an end 
point in 2050; the model then works backwards to construct a pathway to it in 
the least expensive (optimal) way. The model can be constrained in various ways 
to show optimal pathways under different conditions. Constraints can encompass 
variables ranging from technological choices to specific policies. MARKAL is also able 
to test these pathways against a range of factors that affect energy security. 

MARKAL calculates the capital, operating expenditure and fuel costs of the energy 
system. It can also calculate welfare costs (such as the loss of comfort associated 
with having a colder home or not being able to travel as far). Coverage of the 
model is limited to fossil fuel combustion and industrial processes; it does not cover 
international aviation and shipping, non-CO


2

 greenhouse gases (GHGs) and land use, 

land use change and forestry (LULUCF). 

Data in the model takes the form of point estimates for technology costs rather 
than ranges. Learning curves are included and connected to prices, allowing 
technology costs to be partially endogenous, i.e. they are determined partly by 
learning due to factors within the model, and partly due to factors which are pre-set. 

MARKAL is a sophisticated model containing over 500,000 data elements. Even 
so, the model necessarily makes a number of important simplifying assumptions. 
Perfect foresight is assumed, as if knowledge of future technologies and prices 
were fully available. Forward-looking and rational consumers are assumed to 
apply this foresight in the context of perfectly competitive markets, meaning that 
price distortions do not raise costs. 

6 www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/cutting-emissions/carbon-budgets/2290-pathways-to-2050-key-results.pdf 
7 http://downloads.theccc.org.uk.s3.amazonaws.com/4th%20Budget/CCC%20MARKAL%20Final%20Report%20-%20UCL%20Nov10.pdf 
8 www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/85_20090310164124_e_@@_climatechangeactia.pdf 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/cutting-emissions/carbon-budgets/2290-pathways-to-2050-key-results.pdf
http://downloads.theccc.org.uk.s3.amazonaws.com/4th%20Budget/cc%20MARKAL%20Final%20Report%20-%20UCL%20Nov10.pdf
http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/85_20090310164124_e_@@_climatechangeactia.pdf




Annex A: 2050 analytical annex 129 

Box A1: MARKAL fact box (continued) 

Methodology 
(continued) 

MARKAL has a number of variants which cover gaps in its central analysis. For 
example, stochastic MARKAL introduces uncertainty, and in MARKAL Macro the 
model includes the interaction with UK economic growth to model the wider 
macroeconomic effects. 

For this exercise we have used the MARKAL Elastic Demand model, with model 
database version 3.26. This is the same version that was used in analysis supporting 
the Impact Assessment of Fourth Carbon Budget Level published in May 2011.9 

Box A2: ESME fact box 

History ESME (Energy System Modelling Environment) was developed by the Energy 
Technologies Institute (ETI) using technology assumptions supplied by businesses 
and industry. Completed in late 2010 and already used by the Department of 
Energy and Climate Change, the CCC and the ETI’s industrial members, the key 
findings are due to be published in early 2012. The model aims to identify those 
technologies likely to be most important for an affordable, secure and sustainable 
energy system that meets the 2050 GHG Emissions Reduction Target of 80%. 

Methodology Like MARKAL, ESME back-casts and optimises to find least-cost solutions to 
meet energy targets. It optimises technology costs in the form of investment, 
operating, fuel and resource costs. It focuses on the engineering system design for 
2050, characterising optimal outcomes at the energy system, sector and individual 
technology levels. It does not model specific government policies, and learning rates 
are exogenously set. Similarly, demand for energy services is prescribed by input 
scenarios and is not responsive to prices. 

Also like MARKAL, ESME includes the capital, operating and fuel costs of the 
energy system to 2050. Unlike MARKAL, ESME does not compute welfare costs. 

The ESME model has a wider coverage than MARKAL. In addition to sources 
of fossil fuel emissions, it also includes international aviation and shipping and a 
valuation for housing stock. But like MARKAL it does not include non-CO


2

 GHGs 

or LULUCF. 

The model represents uncertainty of technology costs and other key assumptions 
by probability distributions. Perfect foresight is assumed in each run, with the costs 
being drawn from these probability distributions. A particular feature of ESME is 
the ability to define demands and resources at a UK regional level and show the 
geographical location of energy infrastructure solutions. 

www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/what%20we%20do/a%20low%20carbon%20uk/carbon%20budgets/1685-ia-fourth-carbon-budget-level.pdf 9 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/what%20we%20do/a%20low%20carbon%20uk/carbon%20budgets/1685-ia-fourth-carbon-budget-level.pdf




130 Annex A: 2050 analytical annex 

Box A3: 2050 Calculator fact box 

History The new 2050 Calculator is released alongside this report as a Call for Evidence. 
Comments on the cost estimates and assumptions used are requested by 8 March 
2012. 

The new 2050 Calculator builds on the original 2050 Calculator first released in 
July 2010. This tool enabled the public to join in an informed debate on the future 
of the UK’s energy system, and to support policymakers in making the best choices 
for the long-term. 

The 2050 Calculator is an engineering model based on physical and technical 
potential which allows users to consider the implications of the pathway for energy 
security, land use, electricity demand and other wider impacts. Following a Call for 
Evidence, the Government decided to add costs to the 2050 Calculator to allow 
users to also compare pathways on this basis. The Government has been working 
to develop the analysis needed to update the Calculator, consulting with experts in 
industry and academia to develop the strongest evidence base available. 

Methodology The 2050 Calculator includes costs for all activities associated with GHG 
emissions. This includes fossil fuel combustion, international aviation and shipping, 
industrial processes, agriculture, waste and LULUCF.10 Therefore, the coverage of 
the 2050 Calculator is wider than that of MARKAL and ESME. 

There are over 100 technologies in the 2050 Calculator and capital, operating 
expenditure and fuel costs are included for each of these to 2050. Unlike 
MARKAL, the 2050 Calculator excludes welfare costs. 

The 2050 Calculator shows the lower, higher and default point estimates for each 
technology and fuel in 2050. Since there is considerable uncertainty about costs in 
40 years’ time, the Calculator uses cost ranges that are intended to be sufficiently 
wide as to capture the views of all credible experts. In particular: 

•	 The lower cost estimate for 2050 is the most optimistic assessment of future 
technology costs published by a credible evidence source. It assumes both 
technological progress to drive costs down over time and sufficient availability of 
skilled staff and materials to build and operate the technology. 

•	 The upper cost estimate for 2050 is the most pessimistic view, assuming minimal 
technological progress11 over the next 40 years. In practice this usually means 
assuming that technology costs remain frozen at today’s prices. 

10	 The 2050 Calculator includes all emissions which count towards the UK’s 2050 target. The only exception is international aviation and shipping: the 
Government has yet to decide whether this will contribute towards the UK’s 2050 target. However, for illustrative purposes this sector has been included in 
the Calculator in the meantime. The 2050 Calculator does not include embedded emissions because these do not count towards the UK’s 2050 target. 

11 This assumes incremental improvements in energy efficiency only. 




Annex A: 2050 analytical annex 131 

Box A3: 2050 Calculator fact box (continued) 

Methodology 
(continued) 

• The default point estimate is a point within the high–low range consistent with 
the latest cost assumptions from MARKAL.12 The default fossil fuel price is the 
Department of Energy and Climate Change central fossil fuel price assumption 
and the default finance cost is 7% for all technologies. 

The cost estimates in the 2050 Calculator are drawn from a wide range of 
credible, published sources. These include economic and energy models (MARKAL 
and ESME), sectoral analysis,13 UK government departments, independent analytical 
bodies such as the Committee on Climate Change and, wherever possible, the real-
world cost of technologies as reported by financial bodies or the media. The 2050 
Calculator includes no new evidence about costs; it simply brings together existing 
published assumptions. 

Critically, unlike MARKAL and ESME, the 2050 Calculator has no inbuilt  
cost-optimisation function; all choices are left up to the user. 

Functionality 

The 2050 Calculator is designed to be easy to use. Users can quickly design 
their own pathway (or select examples) and see a clear description of the cost 
implications. The user can compare the cost of their pathway with those from 
experts including Friends of the Earth, the ETI, Atkins, the Campaign to Protect 
Rural England and the National Grid. The user can see how costs are broken 
down by sector and within sector, and can choose to override the default 
cost assumptions and test the sensivity of the total cost of their pathway to 
alternative assumptions. 

The 2050 Calculator is particularly well suited to answering questions such as: 

•	 What	is	the	cost	of	pathway	X	relative	to	pathway	Y? 

•	 What	are	the	biggest	component	costs	of	pathway	X? 

•	 	How	could	the	cost	of	pathway	X	change	if,	say,	nuclear	costs	are	high	and	the	 
cost of, say, renewables are as low as credible experts believe is possible? 

12	 MARKAL cost assumptions have been used for approximately half the technologies in the 2050 Calculator where the mapping between both models is 
fairly straightforward. This includes power sector technologies, road transport, heat insulation, bioenergy and hydrogen production costs.  For those sectors 
where it is more problematic to map from MARKAL to the 2050 Calculator (aviation, shipping, heat and industry) and for sectors which MARKAL does 
not cover (agriculture and waste), we have used a 35th centile assumption. Finance costs are set at 7% default.  Fossil fuel prices for 2050 will default to the 
DECC central projection for 2030 ($130/barrel). 

13 Including Parsons Brinckerhoff; Mott MacDonald; AEA; and NERA. 




132 Annex A: 2050 analytical annex 

Box A3: 2050 Calculator fact box (continued) 

Methodology Caveats 
(continued) 

There are a number of important caveats to bear in mind when interpreting results 
from the 2050 Calculator. 

Does not represent an impact on energy bills. Results from the 2050 Calculator 
are presented as £/person/year, but this should not be interpreted as the effect 
on energy bills. The impact on energy bills of, say, building more wind turbines 
will depend on how the policy is designed and implemented (e.g. via tax, subsidy, 
regulation, etc). Taxes and subsidies are not captured in the 2050 Calculator so we 
cannot use the tool to examine these effects. The Government uses other, more 
sophisticated models to examine the effect of specific policy interventions on 
electricity and energy prices. 

Pathway costs should be understood relative to other pathways. The total cost 
of pathways is presented in the 2050 Calculator but for these to be meaningful they 
should be compared with the costs of another pathway. This is because there is no 
‘zero cost’ option (unless the UK were to stop using energy altogether). Not tackling 
climate change and remaining fossil fuel dependent would still entail an energy 
system and it would still have a cost. 

The costs presented exclude energy security impacts, costs arising from the 
damaging impacts of climate change, welfare costs and wider macroeconomic 
impacts. The damage costs of climate change could be particularly significant – 
up to 20% of GDP. Other welfare costs excluded from the analysis include costs 
associated with living in cooler buildings, travelling less, changes to landscape, and 
air and noise pollution. The 2050 Calculator does not take into account taxes or 
subsidies, R&D costs, administrative costs associated with delivering policies, or 
wider macroeconomic costs. 

Long-term, not short-term analysis. The 2050 Calculator is best suited to long-
term analysis of the energy system in 2050 rather than policy implications over the 
2010s and 2020s. 

User-driven model, not market based. The 2050 Calculator costs the combination 
of technologies chosen by the user. Consequently it does not take into account price 
interactions between supply and demand. For example, if the cost of electricity 
generation increases then the Calculator does not capture any elasticity of demand 
response from the electricity user. The cost optimising model MARKAL better 
handles such price responses. 

Costs are exogenous. Technology costs do not vary depending on the level of 
technology roll-out. However, if the user has beliefs about how they would expect 
the costs of particular technologies to change in their pathway, they can test the 
effect of varying these assumptions. 




Annex A: 2050 analytical annex 133 

Costs of 2050 futures 
A49 We have used MARKAL and ESME to 
calculate the aggregate costs of these 2050 futures. 
As the two models operate in slightly different 
ways, we have used different methodologies 
for mapping the futures created using the 
2050 Calculator into the more complex cost­
optimising models. 

A50 For MARKAL, we used the same baseline 
assumptions as those described in the core 
MARKAL run. The key elements of each future 
are characterised in terms of imposed constraints 
on the model. For example, ‘Higher renewables; 
more energy efficiency’ assumes large-scale 
deployment of wind power. In order to model 
this outcome, we introduced constraints to force 
a minimum or maximum amount of wind (both 
offshore and onshore), nuclear, CCS, solar and 
marine technologies onto the system to broadly 
match the capacity levels set in the 2050 futures. 
We imposed investment or capacity constraints 
on the technologies. As back-up gas plant is built 
to provide reserve capacity in the MARKAL 
model subject to the contributions of intermittent 
technologies, the model endogenously determines 
its capacity. 

A51 On the demand side, we have adopted 
the revised estimates of the energy efficiency 
savings that can be achieved in the residential 
sector, taken from the analysis carried out for the 
Fourth Carbon Budget Impact Assessment.14 We 
introduced constraints to replicate the figures used 
in the Calculator for uptake of heating technologies 
and ultra-low emission vehicles. 

A52 For ESME, we took a different approach. 
Using version 1.2 of the ETI ESME assumption 
database, we made the minimum set of changes 
to reflect the spirit of the 2050 futures. Where 
possible, we changed the cost of different 
technologies to see how that influenced 
deployment rather than fixing deployment levels. 

Differences in behaviour change across the three 
scenarios were not modelled. 

•	 For ‘Higher renewables; more energy 
efficiency’ this meant making lowest cost 
assumptions for wind, electric vehicles and 
electric heating but upper end cost assumptions 
for CCS, nuclear and bioenergy. In each case 
‘lowest cost’ means the technology cost was 
set at the bottom end of the ETI ESME 1.2 
assumption database cost range while ‘upper 
end’ means it was set at the top. 

•	 For ‘Higher nuclear; less energy efficiency’ 
this meant prohibiting CCS; making lowest 
cost assumptions for nuclear and bioenergy; 
assuming that wind, electric heating and electric 
vehicles are at the upper end of predicted costs; 
and assuming that bioenergy is more abundant 
and nuclear power possible in more locations 
than the ESME default. 

•	 For ‘Higher CCS; more bioenergy’ this meant 
making lowest cost assumptions for CCS; but  
setting costs at the upper end for nuclear, wind 
power, electric heating and electric vehicles. It 
also assumes that bioenergy is more abundant 
than the ESME default. 

A53 The technology and fuel cost assumptions 
used by MARKAL and ESME are towards the 
lower end of the range that credible experts 
believe possible by 2050. However, the use of 
these relatively optimistic cost assumptions in our 
analysis reflects confidence that the UK and other 
countries will successfully implement policies that 
are effective in stimulating businesses and industry 
to innovate to bring down costs down. Annex B 
sets out the policies the Government already has 
in place to stimulate innovation. If innovation does 
not drive technology costs down, the costs of the 
pathways would be higher than shown here. The 
results for the three 2050 futures are set out in 
table A1 overleaf. 

14 HM Government (2011) Impact Assessment of Fourth Carbon Budget Level . Available at: www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/what%20we%20do/a%20low%20 
carbon%20uk/carbon%20budgets/1685-ia-fourth-carbon-budget-level.pdf 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/what%20we%20do/a%20low%20carbon%20uk/carbon%20budgets/1685-ia-fourth-carbon-budget-level.pdf




134 Annex A: 2050 analytical annex 

Table A1: Cost of pathways to 2050 compared with doing nothing on climate change (£bn in 2050)15 

MARKAL core run Higher renewables; 
more energy 
efficiency 

Higher nuclear; less 
energy efficiency 

Higher CCS; more 
bioenergy 

MARKAL 13 36 26 43 

ESME n/a 36 88 33 

sensitivity testing the three 
futures 
A54 As set out above, we have represented the 
three 2050 futures in MARKAL by imposing the 
minimum number of constraints on the model. 

A55 However, this simple representation does not 
capture the different energy demand profiles set 
out in the three futures pathways. For example, 
the ‘Higher renewables; more energy efficiency’ 
pathway assumes significant behaviour change: the 
average temperature of homes is one and a half 
degrees lower than it is today and travel behaviour 
is curbed (people travel the same distance as today 
and there is a significant shift to public transport).16 

A56 We have deliberately not reflected different 
energy demand characteristics in the MARKAL 
modelling because we sought to maintain 
consistency with the MARKAL modelling practice 
of keeping demand assumptions the same in the 
baseline and the abatement pathway.17 

A57 Relaxing this assumption reveals that the 
cost of achieving the ‘Higher renewables; more 
energy efficiency’ scenario could be significantly 
lower. Using a lower demand profile (compared 
with a baseline with central demand assumptions), 
this pathway actually saves the economy £8 billion 
in 2050 compared with taking no action on 
climate change. 

A58 We have also sensitivity tested these results 
using the 2050 Costs Calculator to identify the 

major components of costs and where the most 
significant uncertainties are in the 2050 futures. 

‘Higher renewables; more energy 
efficiency’ future    
A59 Results from MARKAL and ESME suggest 
that the aggregate additional investment and 
operating cost of the ‘Higher renewables; more 
energy efficiency’ scenario could be £36 billion18 

in 2050 compared with taking no action on climate 
change or energy security (see table A1). It is 
worth noting that all figures cited for 2050 costs 
are highly sensitive to methodological decisions. 

‘Higher nuclear; less energy efficiency’ 
future 
A60 The additional investment and operating cost 
of the ‘Higher nuclear; less energy efficiency’ 
scenario could be perhaps £26–88 billion19 in 2050 
compared with taking no action on climate change 
or energy security (see table A1). There is a saving 
from less use of fossil fuels and an increase in costs 
in other sectors (in order of importance: finance 
costs, bioenergy and buildings).20 

A61 Using the 2050 Calculator, we can see that, 
irrespective of the wider benefits of tackling 
climate change, the ‘Higher nuclear; less energy 
efficiency’ future could be cheaper than the 
counterfactual if fossil fuel prices are high  
($170/bbl for oil and 100p/therm for gas). 

15	 This is the annual cost incurred in 2050 over and above doing nothing on climate change. Based on estimates of total undiscounted system costs in 2011 
prices from MARKAL and ESME model runs 

16 In the 2050 Calculator this is characterised as effort level 4 for domestic transport behaviour and average temperature of homes. 
17 The MARKAL results set out in this annex are calculated using central demand assumptions in the baseline and abatement pathway unless stated otherwise. 
18	 This is the annual cost incurred in 2050 over and above taking no action on climate change. Based on estimates of total undiscounted system costs in 2011 

prices from MARKAL and ESME model runs. 
19	 This is the annual cost incurred in 2050 over and above taking no action on climate change. Based on estimates of total undiscounted system costs in 2011 

prices from MARKAL and ESME model runs. 
20 Analysis from the 2050 Calculator. 




Annex A: 2050 analytical annex 135 

‘Higher CCS; more bioenergy’ future 
A62 The additional investment and operating 
cost of the ‘Higher CCS; more bioenergy’ 
scenario could be perhaps £33–43 billion21 in 2050 
compared with taking no action on climate change 
or energy security (see table A1). There is a saving 
from less use of fossil fuels and lower transport 
costs and an increase in costs in other sectors  
(in order of importance: buildings, finance costs 
and bioenergy).22 

A63 Using the 2050 Calculator, we can see 
that, irrespective of the wider benefits of 
tackling climate change, the ‘Higher CCS; more 
bioenergy’ future could be cheaper than the 
counterfactual if: 

•	 fossil fuel prices are high ($170/bbl for oil and 
100p/therm for gas); 

•	 the cost of solid wall insulation on a house falls 
to around £2,000/household compared with 
£7,000 or more today; 

•	 the cost of bioenergy falls (to £20/MWh for 
imported solid fuels); and 

•	 cost of finance is 5%. 

21	 This is the annual cost incurred in 2050 over and above taking no action on climate change. Based on estimates of total undiscounted system costs in 2011 
prices from MARKAL and ESME model runs. 

22 Analysis from the 2050 Calculator. 


137 


Annex B: Carbon budgets
analytical annex 
Contents


 

Note on methodology 138


 

List of charts 139


 

List of tables 140


 

B1: Carbon budget levels and the net UK carbon account 141


 

Legislated carbon budgets 141


 

Scope of the UK carbon budgets and the net UK carbon account 141


 

The European Union Emissions Trading System 142


 

Baseline emissions levels and the 2050 target 143


 

B2: Meeting carbon budgets 143


 

Progress against the first three carbon budgets 143


 

Future projections 144


 

Uncertainty around projections 146


 

Annual indicative range 148


 

Carbon budgets management 148


 

Policy savings 149


 

Aggregate costs of the current policy package 151


 

Changes since the last assessment 155


 

Policy cost effectiveness 157


 

B3: Potential for the fourth carbon budget 158


 

Additional abatement potential 158


 

Abatement potential in the power sector 162


 

Overview of abatement potential across the economy 163


 

Cost effectiveness of abatement potential 165


 

Scenarios to deliver the fourth carbon budget 168


 

Costs of delivering the fourth carbon budget 175


 

138 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

B4: Wider impacts 181 

Impact of energy and climate change policies on UK growth 181 

Fiscal impact of energy and climate change policies 181 

Impacts on electricity security of supply 182 

Sustainability and wider environmental impacts 184 

B5: Detailed tables 191 

Emissions by sector 191 

Emissions savings by policy 192 

Fourth carbon budget scenarios marginal abatement cost curves 204 

note on methodology 
All analysis presented in this annex is consistent with the methodology laid out in Department of Energy 
and Climate Change/HM Treasury Green Book guidance on the appraisal of emissions impacts.1 

Energy and emissions savings have been valued using an updated set of fossil fuel2 and carbon values3 

consistent with the Department of Energy and Climate Change’s Updated Energy and Emissions 
Projections baseline,4 all of which were published in October 2011. An interim set of energy prices was 
used to value changes in energy use. Further details on the appraisal approach are set out in relevant 
sections throughout this annex. 

1	 DECC (2010) Valuation of Energy Use and Greenhouse Gas Emissions for Policy Appraisal and Evaluation. Available at: www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/statistics/ 
analysis_group/122-valuationenergyuseggemissions.pdf 

2	 DECC (2011) DECC fossil fuel price projections. Available at: www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/about/ec_social_res/analytic_projs/ff_prices/ff_prices.aspx 
3	 DECC (2011) Update Short Term Traded Carbon Values for UK Public Policy Appraisal. Available at: www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/cutting-emissions/carbon­

valuation/3137-update-short-term-traded-carbon-values-uk.pdf 
4	 DECC (2011) Updated Energy and Emissions Projections 2011. Available at: www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/about-us/economics-social-research/3134­

updated-energy-and-emissions-projections-october.pdf 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/statistics/analysis_group/122-valuationenergyuseggemissions.pdf
http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/about/ec_social_res/analytic_projs/ff_prices/ff_prices.aspx
http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/cutting-emissions/carbon-valuation/3137-update-short-term-traded-carbon-values-uk.pdf
http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/about-us/economics-social-research/3134-updated-energy-and-emissions-projections-october.pdf
http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/about-us/economics-social-research/3134-updated-energy-and-emissions-projections-october.pdf




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 139 

List of charts


 

Chart B1: Historic and projected net UK carbon account, 2008–27 (MtCO


2

e) 146 

Chart B2: Indicative uncertainty around the net UK carbon account projections, 2008–30  
(MtCO


2

e) 147 

Chart B3: Illustrative reduction in non-traded emissions by sector, 2008–27 (MtCO


2

e) 151 

Chart B4: Changes to the total net present value of policy, excluding the value of non-traded  
emissions, since the Low Carbon Transition Plan (£ million 2011) 156 

Chart B5: Non-traded emissions policy marginal abatement cost curve, 2020 157 

Chart B6: Total potential abatement identified in the non-traded sector, 2023–27 (MtCO


2

e) 164 

Chart B7: Total potential abatement identified in the traded sector, 2023–27 (MtCO


2

e) 164 

Chart B8: Marginal abatement cost curve of the total potential abatement identified in the  
non-traded sector, 2023–27 (MtCO


2

e) 165 

Chart B9: Aggregate non-traded emissions under the illustrative scenarios to meet the  
fourth carbon budget, 2023–27 169 

Chart B10: Aggregate territorial traded sector emissions under the illustrative traded sector  
scenarios, 2023–27 174 

Chart B11: De-rated peak capacity margins under different power sector scenarios 183 

Chart B12: Biomass supply and demand, including heat, power and transport, 
2020–30 (petajoules) 189 

Charts B13–B16: Abatement included under illustrative Scenarios 1 to 4 204 

Charts B17–B18: Abatement included under the illustrative traded sector scenarios (excluding 
Electricity Market Reform) under central and high electricity demand 207 




140 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

List of tables 
Table B1: UK’s legislated carbon budgets (MtCO


2

e) 141


 

Table B2: Actual emissions against the first carbon budget (MtCO


2

e) 144


 

Table B3: Projected performance against carbon budgets 1 to 4 (MtCO


2

e) 147


 

Table B4:  Indicative annual uncertainty range for the net UK carbon account projections, 2008–27 

(MtCO


2

e) 148


 

Table B5: Net present value of policy by measure, excluding value of non-traded emissions 

(£ million 2011) 152


 

Table B6: Net present value and cost effectiveness of non-traded sector policies by measure  

(£ million 2011) 154


 

Table B7: Range of additional potential abatement in the non-traded sector, 2023–27 (MtCO


2

e) 161


 

Table B8: Range of additional potential abatement in the traded sector (excluding power sector,  

2023–27) (MtCO


2

e) 162


 

Table B9: Expected activity under illustrative Scenario 1 169


 

Table B10: Expected activity under illustrative Scenario 2 171


 

Table B11: Expected activity under illustrative Scenario 3 172


 

Table B12: Expected activity under illustrative Scenario 4 173


 

Table B13: Emissions levels and NPV of the illustrative non-traded sector scenarios 176


 

Table B14: NPV of the illustrative traded sector scenarios, central electricity demand (£ billion 2011) 177


 

Table B15: NPV of the illustrative traded sector scenarios, high electricity demand (£ billion 2011) 177


 

Table B16: Cumulative NPV of the illustrative non-traded and traded scenarios (£ billion 2011) 178


 

Table B17: Sensitivity of the NPV estimates to vehicle battery costs (£ billion 2011) 179


 

Table B18: Sensitivity of the NPV estimates to improvements in heat pumps’ coefficient  

of performance 179


 

Table B19: Sensitivity of the NPV estimates to the fossil fuel price assumptions used for the transport 

analysis only (£ billion 2011) 179


 

Table B20: Sensitivity of the NPV estimates to the fossil fuel price assumptions used for the  

low carbon heat analysis only (£ billion 2011) 180


 

Table B21: Sensitivity of the NPV estimates to the fossil fuel price assumptions used for the  

power sector analysis only (£ billion 2011) 180


 

Table B22: Sensitivity of the NPV estimates to the rebound effect in the transport analysis only  

(£ billion 2011) 180


 

Table B23: Risks and opportunities associated with the fourth carbon budget 185


 

Table B24: Projected net UK carbon account by sector, National Communication basis (MtCO


2

e) 191


 

Table B25: Projected non-traded sector emissions savings by policy in the baseline (MtCO


2

e) 192


 

Table B26: Projected non-traded sector emissions savings by policy additional to the baseline (MtCO


2

e) 194


 

Table B27: Projected traded sector emissions savings by policy included in the baseline (MtCO


2

e) 199


 

Table B28: Projected traded sector emissions savings by policy additional to the baseline (MtCO


2

e) 201


 

Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 141 

B1. Carbon budget levels and 
the net Uk carbon account 
Legislated carbon budgets 
B1.1 The first three legislated carbon budgets 
are consistent with the UK’s share of the current 
European Union (EU) target to reduce emissions 
by 20% below 1990 levels by 2020. There is a 
commitment to tighten the second and third 
carbon budget levels following an EU move to a 
more stringent 2020 emissions target. 

B1.2 In June 2011, the Government set in 
legislation the fourth carbon budget at the level 
recommended by the Committee on Climate 
Change (CCC),5 1,950 million tonnes of CO


2 

equivalent (MtCO


2

e), equivalent to a 50% 

reduction below the 1990 baseline. See the Impact 
Assessment accompanying that decision for details 
of the evidence base for setting the level of the 
fourth carbon budget.6 

scope of the uK carbon budgets 
and the net uK carbon account 
B1.3 The UK’s performance against its legislated 
carbon budgets is assessed relative to the net 
UK carbon account (section 27 of the Climate 
Change Act 20087). The net UK carbon account: 

•	 includes emissions from the UK (not including 
Crown Dependencies and UK Overseas 
Territories) of the ‘Kyoto basket’ of greenhouses 
gases (GHGs) which includes all carbon dioxide 


(CO2

), methane (CH


4

), nitrous oxide (N


2O), 


hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons 
(PFCs) and sulphur hexafluoride (SF


6

) emissions; 

•	 includes net emissions/removals8 from land use, 
land use change and forestry (LULUCF); and 

	 is net of the purchase and sale of international 
carbon units. Carbon units include allowances 
issued under cap and trade systems, such as the 
EU Emissions Trading System (ETS) (see below), 
and international carbon units representing 
developing country emissions reductions issued 
under the Clean Development Mechanism.9 


•

Table B1: UK’s legislated carbon budgets (MtCO


2e) 

First carbon 
budget 

(2008–12) 

Second carbon 
budget 

(2013–17) 

Third carbon 
budget 

(2018–22) 

Fourth carbon 
budget 

(2023–27) 

Legislated budgets10 3,018 2,782 2,544 1,950 

of which traded 1,233 1,078 985 690 

of which non-traded 1,785 1,704 1,559 1,260 

Average annual percentage 
reduction from 199011 

23% 29% 35% 50% 

5	 CCC (2010) The Fourth Carbon Budget: Reducing emissions through the 2020s. Available at: www.theccc.org.uk/reports/fourth-carbon-budget 
6	 DECC (2011) Impact Assessment of Fourth Carbon Budget Level. Available at: www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/what%20we%20do/a%20low%20carbon%20uk/ 

carbon%20budgets/1685-ia-fourth-carbon-budget-level.pdf 
7	 www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2008/27/contents 
8	 In this context, ‘removals’ refers to where emissions are taken out of the atmosphere. See box B1 on page 145 for further details. 
9	 Under the Clean Development Mechanism, emissions reduction projects in developing countries can earn Certified Emissions Reduction credits. These 

credits can be used by countries to meet a part of their emissions reduction targets under the Kyoto Protocol, or to meet targets under domestic legislation. 
10	 Assumed share for the second and third carbon budgets, based on the best estimate of the UK share of an EU 20% reduction target when the first three 

carbon budgets were legislated in 2009.      
11	 These percentages have changed since 2009 when legislated and quoted in the Low Carbon Transition Plan (DECC (2009) The UK Low Carbon Transition Plan. 

Available at: www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/tackling/carbon_plan/lctp/:aspx) owing to an update in the National Greenhouse Gas Inventory which revised 
total 1990 baseline UK GHG emissions from 777.4 MtCO


2

e to 783.1 MtCO


2

e. This number is the denominator in this calculation, hence while the budget 

levels (in MtCO


2

e) have not changed, the 1990 baseline and percentage reductions have. 

http://www.theccc.org.uk/reports/fourth-carbon-budget
http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/what%20we%20do/a%20low%20carbon%20uk/carbon%20budgets/1685-ia-fourth-carbon-budget-level.pdf
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2008/27/contents
http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/tackling/carbon_plan/lctp/:aspx




142 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

B1.4 Each carbon budget sets a maximum level for 
the total net UK carbon account over a five-year 
period, in tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent 


(t CO2

e). The first four carbon budgets are set 

out in table B1. More information on the net 
UK carbon account and carbon accounting rules 
can be found on the Department of Energy and 
Climate Change website.12 

B1.5 The Climate Change Act 2008, and therefore 
by definition the net UK carbon account, currently 
excludes emissions from international aviation 
and shipping. The Act requires the Government, 
by the end of 2012, either to make regulations to 
specify the circumstances in which, and the extent 
to which, emissions from international aviation 
or international shipping13 are to be included in 
carbon budgets and the 2050 target, or to lay 
before Parliament a report explaining why such 
regulations have not been made.14 This decision 
will need to be considered alongside development 
through 2012/13 of the UK’s sustainable aviation 
policy framework, which will also consider whether 
to adopt the previous administration’s 2050 
aviation CO


2

 target. 

The european union emissions 
Trading system 
B1.6 The EU ETS covers direct emissions from 
power generation and heavy industry (and aviation 
from 2012) and sets a cap at the EU level for these 
emissions. In the UK this represents around 40%15 


12 


of emissions (referred to as the traded sector). 
For the purposes of calculating the net UK carbon 
account, emissions in the traded sector are taken 
to be equal to the UK’s share of the EU ETS cap. 
While there is volatility in the level of UK territorial 
emissions, driven by variables such as the carbon 
price and fossil fuel prices, there is near certainty 
over the traded sector share of the net UK carbon 
account, which derives from the established level 
of the EU ETS cap.16 

B1.7 The UK share of the EU ETS cap is the 
sum of the allowances allocated for free to UK 
installations17 covered by the EU ETS and the UK’s 
share of auctioned allowances. Once negotiated, 
this share of the fixed cap is relatively stable.18 This 
certainty over the traded sector component of 
the net UK carbon account provides a significant 
advantage in managing carbon budgets, and the EU 
ETS is an important instrument for guaranteeing 
emissions reductions. 

B1.8 The overall environmental outcome (total 
EU-wide emissions from the traded sector) is 
fixed, although the level of territorial emissions in 
the UK or any other EU Member State may vary. 

•	 If the UK went further and reduced territorial 
emissions below the UK share of the EU 
ETS cap, this would not lead to an additional 
reduction in global emissions. Going further 
would, in the absence of other measures, 
result in a net outflow of allowances from the 
UK, increasing the availability of allowances to 

DECC (2009) Guidance on Carbon Accounting and the Net UK Carbon Account. Available at: www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/what_we_do/lc_uk/carbon_ 
budgets/carbon_budgets.aspx 

13	 Note that international aviation emissions associated with all flights arriving at and departing from European Economic Area (EEA) airports will be included 
in the EU ETS from 2012. The European Commission is also encouraged, by recitals in Directive 2009/29/EC and Decision 406/2009/EC, to introduce 
legislation to limit international maritime emissions, in the event that a global agreement has not been reached in the International Maritime Organization or 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change by the end of 2011. 

14 Climate Change Act 2008, section 30. 
15 On average over the first three carbon budgets. 
16	 The Government has informed UK installations of their provisional levels of free allocation for Phase III (2013–20), although these are not yet finalised. 

Exact levels of free allocation for each installation will not be known until the Commission publishes details of the level of the cross-sectoral correction 
factor (in 2012). At the same time, we expect the Commission to publish figures on the number of allowances each Member State will receive to auction. 
Some uncertainty will remain over the extent to which UK installations have access to the New Entrants’ Reserve or have their free allocation reduced as a 
result of closures. The latter will also affect the number of allowances to auction that the UK receives and this uncertainty will not be reduced until the end 
of the trading period. 

17	 For the purposes of carbon budgets, this includes all allowances received by static installations located in the UK along with a proportion of aviation 
allowances which correspond to UK domestic aviation. 

18	 It varies only with small changes to the distribution of allowances resulting from closures and new entrants to the system, and current uncertainty associated 
with the level of free allocation each installation is likely to receive. This will not be known until after all Member States have submitted their National 
Implementation Measures (NIMs) Plan, which is likely to be in early 2012. 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/what_we_do/lc_uk/carbon_budgets/carbon_budgets.aspx




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 143 

installations outside the UK, whose emissions 
could increase within the overall EU ETS 
cap. The net UK carbon account would be 
unchanged because the increased export of 
allowances from the UK would cancel out the 
reduction in UK territorial emissions. 

•	 Likewise, if UK territorial emissions exceed the 
UK share of the cap, then compliance requires 
that UK installations covered by the scheme 
purchase allowances from other installations 
with a surplus in other Member States, or 
(subject to strictly defined limits) international 
offset credits. 

Baseline emissions levels and the 
2050 target 
B1.9 The baseline level of UK greenhouse gas 
(GHG) emissions in 1990 from which the emissions 
reduction targets in the Climate Change Act 2008 
are referenced is 783.1 MtCO


2

e. This is referred 

to as ‘the 1990 baseline’ and consists of net UK 
emissions in 1990 for CO


2

, methane and nitrous 

oxide GHGs, and 1995 for fluorinated gases (as 
recorded in the latest GHG emissions inventory19 

and calculated according to the latest international 
reporting practice as required by the Act). 

B1.10 The long-term target set out in the Climate 
Change Act, to reduce emissions levels by at least 
80% below the 1990 baseline, would therefore 
require the net UK carbon account to decline to at 
most 156.6 MtCO


2

e by 2050. 

B2. Meeting carbon budgets 
Progress against the first three 
carbon budgets 
B2.1 The provisional emissions estimates for 
201020 published in early 2011 show that the net 
UK carbon account (which includes the impact 
of emissions trading) increased by 1.8% to 585.6 


Mt CO2

e in 2010 from 575.4 MtCO


2

e in 2009.21 

This increase in emissions resulted primarily from 
a rise in residential gas use related to the fact that 
2010 was, on average, the coldest year since 1986. 

B2.2 The net UK carbon account in 2010 was 
25.2% below 1990 levels. The first carbon budget 
requires that total UK GHG emissions do not 
exceed 3,018 MtCO


2

e over the five-year period 

2008–12, which is approximately 23% below the 
1990 level, on average, over the period. 

B2.3 Table B2 summarises the UK’s progress 
towards meeting the first carbon budget by 
comparing the average emissions per annum 
required to meet the budget with the average 
emissions to date in the first budgetary period. 

19	 DECC (2011) UK Greenhouse Gas Inventory. Available at: www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/statistics/climate_change/gg_emissions/uk_emissions/2009_ 
final/2009_final.aspx 

20	 Please note that territorial emissions and the net UK carbon account estimate for 2010 are provisional and may be subject to change. More details on 
the provisional emissions figures for 2010 can be found at: www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/statistics/climate_stats/gg_emissions/uk_emissions/2010_ 
prov/2010_prov.aspx 

21 Territorial emissions which exclude the impact of trading within the EU ETS increased by 2.9% to 577.9 MtCO


2

e from 561.8 MtCO


2

e in 2009. 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/statistics/climate_change/gg_emissions/uk_emissions/2009_final/2009_final.aspx
http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/statistics/climate_stats/gg_emissions/uk_emissions/2010_prov/2010_prov.aspx




144 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

Table B2: Actual emissions against the first carbon budget (MtCO


2e) 

First carbon budget Actual emissions including EU ETS MtCO


2

e Average 

emissions 
p.a. 

required 
in 2011/12 

to meet 
budget 

Total 
emissions 
(2008–12) 

Equivalent 
average 

emissions 
p.a. 

2008 2009 2010 (p) Cumulative 
emissions 

to date 
(2008–10) 

Average 
emissions 

p.a. 
(2008–10) 

3,018 604 597 575 586 1,758 586 630 

B2.4 Emissions have averaged 586 MtCO


2e 


over the course of 2008–10, which means that 
emissions in the remaining two years would have 
to exceed 630 MtCO


2

e per annum in order 

to miss the first budget. The latest emissions 
projections suggest that the UK will be comfortably 
below this level during the remaining two years. 

future projections 
B2.5 The Department of Energy and Climate 
Change’s Updated Energy and Emissions 
Projections,22 published in October 2011, provide 
forecasts for UK emissions over the short and 
medium term and are an essential tool for tracking 
progress and risks towards meeting the carbon 
budgets. 

Box B1: The Department of Energy and Climate Change’s emissions projections 

The Department of Energy and Climate Change’s energy and emissions model projects energy 
demand using econometric equations of the interaction between supply and demand for each  
sub-sector of the economy, models of the UK energy market, various assumptions on the key 
external drivers of energy demand (i.e. expectations of future GDP growth, international fossil fuel 
prices, carbon prices and UK population) and the impacts of government policies. 

The input data and assumptions in the model are subject to uncertainty. For example: 

•	 the exogenous inputs (GDP, fossil fuel prices and UK population growth) are all subject to their own 
assumptions and levels of uncertainty about what the actual level may be in the future; 

•	 expected policy savings are uncertain – numerous factors can affect whether policies will deliver as 
expected; and 

•	 the parameters in the model are uncertain, particularly in the longer run. For example, the energy 
demand responses to prices and output are estimated from analysis of past data trends. 

The model is calibrated to the 2009 UK Greenhouse Gas Inventory and the latest available Digest 
of United Kingdom Energy Statistics (DUKES) data, the former is currently based on 2009 levels 
(published February 2011, the latest available to carry out this modelling exercise). 

22 For full details of these projections, see DECC (2011) Updated Energy and Emissions Projections 2011. Available at: www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/about­
us/economics-social-research/3134-updated-energy-and-emissions-projections-october.pdf 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/about-us/economics-social-research/3134-updated-energy-and-emissions-projections-october.pdf




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 145 

Box B1: The Department of Energy and Climate Change’s emissions projections (continued) 

The Department of Energy and Climate Change’s non-CO


2

 GHG projections use the 

methodologies set out in the Greenhouse Gas Inventory report.23 Projections are calculated using 
forecast activity statistics, emissions factors and various other sector specific assumptions for each of 
the main sources of emissions. GHG emissions projections are calculated by sector and aggregated 
to provide an estimate of total projected emissions. The projections system is designed to be 
transparent, flexible and easy to update. 

The Department of Energy and Climate Change’s LULUCF projections cover CO


2

 emissions from 

forestry, crop and grassland management, and other land uses. It is the only sector where CO


2

 can be 

removed from the atmosphere (through photosynthesis). LULUCF can therefore show net emissions, 
net removals or zero change, if emissions and removals are in balance. Projections are estimated by 
the Centre for Ecology and Hydrology24 under contract to the Department of Energy and Climate 
Change, using methods consistent with the UK Greenhouse Gas Inventory, coupled with projections 
of future land use and land use change, based on what has happened historically and possible future 
scenarios. The LULUCF projections have recently been revised to reflect the latest survey and 
inventory data available.25 

Monte Carlo simulation is used in all three areas of emissions projections to take account of the 
uncertainty inherent in the range of input assumptions necessary to produce these projections. 

B2.6 These projections suggest that the UK is 
on track to meet its first three legislated carbon 
budgets with current planned policies. By 2020, 
the UK is forecast to reduce net UK emissions 
by 38% from 1990. Territorial emissions over 
the first three carbon budgets are expected to 
be 2,877, 2,604 and 2,322 MtCO


2

e respectively, 

while the net UK carbon account is expected to 
be 2,922, 2,650 and 2,457 MtCO


2

e respectively 

(see table B3). We therefore expect, on central 
projections, to reduce emissions to below the 
level of the first three carbon budgets. This means 
that the UK is expected to exceed the first three 
carbon budgets by 96, 132 and 87 MtCO


2e 

respectively. 

B2.7 In respect of the fourth carbon budget, the 
Department of Energy and Climate Change’s 
emissions projections set the baseline against which 
to assess the level of additional abatement required 
to reach the fourth carbon budget. UK territorial 
emissions are projected to be 2,207 MtCO


2

e over 

the fourth budget period (average of 441.4 MtCO


2e 


per annum). This represents a 43.6% emissions 

reduction on average over the budget period 
relative to 1990 levels. 

B2.8 In the traded sector, the UK’s level of 
emissions over the fourth budget period will be 
dictated by the UK’s share of the EU ETS cap 
over the period. However, there is uncertainty 
about the level of ambition of the EU ETS, and 
the UK’s share of the cap, beyond 2020. Analysis 
suggests that the UK’s share of the assumed cap 
could be between 590 and 860 MtCO


2

e over 

the period, depending on the level of ambition 
to reduce emissions leading up to the period, and 
the methodology for determining the UK’s share. 
The fourth budget was set assuming that the UK’s 
traded sector cap would be at 690 MtCO


2

e over 

the period.26 

B2.9 The UK’s net carbon account, assuming a 
cap on traded sector emissions of 690 MtCO


2e, 

is projected to be 2,131 MtCO


2

e over the fourth 

carbon budget (426 MtCO


2

e per annum). This 

represents a reduction in emissions of around 46% 
relative to 1990 levels. 

23 AEA (2011) National Inventory Report. Available at: http://unfccc.int/national_reports/annex_i_ghg_inventories/national_inventories_submissions/items/5888.php 
24 Available at: www.ceh.ac.uk 
25 DECC (2011) Non-CO


2

 Land and Land Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) GHG emissions projections summary tables. Available at:  

www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/about/ec_social_res/analytic_projs/en_emis_projs/en_emis_projs.aspx 
26 In line with the CCC’s recommendation. See footnotes 5 and 6. 

http://unfccc.int/national_reports/annex_i_ghg_inventories/national_inventories_submissions/items/5888.php
http://www.ceh.ac.uk
http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/about/ec_social_res/analytic_projs/en_emis_projs/en_emis_projs.aspx




146 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

Chart B1: Historic and projected net UK carbon account, 2008–27 (MtCO


2e) 

Year 

Carbon budgets (indicative annual average) 

Net UK carbon account (central projections scenario) 



700 




600 




500 




400 e) Emissions (Mt CO2 300 




200 




100 0 20082009201020112012201320142015201620172018201920202021202220232024202520262027 

Source: DECC energy model CO


2

 energy projections, non-CO


2

 GHG projections and LULUCF projections 

B2.10 On a net UK carbon account basis, the 
shortfall to the fourth budget of 1,950 MtCO


2e 

is therefore projected to be around 181 MtCO


2e 


over the fourth budget period. This incorporates 
a significant legacy of impacts from the current 
policy package over the fourth carbon budget. 

uncertainty around projections 
B2.11 Projections of emissions levels are inherently 
uncertain as they depend upon projected future 
levels of a number of key factors, including 
economic and population growth and fossil fuel 

prices. The Department of Energy and Climate 
Change’s emissions projections capture some of 
this uncertainty through the use of Monte Carlo 
simulations, using assumed distributions of the 
levels of the key variables to provide a range of 
outcomes. This analysis provides an indication 
of the impact of uncertainty in fossil fuel prices, 
economic growth, temperature, policy delivery, 
power station capital costs, non-CO


2

 GHG 

emissions and LULUCF emissions and removals.27 

Chart B2 reflects the range of uncertainty around 
net UK carbon account projections. 

27 This does not account for all sources of uncertainty. In particular, uncertainties over the modelling parameters, which will increase over time, are only 
partially reflected. The emissions projections also do not attempt to take account of climate science uncertainty. 




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 147 

Chart B2: Indicative uncertainty around the net UK carbon account projections, 2008–30 (MtCO


2

e)28 



640 




95% 




90% 590 




80% e) Net UK carbon account (Mt CO

2 70% 



540 50% 


central 



490 




440 




390 20082011201420172020202320262029 

Source: DECC energy model CO


2

 energy projections, non-CO


2

 GHG projections and LULUCF projections 

B2.12 Table B3 below provides the Department first four carbon budgets, and the projected over-
of Energy and Climate Change’s latest emissions achievement margins under central, low and high 
projections for the net UK carbon account for the modelled uncertainty ranges. 

Table B3: Projected performance against carbon budgets 1 to 4 (MtCO


2e) 

Carbon budget 1 
(2008–12) 

Carbon budget 2 
(2013–17) 

Carbon budget 3 
(2018–22) 

Carbon budget 428 

(2023–27) 

Legislated carbon budgets 3,018 2,782 2,544 1,950 

Territorial emissions 2,877 2,604 2,322 2,207 

Net UK carbon account 2,922 2,650 2,457 2,131 

Projected performance 
against carbon budgets 
(negative implies 
emissions under budget) 

−96 −132 −87 181 

Uncertainty range 
(high to low emissions 
projections) 

−73 to −124 −73 to −172 −19 to −142 250 to 117 

Source: DECC energy model CO


2

 energy projections, non-CO


2

 GHG projections and LULUCF projections 

28 The projected performance against the fourth carbon budget assumes an EU ETS cap of 690 MtCO


2

e from 2023. 




148 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

Annual indicative range	 a year is a range within which the Secretary of 
State expects the amount of the net UK carbon 
account for the year to fall. The annual indicative 
range for the first three carbon budgets was 
set in July 2009. Table B4 shows these ranges, to 
reflect the latest data and updated projections, 
along with the annual indicative range for the 
fourth carbon budget. 

B2.13 Section 12 of the Climate Change Act 
2008 requires the Government to publish, as 
soon as possible after making an Order setting a 
carbon budget, an indicative annual range for the 
net UK carbon account for each year within the 
period. An indicative annual range in relation to 

Table B4: Indicative annual uncertainty range for the net UK carbon account projections, 2008–27 
(MtCO


2

e)29 

Carbon budget 1 Carbon budget 2 

Net UK carbon 
account projections 
(MtCO


2e) 

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 

Upper bound 599 576 593 596 593 565 557 552 544 535 

Central 599 576 593 579 575 545 538 531 523 514 

Lower bound 599 576 593 559 558 530 522 514 506 498 

Carbon budget 3 Carbon budget 4 

Net UK carbon 
account projections 
(MtCO


2e) 

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 

Upper bound 524 518 506 509 504 449 448 448 447 447 

Central 505 495 486 489 483 428 427 426 425 425 

Lower bound 487 478 468 469 465 409 409 406 405 405 

Source: DECC energy model CO


2

 energy projections, non-CO


2

 GHG projections and LULUCF projections 

carbon budgets management 
B2.14 The uncertainty inherent in emissions 
projections means that the Government cannot 
rely on central estimates alone to demonstrate 
that the UK is on track to meet carbon budgets. 
There are a number of things which the 
Government is doing to ensure that the UK 
remains on track. 

B2.15 First, the EU ETS, which covers emissions 
from the power generation and industrial 
sectors, effectively eliminates uncertainty in these 
sectors as emissions are capped and, for carbon 

budget accounting purposes, the traded sector 
contribution to the net UK carbon account is equal 
to the UK’s share of the EU ETS cap (rather than 
territorial emissions). On this basis the UK cannot 
under- or over-perform on its traded sector share 
of the carbon budgets. Given that this represents 
around 40% of the UK carbon account, the EU 
ETS is an important instrument for guaranteeing 
net emissions reductions. 

B2.16 In the remaining non-EU ETS sectors there 
are a number of ways in which the Government 
is working to increase confidence that the budgets 
will be met: 

29 The tables show the indicative annual uncertainty around the net UK carbon account. For the fourth carbon budget, an EU ETS cap of 690 MtCO


2

e is 

assumed. The upper and lower bounds represent the 95% confidence interval. 




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 149 

•	 the surpluses projected (on the central scenario) 
in each budget period provide a contingency 
reserve that will offer some resilience to 
unexpected events, such as higher than 
anticipated emissions driven by fossil fuel prices 
that are significantly lower than assumed in our 
central scenario; 

•	 the Climate Change Act 2008 provides the 
flexibility to bank over-achievement across 
carbon budget periods or undertake limited 
borrowing (constrained at 1%) from the next 
budget. This increases the contingency to cope 
with unanticipated increases in emissions; 

•	 the Government is continuing to explore new, 
cost effective policy options to further reduce 
emissions in a variety of areas over the first 
three budget periods, e.g. ways to help small 
businesses to save carbon; and 

•	 the Government recognises the importance of 
placing the UK on an appropriate pathway to 
meet its longer-term carbon targets and it aims 

to meet the first four carbon budgets through 
domestic action. However, the Government 
also recognises the benefits of international 
offsets in allowing emissions reductions to occur 
where they are least costly and as a mechanism 
to help decarbonise developing economies. 
Consequently, purchasing international credits 
to offset UK emissions remains an option, 
although a limit must be set for each budgetary 
period. The limits for the first and second 
carbon budget periods are zero and 55 MtCO


2e 

(outside the EU ETS) respectively. 

Policy savings 
B2.17 The emissions projections take into account 
the estimated impact of government policies and 
proposals announced to date. Re-evaluations 
of policies are made periodically and, where 
appropriate, savings are adjusted and reflected in 
the emissions projections. See box B2 overleaf for 
details on appraisal methodology. 




150 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

Box B2: Greenhouse gas appraisal guidance 

Valuing energy use and GHGs is vital to ensure that the Government takes full account of climate 
change and energy impacts when appraising and evaluating public policies and projects. In consultation 
with analysts across government, the Department of Energy and Climate Change and HM Treasury 
have jointly produced supplementary guidance to the HM Treasury Green Book that provides 
government analysts with a set of rules for valuing energy use and emissions.30 The guidance helps the 
appraisal and evaluation of proposals leading to an increase or reduction in energy use and/or GHG 
emissions in the UK. It covers proposals that have a direct impact on energy use and supply and those 
with an indirect impact through planning, construction, land use change or the introduction of new 
products that use energy. 

Moreover, it helps analysts to quantify the carbon impacts of their policies and to value significant 
impacts using the revised carbon valuation methodology (July 2009),31 as required by the 
revised Impact Assessment guidelines32 of the Better Regulation Executive (BRE). There is also a 
complementary spreadsheet calculation ‘toolkit’ designed to convert increases or decreases in energy 
consumption into changes in GHG emissions and to value the changes in both emissions and energy 
use.33 This spreadsheet also contains the latest assumptions for carbon values, energy prices, long 
run variable energy supply costs, emissions factors and air quality damage costs to be used in UK 
policy appraisal. 

Avoiding double counting of emissions savings 

Monitoring overall progress against legislated carbon budgets requires precise and robust projections 
of emissions savings from a package of policies and an assessment of their combined, aggregated 
effectiveness. 

The primary purpose of the aggregation is to show the total costs, benefits and impacts of the 
package of policies and proposals to meet the carbon budgets. In this respect, it is important to 
avoid the ‘double counting’ of energy and GHG emissions impacts when assessing the combined, 
aggregated effectiveness of a package of policies. Emissions savings from policies have been 
sequenced with respect to the following criteria: permanency; bindingness; cost effectiveness; timing 
of implementation; and pragmatism. This means that emissions impacts vary from those set out 
in individual Impact Assessments which analyse policies on a purely chronological basis in order to 
identify the marginal impact of their introduction. 

30	 DECC and HM Treasury (2010) Valuation of Energy Use and Greenhouse Gas Emissions for Policy Appraisal and Valuation. Available at: www.decc.gov.uk/assets/ 
decc/statistics/analysis_group/122-valuationenergyuseggemissions.pdf 

31 DECC (2009) Carbon Valuation in UK Policy Appraisal: A Revised Approach. Available at: www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/emissions/valuation/valuation.aspx 
32 See: www.berr.gov.uk/whatwedo/bre/index.html 
33 See: www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/about/ec_social_res/iag_guidance/iag_guidance.aspx 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/statistics/analysis_group/122-valuationenergyuseggemissions.pdf
http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/emissions/valuation/valuation.aspx
http://www.berr.gov.uk/whatwedo/bre/index.html
http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/about/ec_social_res/iag_guidance/iag_guidance.aspx




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 151

B2.18 As set out above, the Department of 
Energy and Climate Change’s Updated Energy 
and Emissions Projections indicate that current 
policies are projected to over-achieve against the 
first three carbon budgets and will continue to 
deliver savings over the fourth carbon budget 
(see chart B3 below). See tables B25 to B28 for 
full details on the emissions savings delivered by 
individual policies.

Aggregate costs of the current 
policy package
B2.19 The total net present lifetime cost of the 
current policy package is estimated at £9 billion 
(excluding the value of GHG emissions savings 
in the non-traded sector). Including the value of 
GHG savings in the non-traded sector results in 
the package delivering a net benefit, on central 
estimates, of £45 billion.

B2.20 This represents the net present value of the 
Government’s current policy package that places 
the UK on track to meet its first three carbon 
budgets, reducing the UK’s net carbon account by 
38% in 2020 versus 1990. 

B2.21 In line with HM Treasury Green Book 
guidance, the costs are presented as net present 
values that reflect discounted societal costs and 
benefits over the lifetime of the policy, some of 
which may extend over six decades. The resource 
costs of low carbon technologies are relative to the 
cost of technologies that would have been installed 
in the baseline counterfactual, i.e. without legislated 
carbon budgets. 

B2.22 Table B5 sets out the net present cost of 
delivering the emissions savings over the first three 
carbon budgets. It excludes the value attributed to 
the GHG emissions themselves.

Chart B3: Illustrative reduction in non-traded emissions by sector, 2008–27 (MtCO


2e)3420022024026028030032034036038020082009201020112012201320142015201620172018201920202021202220232024202520262027

Agriculture

Industry

Commerical and
Public Services

Residential

Transport

Non-traded emissions
projections

Policy savings modelled from 2010



Year Emissions (Mt CO2e) 

34 Does not include indirect effects of policies. Only shows impact of non-traded savings additional to the baseline (Low Carbon Transition Plan  
and newer policies).




152 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

Table B5: Net present value of policy by measure, excluding value of non-traded emissions 
(£ million 2011)35 

Policy 
(positive = benefit) 

Central fossil 
fuel prices 

Low fossil 
fuel prices 

High fossil 
fuel prices 

EU Emissions Trading 

EU Emissions Trading System36 −3,290 n/a 

Power and low carbon heat 

Carbon Price Floor37 −620 −6,250 4,260 

Carbon capture and storage demonstration −8,940 −9,710 −8,510 

Carbon capture readiness38 −6 to −8039 n/a 

Large-scale electricity (Renewables Obligation (RO))40 −42,820 −67,450 −33,130 

Small-scale electricity Feed-in Tariffs (FiTs) −3,370 n/a 

Renewable Heat Incentive (RHI)41 −6,530 n/a 

Total −62,280 to −62,350 n/a 

Transport42 

8% of transport fuel from renewable sources by 2020 −5 −320 110 

EU new car average fuel efficiency standards – CO


2 

mid-term target (130g CO


2

/km) 

10,780 2,510 16,850 

Additional impact of further new car efficiency 
improvements to 95g/km 

−22,010 −35,430 −11,640 

EU new van CO


2

 regulation 180 −2,690 2,060 

Low carbon emissions buses 890 310 1,290 

EU new car complementary measures −4,060 −5,500 −3,230 

Local Sustainable Transport Fund (LSTF) 1,480 1,650 1,580 

HGV low rolling resistance tyres 1,100 640 1,300 

Industry-led action to improve HGV efficiencies 1,710 910 2,140 

Rail electrification 2,310 2,210 2,530 

Total −7,640 −35,710 13,010 

35 Values have been rounded to the nearest £10 million. 
36	 The costs of the EU ETS are made up of the costs to UK installations of abatement incentivised by the carbon price, project credits purchased, EUA 

allowances purchased, minus the revenues earned from the UK Government and installations selling allowances. The estimates shown in the table reflect 
the costs over the period 2008–20 and include all UK (static) installations plus domestic aviation. In estimating these figures, the baseline excludes all policies 
in and announced since the Low Carbon Transition Plan (LCTP) (2009). The choice of baseline is critical in determining the costs; use of a baseline which 
included recently implemented policies would actually show a negative cost of the EU ETS, as the UK is expected to be a large net seller of allowances once 
these policies have been introduced. 

37 New policy since the Low Carbon Transition Plan. 
38 There are no fossil fuel price sensitivities, as energy savings are not a significant component of the costs and benefits. 
39 Range of costs reflects the varying complexities of projects, in particular variations in the cost of land. 
40	 An approximate adjustment has been made to the large-scale (mainly RO) net present values (NPVs) and costs per tonne of carbon saved to avoid double-

counting with the small-scale renewable electricity data also given in this table. This adjustment was made on the basis of estimated small-scale generation, 
and does not take into account the generally higher unit costs of small-scale renewable electricity compared with large-scale renewable electricity. It is 
therefore likely to slightly overestimate the large-scale (mainly RO) renewable electricity costs. 

41	 The RHI figures in this annex have not been updated to reflect the most recent changes to policy, Impact Assessment, including the change of large biomass 
tariff as a result of EU ruling, meaning that they differ from the RHI IA published in Q4 2011. 

42	 Transport costs include technology costs associated with improved fuel efficiency and costs associated with the rebound effect (the additional kilometres 
driven as the fuel cost of driving decreases with improved efficiency), including congestion, accidents, noise, infrastructure and air quality. Costs for rail 
electrification include operating costs. 




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 153 

Table B5: Net present value of policy by measure, excluding value of non-traded emissions 
(£ million 2011) (continued) 

Policy Central fossil 
fuel prices 

Low fossil 
fuel prices 

High fossil 
fuel prices 

Energy efficiency policies 

Carbon Reduction Commitment 1,690 n/a 

Climate Change Agreements (CCAs)43 0 n/a 

Community Energy Saving Programme44 110 n/a 

Carbon Emissions Reduction Target (CERT) 12,970 8,780 21,140 

CERT extension 6,950 3,960 11,940 

Energy Company Obligation (ECO) and Domestic 
Green Deal 

1,897 −3,658 6,839 

Non-Domestic Green Deal 1,320 530 1,900 

Building Regulations 2010 Part L45 13,550 n/a 

Zero Carbon Homes −2,090 −2,510 −1,690 

Smart Metering (households)46 −4,510 n/a 

Smart Metering (small and medium-sized enterprises 
(SMEs))47 

−1,820 n/a 

Energy Performance of Buildings Directive48 −830 n/a 

Products Policy (Tranche 1) 11,080 n/a 

Products Policy (Tranche 2)49 5,450 n/a 

Carbon Trust50 1,040 n/a 

Total 48,110 n/a 

Agriculture 

Voluntary Action Plan51 (England only) 6,110 
(6,410 to 4,890)52 



n/a 


Total53 −9 billion −82 billion 45 billion 

Source: Consolidation of individual policy cost benefit analysis, drawing on evidence from the Department for Transport, the Department for 
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs and the Department for Communities and Local Government 

43	 Energy intensive business package in LCTP. Net costs have been re-estimated at zero, as CCAs are considered to not incentivise additional abatement 
beyond the revised baseline. 

44 Not updated since the LCTP. 
45	 This analysis is from the implementation stage of the Impact Assessment (www.communities.gov.uk/publications/planningandbuilding/partlf2010ia) and was 

based on the December 2008 DECC/HMT GHG Appraisal Guidance. While energy and carbon values have been updated using values published in 2009, 
these are not consistent with the 2011 values used in most of the policy assessments presented here. The Impact Assessment included benefits in its NPV 
calculation from the avoided cost of renewables. This benefit has been removed in the numbers presented here for consistency with other policy NPVs. 

46	 All Smart Metering (household) figures in this document are based on the latest published Impact Assessment, available at: www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/ 
consultation/smart-metering-imp-prog/2549-smart-meter-rollout-domestic-ia-180811.pdf 

47  All Smart Metering (SMEs) figures in this document are based on the latest published Impact Assessment, available at: www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/ 
consultation/smart-metering-imp-prog/2550-smip-rollout-small-and-med-non-dom.pdf 

48 See: www.communities.gov.uk/archived/publications/planningandbuilding/regulatoryimpactenergyperformanc 
49 New policy since the LCTP. 
50 Carbon Future, Salix and Interest Free loans are not included. 
51 No fossil fuel price sensitivities are included as energy savings are not a significant component of net costs. 
52 There is sensitivity about non-GHG costs and benefits, given high uncertainties in this area. 
53	 Where figures from published Impact Assessments have been listed in the table, an adjustment factor has been applied in order to ensure that all policies 

are incorporated into the total figure on a consistent basis. 

http://www.communities.gov.uk/publications/planningandbuilding/partlf2010ia
http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/consultation/smart-metering-imp-prog/2549-smart-meter-rollout-domestic-ia-180811.pdf
http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/consultation/smart-metering-imp-prog/2550-smip-rollout-small-and-med-non-dom.pdf
http://www.communities.gov.uk/archived/publications/planningandbuilding/regulatoryimpactenergyperformanc




154 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

B2.23 The full net present value of the policies 
delivering emissions reductions in the non-
traded sector are shown below – where GHG 
reductions in the non-traded sector have been 
valued using the Department of Energy and 

Climate Change’s non-traded price of carbon, part 
of the Government’s revised carbon valuation 
methodology published in July 2009.54 Table B6 
also shows the cost per tonne of GHG abatement 
delivered. 

Table B6: Net present value and cost effectiveness of non-traded sector policies by measure  
(£ million 2011)55 

Policy 
(positive = benefit) 

Net present value 
(£ million) 

Cost effectiveness 
(£/tCO


2e 

non-traded) 

Transport 

8% of transport fuel from renewable sources by 2020 820 0 

EU new car average fuel efficiency standards – CO


2

 mid-term target 

(130gCO


2

/km) 

14,310 −136 

Additional impact of further new car efficiency improvements to 95g/km −13,870 118 

EU new van CO


2

 regulations 1,440 −6 

Low carbon emissions buses 1,430 −73 

EU new car complementary measures −2,380 108 

Local Sustainable Transport Fund (LSTF) 1,810 −224 

HGV low rolling resistance tyres 1,540 −110 

Industry-led action to improve HGV efficiencies 2,330 −122 

Rail electrification 2,880 −202 

Energy efficiency policies 

Renewable Heat Incentive (RHI)56 2,450 26 

Carbon Reduction Commitment 2,750 −71 

Climate Change Agreements (CCAs)57 n/a n/a 

Community Energy Saving Programme 170 −90 

Carbon Emissions Reduction Target (CERT) 16,870 −163 

CERT extension 9,830 −118 

Energy Company Obligation (ECO) and Domestic Green Deal 6,430 −20 

Non-Domestic Green Deal 2,140 −74 

Building Regulations 2010 Part L 20,380 −74 

Zero Carbon Homes −660 68 

Smart Metering (households)58 5,200 −304 

54 See: www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/what_we_do/lc_uk/valuation/valuation.aspx 

55 Values have been rounded to the nearest £10 million.


 

56 See footnote 41.


 

57 See footnote 43.


 

58 All Smart Metering (household) figures in this document are based on the latest published Impact Assessment, available at: www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/


 

consultation/smart-metering-imp-prog/2549-smart-meter-rollout-domestic-ia-180811.pdf 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/what_we_do/lc_uk/valuation/valuation.aspx
http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/consultation/smart-metering-imp-prog/2549-smart-meter-rollout-domestic-ia-180811.pdf




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 155 

Table B6: Net present value and cost effectiveness of non-traded sector policies by measure  
(£ million 2011) (continued) 

Policy Net present value 
(£ million) 

Cost effectiveness 
(£/tCO


2e 

non-traded) 

Smart Metering (SMEs)59 2,280 −211 

Energy Performance of Buildings Directive −380 85 

Products Policy (Tranche 1) 10,140 n/a 

Products Policy (Tranche 2) 5,500 n/a 

Carbon Trust60 1,240 −18161 

Agriculture 

Voluntary Action Plan (England only) 7,570 −181 

Total (non-traded sector only)62 101 billion – 

changes since the last assessment 
B2.24 The Low Carbon Transition Plan (LCTP)63 

in 2009 estimated the net cost of delivering the 
first three carbon budgets at £28–34 billion (£2011 
prices),64 significantly higher than the updated 
estimate of £9 billion presented in this report.  
This reduction in net costs is predominantly driven 
by the inclusion of new policies since 2009 that 
deliver significant net benefits. These include: 

•	 Building Regulations 2010 Part L: The 
Building Regulations typically apply at original 
point of build, subsequent conversion and 
renovation, and on replacement of specified 
fixed components and systems. Part L of the 
Building Regulations sets requirements for the 
conservation of fuel and power on a technology-
neutral basis, helping to encourage the take-up 
and innovation of more energy efficient and 
low carbon technologies. For more details on 
Building Regulations, see the Planning Portal 
website.65 


59 


•	 Products Policy extension (Tranche 2): 
Tranche 2 refers to a number of minimum 
energy efficiency standards that are in the 
process of being agreed at European level that 
will provide a stream of energy and emissions 
savings and other related benefits. Examples of 
items affected by these measures are household 
and non-domestic ICT, household tumble 
dryers, commercial refrigeration and non-
domestic air conditioning. 

•	 Voluntary Action Plan for agriculture: The 
Voluntary Action Plan (VAP) is being taken 
forward by the Climate Change Taskforce and is 
an industry-led partnership that is working with 
sector bodies and farmers to improve the GHG 
performance of English agriculture. The VAP is 
expected to deliver cost effective abatement 
from English agriculture over the third and 
fourth carbon budgets. 

All Smart Metering (SMEs) figures in this document are based on the latest published Impact Assessment, available at: www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/ 
consultation/smart-metering-imp-prog/2550-smip-rollout-small-and-med-non-dom.pdf 

60 Carbon Future, Salix and Interest Free loans are not included. 
61 This refers to the lifetime impact of savings implemented in 2010/11 (latest data available). 
62	 Where figures from published Impact Assessments have been listed in the table, an adjustment factor has been applied in order to ensure that all policies 

are incorporated into the total figure on a consistent basis. 
63 DECC (2009) The UK Low Carbon Transition Plan. Available at: www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/tackling/carbon_plan/lctp.aspx 
64	 A figure of £25–29 billion (£ 2009 prices) was published in the LCTP as the net cost of delivering the first three carbon budgets. The comparable present 

value of the same policy package is £28–34 billion. This represents an increase of 14% and reflects two adjustments: a nominal cost increase of 6% from 
2009 based on HM Treasury’s GDP deflator; and an uplift from 2009 present values of 7% based on the Green Book discount rate. 

65 www.planningportal.gov.uk/buildingregulations/approveddocuments/partl/ 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/consultation/smart-metering-imp-prog/2550-smip-rollout-small-and-med-non-dom.pdf
http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/tackling/carbon_plan/lctp.aspx
http://www.planningportal.gov.uk/buildingregulations/approveddocuments/partl/




156 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

•	 Non-Domestic Green Deal: As with the 
Domestic Green Deal, this provides a finance 
mechanism for investment in energy efficiency 
measures with no upfront cost to the 
consumer. Measures are paid for by charges 
that are attached to energy bills. A supporting 
regulation in the non-domestic private rented 
sector would require buildings with an Energy 
Performance Certificate (EPC) rating of G 
or F to install cost effective energy efficiency 
measures to move to an EPC rating of E. 

B2.25 The benefits from these policies have the 
effect of offsetting increased costs elsewhere. 
For example, improvements to the appraisal 
methodology used for the Energy Company 
Obligation (ECO) and Domestic Green Deal have 
led to the inclusion of assessment, financing and 
‘hassle’ costs.66 The monetisation of these costs and 
new cost estimates for the measures themselves 
have pushed up the cost figures. Chart B4 illustrates 
some of the key changes to the net cost figures 
since the estimates that were provided in the LCTP. 

B2.26 There have been a number of other 
changes to modelling and cost–benefit analysis 
that have affected the emissions savings and cost 
estimates of policies, namely: 

•	 there have been a number of significant 
updates to key input assumptions for policy 
cost–benefit analysis (e.g. fossil fuel prices, GDP 
growth assumptions) and, where possible, all 
policies have been reappraised in line with these 
updated assumptions; and 

•	 there have also been revisions to input 
assumptions in respect of individual sectors such as 
transport. For instance, the analysis assumes that 
biofuels will make up 8% of transport energy in 
2020, rather than 10% as previously assumed. The 
change of assumption is made for purely analytical 
reasons and is not intended to pre-empt policy 
decisions on biofuel use in road transport fuel 
beyond 2014. It is consistent with the Committee 
on Climate Change’s recommendation for biofuel 
use in 2020. The change in modelling assumption 
leads to lower savings from biofuel than have 
previously been estimated. 

Chart B4: Changes to the total net present value of policy, excluding the value of non-traded 
emissions, since the Low Carbon Transition Plan (£ million 2011) 

Low Carbon Transition Plan cost range 

Products policy (T2) Building regs 

New policies Range due to 
differing CCS 
cost estimates Non- Agriculture 

Domestic VAP 
Green Deal Successors to CERT 

Hassle costs 

Revisions to transport policies 

Revisions to other policies 

Revised costs 

–£30 –£20 –£10 £0 £10 £20 £30 £40 

66	 Revised methodology based on research commissioned by DECC in 2009 that highlighted the real and substantial time and financial costs associated with 
domestic energy efficiency and carbon saving measures. These were excluded from the previous appraisal methodology. See ECOFYS (2009) The hidden 
costs and benefits of domestic energy efficiency and carbon saving measures, ECOFYS, May 2009. 

http:costs.66




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 157

policy cost effectiveness
B2.27 The policy marginal abatement cost 
(MAC) curve set out in chart B5 provides a static 
‘snapshot’ of the potential emissions reductions and 
average costs in 2020 of government policies to 
deliver the first three carbon budgets in the non-
traded sector (each policy being represented by its 
own bar). 

B2.28 MAC curves provide a useful tool for 
comparing the cost effectiveness of policies by 
ranking them in order of cost per tonne of CO


2e 

saved,67 such that measures below the horizontal 
axis indicate negative costs or savings to society 

and measures above the horizontal axis indicate 
costs to society.

B2.29 The cost effectiveness figure for each of 
the policies represents the cost effectiveness of 
the whole policy per tonne of abatement in the 
non-traded sector. Where the policy has an impact 
in the traded sector, the costs and benefits of 
this impact are included in the cost effectiveness 
calculation.

B2.30 It must be remembered that MAC curves 
are sensitive to input assumptions and that policies 
reflected in them may not monetise all costs and 
benefits associated with each policy. This will 
inevitably result in the cost effectiveness of policies 
changing as input assumptions change. 

Chart B5: Non-traded emissions policy marginal abatement cost curve, 2020

MtCO2e


Cost e�ectiveness (£/t CO2e) Key

0.0 – 0.5 Local Sustainable Transport Fund
0.5 – 0.7 Rail electrification
0.7 – 0.7 Carbon Trust
0.7 – 3.9 Agriculture Voluntary Action Plan
3.9 – 9.4 Carbon Emissions Reduction Target (CERT)
9.4 – 12.2 EU new car average fuel e�ciency standards 
 (130 gCO2/km)
12.2 – 12.7 HGV technology measures
12.7 – 16.7 CERT extension
16.7 – 17.4 HGV low rolling resistance tyres
17.4 – 17.5 Community Energy Savings Programme
17.5 – 18.3 Non-Domestic Green Deal

18.3 – 22.2 Building Regulations 2010 part L
22.2 – 22.5 Low carbon emission buses
22.5 – 23.9 Carbon Reduction Commitment
23.9 – 25.1 Energy Company Obligation (ECO) 
 and Domestic Green Deal
25.1 – 25.7 EU new van CO2 regulation
25.7 – 30.0 8% transport fuel from renewable sources by 2020
30.0 – 40.0 Renewable Heat Incentive
40.0 – 40.4 Zero Carbon Homes
40.4 – 40.7 Energy Performance of Buildings Directive
40.7 – 42.2 EU new car complementary measures
42.2 – 45.8 Further new car e�ciency improvements to 95 gCO2/km



–80 




–60 




–40 


–240 

–220 

–200 

–140 

–160 

–180 



–20 


–120 

–100 


80 60 40 20 




120 




100 0 

8 6 46 44 42 40 4 38 36 34 32 30 28 26 24 22 20 2 18 16 14 12 10 0 

67 Further information on the cost effectiveness methodology is available at: www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/about/ec_social_res/iag_guidance/iag_guidance.aspx 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/about/ec_social_res/iag_guidance/iag_guidance.aspx




158 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

B3. Potential for the fourth 
carbon budget 
Additional abatement potential 
B3.1 As indicated above, on a net UK carbon 
account basis, the shortfall to the fourth budget 
of 1,950 MtCO


2

e is projected to be around 181 



Mt CO2

e. This shortfall is in the non-traded sector, as 

the UK’s traded sector emissions will be determined 
by the EU Emissions Trading System cap. 

B3.2 This means that additional effort beyond 
current policy is required to meet the fourth 
carbon budget. An economy-wide UK marginal 
abatement cost (MAC) curve evidence base has 
been developed to investigate potential sources of 
additional abatement. It consolidates information 
on abatement potential through various technology 
measures over the fourth budget period, and the 
associated cost effectiveness of these measures. 
See box B3 for further information on the UK 
MAC curves evidence base. 

B3.3 Abatement opportunities have been 
assessed by considering varying levels of abatement 
potential over the period for each sector, and do 
not consider the policy mechanisms through which 
abatement could be delivered. Assumptions about 
the feasible roll-out, emissions savings and costs of 
these technologies have been made to produce 
scenarios of potential abatement. 

B3.4 The evidence base includes abatement 
opportunities through energy efficiency measures 
and low carbon heat technologies in the residential, 
services and industry sectors; abatement 
technologies in domestic and commercial 
transport; and abatement opportunities in 
agriculture. Although some consideration has been 
given to further abatement potential through 
small-scale electricity generation, and through 
abatement in the land use, land use change, 
forestry and waste sectors, scenarios of abatement 
have not been assessed for these measures. 

Box B3: UK MAC curves evidence base 

The Government’s UK MAC curves evidence base contains information on the abatement potential, 
cost and cost effectiveness of measures to reduce emissions over the fourth budget period. This 
information was consolidated across a range of models and sources as set out below. 

•	 Residential	energy	efficiency	in	existing	buildings 

Scenarios for abatement potential in the domestic housing stock have been modelled in econometric 
work supporting the Impact Assessment of the Green Deal consultation. Analysis incorporated 
findings from consumer research to differentiate between abatement potential across different 
segments of the domestic housing stock, and modelling reflected updated information on the 
trajectories of supply capacity and costs. 

•	 Services	energy	efficiency	in	existing	buildings 

Data from the Valuation Office Agency gives the number and rateable value of buildings by sector in 
the year 2010, to a substantial level of disaggregation. The scale of abatement potential from Green 
Deal eligible measures is estimated using the National Non-Domestic Buildings Energy and Emissions 
Model (N-DEEM), together with technology penetration rates as estimated by consultants Element 
Energy. This potential is then adjusted for take-up brought about by other, non-Green Deal policies, 
based on projected policy savings that are derived from the Department of Energy and Climate 
Change energy model. A decision tree is used to determine the process of moving towards a decision 
to take out a Green Deal. 




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 159 

Box B3: UK MAC curves evidence base (continued) 

A review and update of the evidence base on non-domestic energy efficiency is planned. An initial 
pilot to determine an appropriate methodology, using the food and mixed retail sector as a test case, 
should be complete in spring 2012. A full economy-wide study may be launched shortly afterwards. 

•	 Services	and	residential	energy	efficiency	in	new	buildings 

The cost effectiveness information for new buildings is based on evidence published in the 
Implementation Stage Impact Assessment of revisions to Part L of the Building Regulations, published in 
March 2010.68 

•	 Industrial	process	efficiency	and	carbon	capture	and	storage	(CCS) 

Abatement potential from industrial processes and further energy efficiency improvements has been 
derived from four principal sources: 

•	 The Energy End-Use Simulation Model (ENUSIM) is a technology based, bottom-up industrial 
energy end-use simulation model which projects the uptake of energy-saving and/or fuel-switching 
technologies taking into account the cost effectiveness of technology options under future carbon 
and fossil fuel prices.69 

•	 Further detail on future abatement potential has been derived from work undertaken by AEA 
Technology. The major sources of abatement covered within this work focus on six major sectors: 
cement, refineries, glass, chemicals, food and drink, and iron and steel.70 

•	 The Department of Energy and Climate Change commissioned further analysis to assess abatement 
potential beyond that considered in the AEA work. This project is based on top-down energy and 
abatement projections for 17 wider groups of manufacturing. 

•	 In addition, the Department of Energy and Climate Change has undertaken further modelling analysis 
to estimate abatement from the uptake of low carbon heat and the initial deployment of CCS.71 

•	 Low	carbon	heat	in	residential,	services	and	industry 

Scenarios for low carbon heat have been modelled using the detailed cost effectiveness model 
developed for the Committee on Climate Change by consultants NERA and AEA. This model looks 
at the potential for low carbon heat technologies to replace fossil fuel use up to 2030. The model 
has drawn upon and extended the evidence base used for previous low carbon heat modelling in 
the Department of Energy and Climate Change, and includes technology assumptions and input data 
that have been extended to 2030. Additional technologies have been incorporated to reflect a wider 
range of possible future developments (e.g. synthetic biogas from the gasification of biomass, and heat 
pumps with heat storage that can shift electricity load profiles). 

68 See: www.communities.gov.uk/publications/planningandbuilding/partlf2010ia 
69 See: http://downloads.theccc.org.uk/AEAUpdateofUKabatementtCh6.pdf 
70 See: www.aeat.com/cms/assets/Documents/Final-Report-CCC.pdf 
71 Element Energy (2010) Potential for the Application of CCS to UK Industry and Natural Gas Power Generation, Report for the Committee on Climate Change, 

Final Report, Issue 3. 

http://www.communities.gov.uk/publications/planningandbuilding/partlf2010ia
http://downloads.theccc.org.uk/AEAUpdateofUKabatementtCh6.pdf
http://www.aeat.com/cms/assets/Documents/Final-Report-CCC.pdf




160 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

Box B3: UK MAC curves evidence base (continued) 

•	 Transport 

Scenarios for transport abatement potential in the 2020s have been developed reflecting research 
and evidence on possible uptake rates and the costs for new technologies; and through consultation 
with industry. 

The Department for Transport’s National Transport Model (NTM) has been used to assess the 
emissions savings that the measures could deliver, with off-model adjustments made to reflect the 
impact of an illustrative technology mix of plug-in vehicles. The NTM also provides the changes in 
vehicle kilometres driven; fuel consumption; air quality and congestion associated with the measures 
and that are used in the cost–benefit analysis of the measures. 

•	 Agriculture 

There is considerable uncertainty over estimates of emissions from the agricultural sector due to the 
complex nature of the biological systems that are the source of greenhouse gas emissions from the 
sector. External research, based on detailed assessment of on-farm measures, has, however, identified 
cost effective abatement potential from the sector – i.e. it reduces farmer costs.72 The voluntary 
action plan being taken forward by industry is expected to deliver annual savings of around 3 MtCO


2e 

from English agriculture by 2020. These are expected to be delivered from measures that improve 
crop nutrient, livestock breeding, feeding and manure management practices. 

The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, in collaboration with the Devolved 
Administrations, has an extensive research programme that will help to deliver an improved 
agricultural inventory. This research will help to reduce the uncertainties over the current inventory 
and potentially support identification of further mitigation potential from the sector. 

B3.5 To assess potential abatement it is necessary 
to project emissions forward, making assumptions 
about the level and source of emissions, and 
the possible abatement technologies available. 
There is significant uncertainty around the level 
of emissions and abatement potential available 
owing, among other things, to uncertainties 
over how technologies may develop, as well as 
public acceptance of new technologies. Further 
information on uncertainty in the analysis of 
marginal abatement costs is set out in the Impact 
Assessment of Fourth Carbon Budget Level.73 

B3.6 This uncertainty will also affect the anticipated 
achievement, costs and cost effectiveness associated 
with the measures installed. The analysis in this 
report represents a best estimate of the impacts 
of measures under central assumptions about 
underlying fundamentals, such as fossil fuel prices, 
GDP growth and technology cost assumptions. 
If these fundamentals change significantly, the 
emissions impact, costs and cost effectiveness 
associated with abatement measures could be 
significantly different. 

72 Scottish Agricultural College (2010) Review and Update of UK Marginal Abatement Cost Curves for Agriculture. 
73	 DECC (2011) Impact Assessment of Fourth Carbon Budget Level. Available at: www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/what%20we%20do/a%20low%20carbon%20uk/ 

carbon%20budgets/1685-ia-fourth-carbon-budget-level.pdf 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/what%20we%20do/a%20low%20carbon%20uk/carbon%20budgets/1685-ia-fourth-carbon-budget-level.pdf




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 161 

B3.7 The ranges of abatement potential have been 
assessed accounting for potential overlaps and 
interdependencies between technology measures. 
As such, the traded and non-traded sector 
scenarios are consistent with one another and with 
the Updated Energy and Emissions Projections 
baseline published in October 2011.74 

B3.8 Tables B7 and B8 below set out the range 
of abatement potential identified for the traded 
and non-traded sectors (abatement potential 
in the power sector is considered separately 
below). These ranges are illustrative, and reflect 
a judgement on feasible abatement potential 
in each sector. 

Table B7: Range of additional potential abatement in the non-traded sector, 2023–27 (MtCO


2e) 

Ambition 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 Total 

Agriculture – 1.9 3.0 4.0 4.0 4.0 16.9 

Residential new build – 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.5 2.4 

Industrial processes High 3.2 4.0 4.2 4.2 4.3 19.9 

Low 1.2 1.5 1.6 1.6 1.6 7.6 

Low carbon heat 
(business) 

High 1.7 2.2 2.7 3.2 3.7 13.6 

Low 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.2 1.4 5.3 

Low carbon heat 
(industry) 

High 3.6 4.6 5.7 6.9 8.0 28.9 

Low 1.2 1.6 2.0 4.9 5.5 15.3 

Low carbon heat (public) High 1.0 1.3 1.6 1.9 2.2 8.0 

Low 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.9 1.0 3.7 

Low carbon heat 
(residential) 

High 4.2 6.0 8.0 10.1 12.3 40.7 

Low 0.8 0.9 1.1 1.2 1.3 5.3 

Residential retrofit High 0.5 1.0 1.4 1.9 2.4 7.2 

Low 0.1 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 1.9 

Services new build High 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.5 

Low 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 

Services retrofit High 1.2 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.2 5.7 

Low 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.7 3.2 

Transport High 12.5 14.2 16.1 18.0 20.0 80.8 

Low 4.9 5.1 5.6 6.0 6.4 28.0 

Total High 30.2 38.0 45.5 52.0 58.7 224.3 

Low 12.5 15.0 17.6 21.5 23.3 89.9 

74 DECC (2011) Updated Energy and Emissions Projections. Available at: www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/about-us/economics-social-research/3134-updated­
energy-and-emissions-projections-october.pdf 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/about-us/economics-social-research/3134-updated-energy-and-emissions-projections-october.pdf




162 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

Table B8: Range of additional potential abatement in the traded sector (excluding power sector,  
2023–27) (MtCO


2e) 

Ambition 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 Total 

Industrial processes High 6.0 7.4 7.5 7.7 7.9 36.5 

Low 3.9 4.8 4.9 5.2 5.6 24.5 

Low carbon heat 
(industry) 

High 3.5 4.1 4.7 6.7 7.4 26.3 

Low 2.3 2.6 2.8 3.2 4.9 15.7 

Total High 9.5 11.5 12.1 14.4 15.3 62.8 

Low 6.2 7.4 7.8 8.4 10.5 40.2 

Abatement potential in the power 
sector 
B3.9 In the power sector, analysis for the fourth 
carbon budget is based on the ongoing Electricity 
Market Reform (EMR) programme, which aims to 
undertake fundamental reforms to the electricity 
market. The section on ‘Secure, low carbon 
electricity’ in Part 2 of the main report provides 
further details on the programme. 

B3.10 The quantitative analysis that informed 
the EMR White Paper and accompanying Impact 
Assessment (IA)75 was undertaken using a dynamic 
model of the British electricity market, developed 
by consultants Redpoint Energy. This model 
simulates how investment decisions are made, and 
the results provide an illustrative narrative to the 
potential impacts of the options examined. 

B3.11 Since the publication of the EMR White 
Paper and IA, the Department of Energy and 
Climate Change has updated its projections of 
fossil fuel and carbon prices, technology costs and 
electricity demand. The EMR White Paper analysis 
was modelled to meet a decarbonisation ambition 
of 100 gCO


2

/kilowatt hour (kWh) in 2030. 

A sensitivity of 50 gCO


2

/kWh was also examined. 

While these aspects remain unchanged, it was 
also assumed that renewables would increase to 

a 35% share of generation by 2030 to drive the 
decarbonisation ambition. The revised approach 
does not impose a specific renewables target 
but assumes that low carbon technologies are 
deployed on the basis of least cost to achieve that 
illustrative decarbonisation ambition. In light of the 
revisions to input assumptions and methodology, 
the analysis underpinning the lead EMR package, 
i.e. Feed-in Tariffs with Contracts for Difference 
(FiT CfD, or CfD) with a capacity mechanism, 
has been updated. 

B3.12 The updated analysis shows that a baseline 
without the EMR has more new gas-fired power 
stations owing to favourable conditions on 
profitability for gas-fired compared with coal-fired 
generation. In addition, a significant percentage 
of existing coal plant retires (around 2020), the 
majority of which is also replaced by new gas 
plants. Moreover, the modelling suggests that the 
first nuclear plant becomes operational in 2027, 
with three more new nuclear plants being built 
by 2030.76 Renewables capacity to 2030 remains 
around a similar level to that presented in the EMR 
White Paper. Under this baseline scenario, the 
carbon intensity of the power generation sector 
is 216.74 gCO


2

/kWh in 2020, which then falls to 

165.96 gCO


2

/kWh in 2030 as a result of increased 

generation from new nuclear, carbon capture and 
storage (CCS) and wind.  

75 See: www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/legislation/white_papers/emr_wp_2011/emr_wp_2011.aspx 
76	 The results reported here differ from those reported in the Department of Energy and Climate Change latest published Updated Energy and Emissions 

Projections (www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/about/ec_social_res/analytic_projs/en_emis_projs/en_emis_projs.aspx). This is because the Department 
of Energy and Climate Change emissions model differs from the Redpoint Energy model in the assumptions about how electricity producers behave. In 
the Department of Energy and Climate Change model, producers behave as if they know what future demand and prices will be (i.e. the model assumes 
perfect foresight). The model used for EMR analysis takes account of the impact of uncertainty about future returns on decisions made under current 
market arrangements. 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/legislation/white_papers/emr_wp_2011/emr_wp_2011.aspx
http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/about/ec_social_res/analytic_projs/en_emis_projs/en_emis_projs.aspx




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 163 

B3.13 As mentioned earlier, the lead EMR 
proposal was for a FiT CfD with a capacity 
mechanism (strategic reserve (SR) or capacity 
market (CM) – the choice to be finalised). The 
package is also to be implemented alongside an 
Emissions Performance Standard (EPS). 

B3.14 Meeting a decarbonisation ambition of 
100 gCO


2

/kWh in 2030 with these mechanisms 

results in more low carbon generation than in the 
baseline, in the form of new nuclear and biomass, 
owing to the levels of financial support provided 
through FiT CfDs. Over the fourth carbon budget 
period (2023–27) this scenario would reduce UK 
territorial emissions by around 120 MtCO


2

 relative 

to the baseline without EMR. 

Decarbonisation with 50 gCO2/kWh 
ambitions 
B3.15 This sensitivity is an update to that in the 
EMR White Paper and examines the implications 
of following a more stringent decarbonisation 
pathway on the CfD with SR package. 

B3.16 The results show that a more stringent 
decarbonisation pathway would lead to greater 
amounts of low carbon generation being 
incentivised through the CfD mechanism. 

With central electricity demand assumptions, 
investment in new nuclear is the same as under 
the CfD with SR package and is constrained by 
assumptions related to nuclear plant build rates. 
However, under this sensitivity there is significant 
investment in new CCS capacity as well as greater 
investment in wind and biomass. The introduction 
of such large quantities of low carbon generation 
(towards the mid to late 2020s) allows the carbon 
intensity of the power generation sector to drop 
to 50 gCO


2

/kWh in 2030, compared with 223 


g CO2

/kWh in 2020. Over the fourth carbon 

budget period (2023–27) this scenario would 
reduce UK territorial emissions by an additional 
40 MtCO


2

 relative to the 100 gCO


2

/kWh pathway. 

overview of abatement potential 
across the economy 
B3.17 A consolidated assessment of the additional 
abatement potential beyond 2022 indicates that 
there is sufficient abatement potential to meet the 
fourth carbon budget. Charts B6 and B7 reflect 
the highest levels of abatement potential identified 
in the non-traded and traded sectors. 




164 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

Chart B6: Total potential abatement identified in the non-traded sector, 2023–27 (MtCO


2e) 

1,447 


17 

(–1.7%) 49 1,260 

(–3.4%) 1,223 50 (–12.6%)* 329 
(–3.5%) (–15.6%) 


81 

28 (–5.6%) 

(–1.9%)
55 279 



141 28 92 519 




438 


45 45 
Residential Off road 

Services Land use change 
254 337 

Industry Total Non-CO2 

Transport 

–3 –3 
Target 

Baseline Final
emissions*Percentage reduction from baseline 

Chart B7: Total potential abatement identified in the traded sector, 2023–27 (MtCO


2e) 766 63 

126 (–8.2%) 

(–16.4%) 578 354 
(–24.6%) 



228 92 


9 92 


9 297 234 


Power stations Industry 

Refineries Other transport 

Services Total non-CO14 2 14 

Baseline Industry Power stations Final emissions Target 



690 

(–9.9%)* 

*Percentage reduction from baseline 




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 165

cost effectiveness of abatement 
potential
B3.18 The Government’s approach to meeting 
the fourth carbon budget aims to ensure that 
we can manage the low carbon transition cost 
effectively. In order to do so, it has been necessary 
to consider a wide range of factors that will 
influence the total cost.

B3.19 Chart B8 reflects all the abatement potential 
identified in the non-traded sector compared 
against the weighted average discounted (WAD) 
carbon price of £43/tCO


2

e. See box B4 for an 

explanation of this metric. Chart B8 also shows 
the marginal abatement cost (MAC) associated 
with the identified abatement measures, but has 
several limitations, which are highlighted in box B5. 
These limitations have been accounted for in the 
development of the carbon budget scenarios.

Chart B8: Marginal abatement cost curve of the total potential abatement identified in the  
non-traded sector, 2023–27 (MtCO


2e)−500 −400 −300 

−2,400


 −200 −100 700600 




500 




400 




300 


140120  100  



100 43 −600 0 

80  60



200 


40 240220200  20 180  1600  

Agriculture  

Industrial process  

Low carbon heat (business)


 

Low carbon heat (industry) 

Low carbon heat (public) 


 

Low carbon heat (residential) 

Residential new build  

Services new build  


 

Services retrofit  

Transport  

Residential retrofit  


Cost-e�ectiveness (£/t CO2e)


MtCO2e




166 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

Box B4: Weighted average discounted (WAD) cost of carbon 

The WAD cost of carbon is designed to provide a single carbon value that is reflective of the value 
of all the greenhouse gas emissions saved by a package of abatement. It is calculated using the 
Government’s standard carbon valuation methodology, in which all emissions savings are valued at 
the carbon price relevant to the year in which they are realised, and then discounted to get a present 
value figure. This aggregate value for the present value of emissions saved is then divided by the total 
number of emissions saved to get the relevant WAD cost of carbon. The cost is weighted, because 
more weight is effectively given to years in which emissions savings are larger. Consequently, two 
abatement measures that save the same amount of emissions, but at different times, will have different 
WAD costs of carbon to reflect the different value of carbon when the savings are expected to be 
realised. The £43/tCO


2

e noted above is the WAD cost of carbon in the non-traded sector discounted 

to 2011 for each of the non-traded sector scenarios. It can be compared with the cost per tonne 
saved in order to determine whether or not the scenario package as a whole is cost effective. 

Box B5: Limitations of marginal abatement cost (MAC) analysis 

While MAC analysis is a useful tool, it does have a number of limitations and needs to be used 
appropriately. 

Cost effectiveness estimates may not reflect non-monetised impacts of abatement opportunities, such 
as impacts on competitiveness, distributional impacts and impacts on other environmental and social 
considerations. 

The lack of granularity in the analysis may misrepresent individual increments and measures; for 
example, a relatively cost ineffective block of abatement could include a mix of measures that are cost 
effective and cost ineffective. 

There may be a substantial difference between the costs identified in this analysis, and the policy costs 
required to deliver this potential for some measures. For example, negative cost abatement measures 
identified in this analysis are not always fully taken up without policy and government intervention. 
This may result in costs increasing substantially. 

MAC curves are limited in portraying the range of uncertainty surrounding abatement potential 
and cost effectiveness. There are considerable uncertainties over the development of technologies 
and their associated costs so far into the future, as well as uncertainties around other key factors 
such as fossil fuel prices. The estimated abatement potential and cost effectiveness presented in this 
document are best estimates and are based on assumptions about technology uptake rates and costs 
that may need to be revised in future. While every attempt has been made to be comprehensive in 
this analysis, some technical options and savings may be omitted, for example potential opportunities 
for emissions abatement through forestry, savings from improved landfill methane capture rates and 
demand reduction measures. 




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 167 

B3.20 In addition to these limitations, MAC curve 
analysis suffers from an inability to account for the 
dynamic impact of different abatement options. 
The cost of each measure is a single number 
and cannot reflect how the cost of different 
technologies is likely to evolve with different levels 
of take-up over time. It is also limited in reflecting 
interdependencies across measures, both within 
and across different sectors. 

B3.21 MAC curves also fail to account for the 
lead-in time necessary to implement various 
technologies or measures and so are limited 
in informing decisions on the optimal timing 
of different abatement options. In considering 
levels of action in the period 2023–27 therefore, 
government needs to combine information 
from static comparisons of cost effectiveness 
with a consideration of the dynamic cost 
efficiency of different implementation timescales. 
Fundamentally, it must consider how the timing 
and scale of implementation affects the evolution 
of costs, and ensure that sufficient cost effective 
abatement is made available in future decades to 
meets its 2050 target. 

B3.22 Investment in the research, development 
and demonstration of emerging low carbon 
technologies is likely to be crucial in ensuring the 
availability of key technologies, such as carbon 
capture and storage. It is also important in 
developing new, enabling technologies, such as in 
heat and electricity storage, and for bringing down 
the costs of low carbon technologies that reach 
the deployment stage. As well as incentivising 
early-stage investment, market-pull policies can 
enable/accelerate deployment and dramatically 
bring down the costs of emerging technologies. 
This suggests that there is a case for pushing the 
development and deployment of technologies 
before they are considered statically cost effective 
(i.e. cost effective in a given year). The rationale for 
this is that by doing so, the costs of the technology 
could be reduced in future periods through 

learning-by-doing or induced innovation, and that 
their availability could be increased through the 
development of the supply chain. 

B3.23 This approach could apply to a range of 
critical technologies, for instance heat pumps and 
low carbon vehicles. Additionally, although some 
relatively low carbon technologies may be useful 
for decarbonising over the next few decades, they 
may not satisfy longer-term abatement needs in a 
least-cost pathway to 2050. 

B3.24 Uncertainty over the future structure of 
the economy, future technology costs, technical 
performance and dynamic interactions within the 
economy make it difficult to determine today a 
least-cost/maximum-benefit pathway to 2050. 
Consequently, it may be beneficial to adopt a 
diverse range of measures in order to mitigate 
the risk that some of these currently immature 
technologies do not work as expected or that 
viable alternative/substitute technologies become 
available in the future. This approach is advocated 
by the Committee on Climate Change and cited 
in their recommendations in chapter 3 of their 
report,77 where they emphasise the importance 
of flexibility and of keeping a range of abatement 
scenarios in play. The option value of a diverse 
range of measures has to be balanced against the 
cost of developing more solutions and the risk 
of diverting resources from the right technology 
families to the wrong technology families on the 
basis of flawed information. 

B3.25 In light of these factors, government has 
sought to develop options that meet the fourth 
carbon budget cost effectively while still leaving 
open probable least-cost options to meet the 2050 
target. This additional constraint can suggest the 
need to use abatement measures that might not 
be cost effective considering the fourth carbon 
budget target alone, but should nevertheless 
support a more efficient transition to the 
2050 goal. 

77 Committee on Climate Change (2010) The Fourth Carbon Budget: Reducing emissions through the 2020s. Available at: www.theccc.org.uk/reports/fourth­
carbon-budget 

http://www.theccc.org.uk/reports/fourth-carbon-budget




168 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

scenarios to deliver the fourth 
carbon budget 
B3.26 Part 3 of the main report set out 
illustrative scenarios for how the additional 
emissions reductions to meet the fourth carbon 
budget could be delivered. These scenarios were 
developed using evidence on the abatement 
potential and cost effectiveness identified and with 
regard to the Government’s desire to encourage a 
portfolio of technologies. Consequently, the fourth 
carbon budget scenarios have been developed 
taking into account a number of factors: 

•	 static cost effectiveness – comparing the 
estimated cost of a measure with the forecast 
carbon price for the same time period; 

•	 dynamic cost effectiveness – considering what 
action needs to be taken in the fourth budget 
period to be on track to meet the 2050 target 
in the most cost effective way; 

•	 technical feasibility – taking account of likely 
technological development and necessary build 
rates; and 

•	 practical deliverability and public acceptability – 
considering potential barriers to delivery. 

B3.27 These illustrative scenarios focus on the 
sectors that are key to achieving the 2050 target 
in a cost effective way and offer the greatest 
potential for emissions reductions over the fourth 
carbon budget period, although these scenarios 
do not directly link to any specific 2050 future set 
out in Part 1. This section provides detail on the 
composition of these scenarios in the non-traded 
and traded sectors separately before considering 
the cross-economy implications and wider impacts 
of the different scenarios. 

Delivering emissions reductions in the 
non-traded sector 
B3.28 The four scenarios for the non-traded 
sector illustrate different ways in which emissions 
could be reduced to 1,260 MtCO


2

e, the level 

of emissions required in the non-traded sector 
over the fourth carbon budget period to meet 
the overall 1,950 MtCO


2

e level. Chart B9 shows 

greenhouse gas emissions under each scenario and 
the contribution from different sectors. 




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 169 

Chart B9: Aggregate non-traded emissions under the illustrative scenarios to meet the fourth 
carbon budget, 2023–27 

1,345 territorial 
1,600 emissions – 

1,441 85 credit 
purchase = 1,260 1,400 

1,253 1,248 1,249 
1,200 

1,000 


e Mt CO


2 800 



600 




400 




200 0 

−200 
Baseline Scenario 1 Scenario 2 Scenario 3 Scenario 4 

Road transport Industry Residential Services 

Off-road Other transport Land use change Agriculture 
Target Other non-CO2 Credit purchase 

Scenario 1: High abatement in 	
low carbon heat 
B3.29 Under this scenario, emissions over the 
fourth carbon budget period would be reduced 

to 1,253 MtCO


2

e in the non-traded sector. The 

table below summarises the key components of 
this scenario. 

Table B9: Expected activity under illustrative Scenario 1 

Sector Expected activity 

Buildings •	 3.7 million solid walls insulated over the period 2023–30 

•	 8.6 million low carbon heat installations in total by 2030, delivering around 165.5 terawatt hours (TWh) 
of low carbon heat and a further 38.6 TWh from district heating 

Transport •	 Average new car emissions = 60 gCO


2

/km in 2030 

•	 Average new van emissions = 90 gCO


2

/km in 2030 

•	 8% biofuel, by energy 

•	 5% heavy goods vehicle (HGV) efficiency improvement over five years 

Industry •	 All ‘realistic’ and some further cost effective measures, including whole-refinery optimisation in the 
refineries sub-sector, clinker substitution in the cement sector and increased recycling in iron and steel 

•	 Committee on Climate Change’s central scenario of industrial carbon capture and storage 

•	 44,000 additional low carbon heat installations in industry by 2030, delivering around 95 TWh of low 
carbon heat in industry 

Agriculture •	 On-farm measures such as improved management of nutrients (excluding introducing new species), 
improved soil drainage, anaerobic digestion, livestock breeding and livestock diet and health measures 

•	 Woodland creation rates across the UK are assumed to increase, maintaining the sector as a sink and 
providing about 1 MtCO


2

e abatement in the fourth budget period over and above current planting rates 




170 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

Detail 
B3.30 This scenario envisages very significant levels 
of low carbon heat in buildings and significant 
improvements in the thermal efficiency of 
buildings. For example, we might need as much 
as 166.5 TWh of low carbon heat from more 
than 8.6 million low carbon heat installations by 
2030 (cumulative total, including low carbon heat 
delivered prior to the fourth carbon budget). The 
majority of these installations are likely to be heat 
pumps, with low carbon heat also coming from 
biomass boilers. District heating will contribute a 
further 38.6 TWh. 

B3.31 In terms of thermal efficiency, this scenario 
assumes that most cavity and loft insulations 
have been completed by 2020. It also assumes 
that a high number of properties with solid walls 
(as opposed to cavity walls) are insulated, with 
3.7 million insulations being carried out by 2030, in 
addition to the up to 1.5 million by 2020 that we 
expect from current policy. Elsewhere in buildings, 
it is assumed that the zero carbon homes standard 
is met in 2016 and 2019 for the residential and 
business sectors respectively. In the business sector, 
cost effective energy efficiency improvements are 
made to buildings. This scenario also envisages 
high ambition on low carbon heat in industry, 
mostly from biomass boilers and the use of biogas 
for combustion. 

B3.32 In the transport sector, this scenario 
assumes that average new car emissions (including 
conventional combustion engine cars as well as 
ultra-low emission cars such as battery electric, 
plug in hybrid and fuel cell electric vehicles) 
improve to 60 gCO


2

/km by 2030 and average  

new van emissions (again, including conventional 
vans and ultra-low emission vans) improve to  
90 gCO


2

/km by 2030. This could be delivered 

through different mixes of conventional vehicles 
and ultra-low emission vehicles, such as electric, 
plug-in hybrid  and even hydrogen vehicles. The 
analysis considers an illustrative technology mix 
where emissions from conventional cars and  
vans improve to 80 gCO


2

/km and 120 gCO


2/km 


respectively, and 40% of new cars and vans sold 
are battery electric, range extended electric or 
plug-in hybrid vehicles in 2030.78 

B3.33 This scenario assumes that the proportion 
of biofuels by energy in the road transport sector 
remains at 8% through the 2020s. This might 
reflect a situation where sustainability concerns 
are not resolved, or where there is relatively little 
innovation in new feedstocks, or where there is 
greater uptake of bioenergy in other sectors. 

B3.34 Elsewhere in transport, this scenario 
assumes continuing improvement in HGV 
efficiencies (a cumulative 5% improvement over 
each five-year period between 2016 and 2030). It 
assumes a 2% reduction in car trips in urban areas 
owing to either continued funding of sustainable 
travel measures or no diminution of the impacts 
of the Local Sustainable Transport Fund, as 
assumed in the baseline for the fourth carbon 
budget analysis. 

B3.35 In addition to the low carbon heat measures 
mentioned in the summary table, this scenario 
assumes some initial uptake of carbon capture 
and storage in industry and energy efficiency 
improvements such as clinker substitution in 
cement, elimination of flaring in refineries, 
reduction in energy consumption during the 
melting process in glass furnaces, nitrous oxide 
reduction from nitric acid production in the 
chemicals sector, increased recycling of steel in the 
steel sector, and some additional savings through 
switching to electric arc furnaces. 

B3.36 In agriculture we have assumed the 
take-up of measures such as improved nutrient 
management (excluding introducing new species), 
improved soil drainage, anaerobic digestion, 
improved livestock breeding, and diet and health 
measures. In forestry, woodland creation rates 
across the UK are assumed to increase, maintaining 
the sector as a sink and providing about 1 MtCO


2e 

abatement in the fourth budget period over and 
above current planting rates. 

78 There is currently insufficient evidence to include fuel cell vehicles explicitly in the modelling of the illustrative technology mix. 




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 171 

Scenario 2: High abatement in transport 
and bioenergy demand 
B3.37 Under this scenario, emissions over the 
fourth carbon budget period would be reduced to 
1,248 MtCO


2

e in the non-traded sector. 

Table B10: Expected activity under illustrative Scenario 2 

Sector Expected activity 

Buildings •	 3.7 million solid walls insulated over the period 2023–30 

•	 Around 7.2 million low carbon heat installations in total by 2030, delivering around 138.0 TWh of 
low carbon heat and a further 9.6 TWh from district heating 

Transport •	 Average new car emissions = 50 gCO


2/km 


•	 Average new van emissions = 75 gCO


2/km 


•	 10% biofuel, by energy 

•	 8% HGV efficiency improvement over five years 

Industry As Scenario 1 

Agriculture As Scenario 1 

Detail 
B3.38 This scenario sees a high uptake of home 
insulation (specifically solid wall insulation), owing 
to high consumer acceptance (e.g. hassle factors 
regarding solid wall insulation are limited), strong 
policy drivers (e.g. attractive long-term financing 
options for domestic retrofit) and strong 
exogenous drivers (e.g. high energy prices). But 
this scenario illustrates a situation where specific 
barriers to the uptake of low carbon heat 
installations are encountered, resulting in a lower 
number of heat pumps and lower biomass use 
in buildings than in Scenario 1. The high use of 
biomass in industry, however, suggests that this is 
a cost effective use of bioenergy resource in this 
scenario. 

B3.39 This scenario assumes around 138 TWh 
of low carbon heat from around 7.2 million low 
carbon heat installations in buildings by 2030 
(cumulative total, including low carbon heat 
delivered prior to the fourth carbon budget). 
A further 9.6 TWh is provided by district heating. 
The same level of ambition in non-domestic 
retrofit measures, and domestic and non-domestic 
new build, as in Scenario 1 is assumed. 

B3.40 To still be able to meet the fourth 
carbon budget under this scenario, greater fuel 
efficiency improvements in road transport would 
be required relative to Scenario 1. Scenario 2 
therefore assumes that average new car emmisions 
(including conventional combustion engine cars as 
well as ultra-low emission cars such as electric and 
plug-in hybrid vehicles) improve to 50 gCO


2

/km, 

and average new van emissions (again, including 
conventional vans and ultra-low emission vans) 
improve to 75 gCO


2

/km. As in Scenario 1, this 

could be delivered through different mixes of 
conventional vehicles and ultra-low emission 
vehicles such as battery electric, range extended 
electric, plug-in hybrid vehicles and even hydrogen 
vehicles. The analysis assumes an illustrative 
technology mix where the emisssions from 
conventional cars and vans fall to 80 gCO


2

/km and 

120 gCO


2

/km respectively, as in Scenario 1, with 

battery electric, range extended electric and plug-
in hybrid vehicles making up 50% of new car and 
van sales (compared with 40% in Scenario 1). 

B3.41 This scenario assumes that the proportion 
of biofuels by energy in road transport increases 
from 8% in 2020 to 10% by 2030. Elsewhere 
in transport, this scenario assumes that HGV 




172 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

efficiency improves by a cumulative 8% over each 
five-year period between 2016 and 2030. It also 
assumes that rail electrification is extended to the 
Midland Mainline and the Welsh Valleys. There 
is a 5% reduction in urban car trips, which might 
be seen if additional funding of sustainable travel 
measures leads to, for example, learning benefits 
across local authority borders. 

B3.42 As this scenario envisages high ambition in 
transport biofuels, as well as significant biomass 
use in industry, it could be considered as a high 
bioenergy demand scenario and gives a sense of 
what the maximum demand implications might be. 

This might reflect constraints around sustainability 
being overcome and technological innovation 
that make more advanced feedstocks viable. 
See paragraphs B4.42–B4.49 of this annex for an 
assessment of the sustainability of bioenergy supply 
under the fourth carbon budget scenarios. 

Scenario 3: Focus on high electrification 
B3.43 Under this scenario, emissions over the 
fourth carbon budget period would be reduced to 
1,249 MtCO


2

e in the non-traded sector. 

Table B11: Expected activity under illustrative Scenario 3 

Sector Expected activity 

Buildings •	 1 million solid walls insulated over the period 2023–30 

•	 8.6 million low carbon heat installations in total by 2030, delivering around 165.5 TWh of low carbon heat 
and a further 38.6 TWh from district heating 

Transport •	 Average new car emissions = 50 gCO


2/km 


•	 Average new van emissions = 75 gCO


2/km 


•	 10% biofuel, by energy 

•	 8% HGV efficiency improvement over five years 

Industry •	 All ‘realistic’ and some further cost effective measures, including whole-refinery optimisation in the 
refineries sub-sector, clinker substitution in the cement sector and increased recycling in iron and steel 

•	 Committee on Climate Change’s central scenario of industrial carbon capture and storage 

•	 22 ,000 additional low carbon heat installations in industry by 2030, delivering around 42 TWh of low 
carbon heat in industry 

Agriculture As Scenario 1 




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 173 

Detail 
B3.44 In low carbon heat the level of ambition 
in Scenario 1 (8.6 million low carbon heat 
installations, delivering 165.5 TWh of low carbon 
heat in buildings by 2030) is assumed. In transport 
the level of ambition in Scenario 2, 50 gCO


2/km 


average new car emissions is assumed. Depending 
on the mix of conventional and ultra-low emission 
cars in the fleet, this could be delivered by up 
to 50% of new car and van sales being battery 
electric or plug-in hybrids. 

B3.45 This scenario assumes a lower level of 
ambition on residential sector retrofit (solid wall 
insulations) than previous scenarios. This might 
reflect specific consumer barriers to taking up 
insulation of solid walls, such as a lack of financing 
options. It assumes 1 million insulations being 
carried out by 2030, in addition to the almost 
1.5 million expected by 2020 under current policy. 

Scenario 4: Purchase of international 
credits 
B3.46 Under this scenario, emissions over the 
fourth carbon budget period would be reduced 
to 1,345 MtCO


2

e in the non-traded sector. The 

Government would therefore need to purchase 
around 85 MtCO


2

e worth of carbon credits. At 

the forecast carbon price of £51 tCO


2

e (£ 2011, 

undiscounted) on average over the fourth carbon 
budget period, this would cost the Government 
£2.7 billion in present value terms. In this scenario, 
both transport and low carbon heat are assumed 
to deliver levels of emissions reductions that are 
at the lower end of the ranges described in Part 
2. This will necessitate faster levels of technology 
uptake beyond 2030, and more detail is given in 
the relevant sections of Part 2. 

B3.47 This scenario assumes 3 million solid wall 
insulations over the fourth carbon budget period. 
The level of ambition in sectors other than 
transport and buildings is as in Scenarios 1, 2 and 3. 

Table B12: Expected activity under illustrative Scenario 4 

Sector Expected activity 

Buildings •	 3 million solid walls insulated over the period 2023–30 

•	 Around 1.6 million low carbon heat installations in total by 2030, delivering around 83.3 TWh of low 
carbon heat and a further 9.6 TWh from district heating 

Transport •	 Average new car emissions = 70 gCO


2/km 


•	 Average new van emissions = 105 gCO


2/km 


•	 6% biofuel, by energy 

Industry As Scenario 3 

Agriculture As Scenario 1 

Credit 
purchase 

85 million credits at a cost of £2.7 billion 




174 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

Delivering emissions reductions in the 
traded sector 
B3.48 The level of emissions reductions in the 
traded sector is dictated by the level of the EU 
Emissions Trading System (ETS) cap. As set out 
in paragraphs B3.1–B3.8 above, the trajectory at 
which the EU ETS cap is currently set to shrink 
would not be sufficient to deliver the emissions 
reductions needed in the power and heavy 
industry sectors to meet a fourth carbon budget 
of 1,950 MtCO


2

e. In this respect, the fourth carbon 

budget was set on the assumption that the EU ETS 
cap will be tightened in the future. 

B3.49 This report considers two illustrative 
scenarios showing how emissions could be 
reduced to 690 MtCO


2

e, the level of traded 

sector emissions required over the fourth carbon 
budget period to meet the overall 1,950 MtCO


2e 

level. Chart B10 below shows by how much 
each scenario would reduce emissions and the 
contribution from different sectors. Both scenarios 
in the traded sector assume that the EU ETS 
cap is tightened sufficiently to meet the fourth 
carbon budget. Given the assumed level of the 
EU ETS cap,  however, both scenarios provide an 
opportunity for EU Allowances (EUAs) to be sold. 

Chart B10: Aggregate territorial traded sector emissions under the illustrative traded sector 
scenarios, 2023–27 



900 




800 




700 




600 


500 e 


MCO2




400 




300 




200 




100 0 

61 64 
98 94 



766 


690 592 629 596 626 

Baseline EU ETS cap Scenario A Scenario B Scenario A Scenario B 
(high demand) (high demand) 

Power stations Refineries Services Industry 

Other transport EU ETS cap Sale of EU Allowances EU ETS cap 




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 175 

Scenario A: Power sector carbon intensity 
of 50 gCO2/kWh 
B3.50 Under this scenario, emissions over the 
fourth carbon budget period would fall to either  
592 MtCO


2

e or 596 MtCO


2

e in the traded sector, 

depending on the level of electricity demand 
assumed. 

B3.51 In this scenario, it is assumed that emissions 
in the power and heavy industry sectors are 
reduced sufficiently in the UK to deliver the 
traded sector component of the fourth carbon 
budget. This will require significant decarbonisation 
of the power sector, and in Scenario A the 
carbon intensity of electricity generation has 
been modelled to reach 50 gCO


2

/kWh by 2030. 

The power sector section in Part 2 gives more 
details on the potential implications of this for the 
generation mix. 

B3.52 In the industry sector the same assumptions 
as in Scenarios 1–4 have been made. 

Scenario B: Power sector carbon intensity 
of 100 gCO2/kWh 
B3.53 In this scenario, emissions in the power and 
heavy industry sectors are reduced in the UK but 
with a lower level of decarbonisation in the power 
sector than assumed in Scenario A. This illustrative 
scenario assumes that the carbon intensity 
of electricity generation falls to 100 gCO


2/ 

kWh by 2030. Emissions in this scenario are 
reduced to either 629 MtCO


2

e or 626 MtCO


2e 

in the traded sector, depending on the level of 
electricity demand.79 

B3.54 In the industry sector the same assumptions 
as in Scenarios 1–4 have been made. 

Combined impacts of traded and 
non-traded sector scenarios 

Electricity demand implications 
B3.55 The high levels of electrification in heat 
and transport included in the non-traded sector 
scenarios imply increased levels of electricity 

demand to be met by the power sector. 
For instance, Scenario 3 includes significant 
electrification of both heat and transport which 
is partially offset by increases in energy efficiency 
but still implies a level of electricity demand that 
is about 10% higher than the current government 
assumption of approximately 410 TWh in 2030. 
As a result, sensitivities reflecting high electricity 
demand have been modelled in both Scenario A 
(50 gCO


2

/kWh) and Scenario B (100 gCO


2

/kWh). 

Bioenergy demand implications 
B3.56 Scenarios reflecting increased abatement 
in transport, heat and electricity generation imply 
increased demand for bioenergy. For instance, 
the demand for biofuels in transport, biomass and 
biogas for heat and the use of biomass and waste 
in electricity generation require a consideration 
of whether sufficient, sustainable supplies of 
bioenergy will be available. An assessment of 
current estimates of sustainable bioenergy supply 
compared with the demand trajectories implied 
by the fourth carbon budget scenarios is set out in 
paragraphs B4.42–B4.49 of this annex. 

costs of delivering the fourth 
carbon budget 
B3.57 Delivering the emissions reductions set out 
in the illustrative fourth carbon budget scenarios 
will impose costs on the UK economy but will also 
deliver benefits well beyond the end of the fourth 
carbon budget period. As discussed above, costs 
will be determined by the combination of traded 
and non-traded sector scenarios. On this basis, the 
net discounted costs of meeting the fourth carbon 
budget are estimated to range from £26 billion to 
£56 billion (excluding the value of greenhouse 
gas emissions savings) depending on the choice 
of ambition in different sectors and the associated 
electricity demand implications. When the benefits 
of the carbon savings that will be delivered by the 
illustrative scenarios are also taken into account, 
the net present value (NPV) ranges from a net 
benefit of £1 billion to a net cost of £20 billion. 

79 Emissions are lower under high demand owing to higher assumed low carbon heat in the industrial sector. 

http:B4.42�B4.49




176 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

B3.58 These cost and benefit estimates 
draw on best available evidence from the UK 
marginal abatement cost curves evidence base 
and appropriate values for energy resource 
costs and carbon benefits as described in the 
methodological note that begins this annex. The 
costs include technical costs associated with the 
abatement measures in each of the scenarios, 
energy consumption and wider impacts such as 
air quality, congestion and hidden or hassle costs, 
where it is possible to monetise these. In the 
traded sector, the EUA cost of complying with the 
EU Emissions Trading System is also valued. Since 
the illustrative scenarios do not include specific 
policies, this assessment does not include any policy 
costs associated with the delivery of measures. See 
charts B13–B18 (pp. 204–207) of this annex for the 
abatement and cost effectiveness of the measures 
contained in each of the illustrative scenarios. 

B3.59 Costs will vary between scenarios as each 
one comprises different levels of abatement in the 
key sectors. Table B13 provides a breakdown of 
the overall costs and benefits of each illustrative 
scenario in the non-traded sector of the economy. 

B3.60 Scenario 4 delivers the fourth carbon 
budget at the lowest cost (£27 billion) since the 
cost of purchasing international credits is cheaper 
than undertaking further territorial abatement. 
However, Scenarios 1 and 3 have the highest 
net present values because of their additional 
emissions savings. 

B3.61 The key driver of the variation in costs 
between the scenarios is the level of ambition in 
the transport and low carbon heat sectors. The 
effects of the different levels of ambition on costs 
can be counter-intuitive. For example, district 
heating is only included in the higher ambition 
scenarios for low carbon heat. District heating 
is considered ambitious because of a number 
of barriers to deployment that will need to be 
addressed. These include planning and consent 
from local authorities, identifying and matching 
demand for heat with supply, and raising capital for 
investment in heat networks. Nevertheless, the 
network benefits of district heating mean that it 
is relatively cost effective compared with installing 
large numbers of heat pumps. For this reason, 
Scenario 2, which does not include district heating, 

Table B13: Emissions levels and NPV of the illustrative non-traded sector scenarios 

Fourth Costs (£ billion 2011) Benefits (£ billion 2011) 
carbon 
budget 
emissions 
(MtCO


2e) 

Scenario Non-
traded 

Capital Admin Other Credit 
purchase 

Energy 
savings 


EU 

Allowances 
savings 

Other Non-
traded 
savings 

NPV Net present 
cost 
(excluding 
the value of 
greenhouse 


gas 

emissions) 

1 1,253 −77.6 −1.5 −5.7 – 37.4 −3.0 6.6 41.8 −2.0 −43.8 

2 1,248 −79.5 −1.5 −4.6 – 33.0 −2.9 7.3 36.5 −11.7 −48.2 

3 1,249 −80.9 −0.5 −0.3 – 37.8 −3.4 5.7 39.3 −2.4 −41.6 

4 1,260
 (1,345) 

−38.2 −1.2 −11.1 −2.7 21.5 −0.1 5.3 19.0 −7.5 −26.5 




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 177 

Table B14: NPV of the illustrative traded sector scenarios, central electricity demand (£ billion 2011) 

Costs Benefits 

Scenario Capital Other Energy 
savings 


EU 

Allowances 
savings 

Other NPV 

A (50 gCO


2

/kWh) −31.8 −1.4 11.6 17.5 1.7 −2.5 

B (100 gCO


2

/kWh) −23.2 −1.4 8.8 14.6 1.7 0.5 

appears to be relatively costly despite its lower 
level of ambition in low carbon heat. 

B3.62 In the traded sector of the economy, the 
difference in costs between the two illustrative 
scenarios is driven by the different levels of 
ambition in the power sector. For instance, 
decarbonising the power sector to reach a carbon 
intensity target of 50 gCO


2

/kWh by 2030 is 

more costly – imposing a net cost – than aiming 
for a target of 100 gCO


2

/kWh by 2030, which 

delivers a small net benefit. Table B14 provides a 
breakdown of the overall costs and benefits of the 
traded sector scenarios under a central electricity 
demand scenario. 

B3.63 The high levels of electrification in heat 
and transport included in the non-traded sector 
scenarios imply increased levels of electricity 
demand to be met by the power sector. 

For instance, Scenario 3 includes significant 
electrification of both heat and transport which 
is partially offset by increases in energy efficiency 
but still implies a level of electricity demand that 
is about 10% higher than the current government 
assumption of approximately 410 TWh in 2030. 
To take account of this impact, sensitivity analysis 
of the power sector under both Scenarios A and B 
has been conducted. 

B3.64 Table B15 provides a breakdown of the 
overall costs and benefits of the traded sector 
scenarios under a high electricity demand scenario. 
The energy savings shown have been adjusted 
to avoid the double counting of costs when the 
traded and non-traded scenarios are combined. 
For this reason, it is not possible to compare costs 
of the high electricity demand scenario directly 
with those of the central electricity demand 
scenario. 

Table B15: NPV of the illustrative traded sector scenarios, high electricity demand (£ billion 2011) 

Costs Benefits 

Scenario Capital Other Energy 
savings* 


EU 

Allowances 
savings 

Other NPV 

A (50 gCO


2

/kWh) −38.0 −1.7 11.7 18.4 1.7 −7.9 

B (100 gCO


2

/kWh) −28.7 −1.7 16.1 15.6 1.7 3.0 

*Adjusted to allow summation with non-traded scenarios 




178 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

Combined impact of traded and 
non–traded sector scenarios 
B3.65 Scenarios 1–4 in the non-traded sector 
imply different levels of electricity demand. 
Consequently, it is important to combine the 
non-traded and traded sector scenarios so that 
the electricity demand assumptions are consistent 
when assessing the whole-economy effects of the 
illustrative scenarios. For example, Scenario 3, which 
includes high levels of electrification in heat and 
transport, has the impact of increasing electricity 
demand by about 10% in 2030. This scenario is 
only compatible with traded sector Scenarios 
A or B under high electricity demand. Levels of 
electrification in Scenario 4 suggest that Scenarios 
A or B under central demand would be an 
appropriate combination. The electricity demand 
implications for Scenarios 1 and 2 fall between 
the central and high demand levels shown for the 
traded sector scenarios and could be consistent 
with either of the Government’s central or high 
electricity demand assumptions. Consequently, 
Scenarios 1 and 2 could potentially be combined 
with Scenarios A or B under either central or 
high electricity demand. Table B16 reflects the 
aggregate costs of the fourth carbon budget 
scenarios under the various appropriate traded 
and non-traded sector combinations. 

Table B16: Cumulative NPV of the illustrative 
non-traded and traded scenarios (£ billion 2011) 

Net present 
cost 
(excluding 
value of 
greenhouse 


gas 

emissions) 



NPV 


Central electricity demand 

Scenarios A + 1 −£46bn −£4bn 

Scenarios A + 2 −£51bn −£14bn 

Scenarios A + 4 −£29bn −£10bn 

Scenarios B + 1 −£43bn −£2bn 

Scenarios B + 2 −£48bn −£11bn 

Scenarios B + 4 −£26bn −£7bn 

High electricity demand 

Scenarios A + 1 −£52bn −£10bn 

Scenarios A + 2 −£56bn −£20bn 

Scenarios A + 3 −£49bn −£10bn 

Scenarios B + 1 −£41bn +£1bn 

Scenarios B + 2 −£45bn −£9bn 

Scenarios B + 3 −£39bn +£1bn 

*The upper and lower bounds in each column have been highlighted 

Uncertainty in cost estimates 
B3.66 Cost estimates for all the illustrative 
scenarios are subject to significant uncertainty 
given the range of assumptions included about the 
evolution of future economic growth, fossil fuel 
prices and technology costs so far into the future. 

B3.67 The tables below reflect the results of 
some limited sensitivity analysis on fossil fuel prices, 
technology costs and the extent of transport 
rebound effects and indicate that the overall 
costs of delivering the fourth carbon budget could 
vary significantly. 




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 179 

Technology sensitivities 
B3.68 In transport, government’s central 
assumption is that battery costs will fall to 
$300/kWh by 2030 (from up to $1,000/kWh 
reported currently). This contrasts with the 
Committee on Climate Change (CCC) analysis, 
which assumed that battery costs in 2030 would 
be $200/kWh. Table B17 shows how the NPV 
of the high transport ambition scenarios would 
change under different battery cost assumptions. 

Table B17: Sensitivity of the NPV estimates to 
vehicle battery costs (£ billion 2011) 

High ambition Low battery High battery 
transport costs  costs  

($150/kWh) ($800/kWh) 

Scenario 2  
−£12bn NPV 

−£3bn −£45bn 

Scenario 3  
−£2bn NPV 

+£7bn −£36bn 

B3.69 The modelling on the costs and benefits 
of low carbon heat shown here assumes that 
heat pumps’ coefficient of performance (COP) 
improves by 0.7 by 2030. This contrasts with the 
CCC’s assumption that the COP will improve 
by 1.5 by 2030. Table B18 shows how the NPV 
of Scenario 2 would change under different 
assumptions. The low improvement sensitivity 
assumes that the COP improves by no more than 
0.1. The high improvement sensitivity assumes that 
the COP improves by 1.5. 

Table B18: Sensitivity of the NPV estimates to 
improvements in heat pumps’ coefficient of 
performance 

Central Low High 
ambition low improvements improvements 
carbon heat in heat pump in heat pump 

COP COP 

Scenario 2 
−£12bn NPV 

−£15bn −£11bn 

Fossil fuel price sensitivities 
B3.70 Many of the abatement measures 
included in the illustrative scenarios also reduce 
the consumption of fossil fuels. This reduction 
in energy use is valued as a benefit. Given the 
uncertainty around energy prices, the Department 
of Energy and Climate Change frequently shows 
how costs and benefits would differ under 
different energy price assumptions. Table B19 
shows how the NPV of the high transport 
ambition scenarios would change if different fossil 
fuel price assumptions were used for the transport 
analysis.80 Note that these changes reflect 
changes to the NPV of the transport measures 
only. If the effect of different fossil prices were 
accounted for in all sectors, the change would be 
significantly larger. 

Table B19: Sensitivity of the NPV estimates to 
the fossil fuel price assumptions used for the 
transport analysis only (£ billion 2011) 

High ambition Low fossil fuel High fossil fuel 
transport prices prices 

Scenario 2  
−£12bn NPV 

−£20bn −£6bn 

Scenario 3  
−£2bn NPV 

−£10bn +£4bn 

B3.71 Table B20 shows how the NPV of Scenario 2 
would change if different fossil fuel price 
assumptions were used for the low carbon heat 
analysis. Note that these changes reflect changes to 
the NPV of the low carbon heat analysis only. 

80 For more information on the Department of Energy and Climate Change’s fossil fuel price assumptions see: www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/about/ 
ec_social_res/analytic_projs/ff_prices/ff_prices.aspx 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/about/ec_social_res/analytic_projs/ff_prices/ff_prices.aspx




180 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

Table B20: Sensitivity of the NPV estimates to 
the fossil fuel price assumptions used for the low 
carbon heat analysis only (£ billion 2011) 

Central 
ambition low 
carbon heat 

Low fossil fuel 
prices 

High fossil fuel 
prices 

Scenario 2 
−£12bn NPV 

−£12bn −£11bn 

Table B22: Sensitivity of the NPV estimates to 
the rebound effect in the transport analysis only 
(£ billion 2011) 

High ambition transport No rebound effect 

Scenario 2  
−£12bn NPV 

−£10bn 

Scenario 3  
−£2bn NPV 

−£0bn 

B3.72 Table B21 shows how the NPV of Scenario B 
(central demand) would change if different 
fossil fuel price assumptions were used for the 
power sector analysis. Note that these changes 
reflect changes to the NPV of the power sector 
analysis only. 

Table B21: Sensitivity of the NPV estimates to 
the fossil fuel price assumptions used for the 
power sector analysis only (£ billion 2011) 

Central Low fossil fuel High fossil fuel 
ambition power prices prices 
sector 

Scenario B −£8bn +£6bn 
(central demand) 
+£1bn NPV 

Rebound effect sensitivities 
B3.73 Evidence suggests that greater vehicle 
efficiency will result in a rebound effect, in 
which lower driving costs encourage additional 
driving. The costs of this additional driving, such 
as increased congestion, are included in the 
estimated total costs of the scenarios. Table B22 
shows how the NPV of the high transport 
ambition scenarios would change if the rebound 
effect were omitted, in order to demonstrate 
the significance of assumptions on the scale of the 
rebound effect. 




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 181 

B4. Wider impacts 
impact of energy and climate 
change policies on uK growth 
B4.1 Overall, studies indicate that the long-term 
growth benefit from avoiding climate change will 
exceed the cost of co-ordinated global action 
to tackle climate change by helping to avoid the 
potentially catastrophic implications of failing to 
act.81 In the shorter term, policies to meet the 
UK carbon budgets can bring economic benefits 
from increased resource and energy efficiency, 
innovation in low carbon technologies, and 
resilience to the impacts of high fossil fuel prices. 
However, there will be transition costs from the 
increased costs of energy for some businesses 
and households, the investment and innovation 
foregone in other areas, and the competitiveness 
impact if UK policy is out of step with competitor 
countries. Current economic circumstances 
highlight the need for climate policy to be cost 
effective, to maximise the economic benefits 
and growth opportunities and minimise negative 
impacts. 

B4.2 Most published analysis suggests that current 
UK ambition on climate change can be achieved 
without large impacts on overall short-term 
economic output. The impacts of the policies to 
meet the first three carbon budgets and illustrative 
measures to meet the fourth budget have been 
modelled using the HM Revenue and Customs 
Computable General Equilibrium model. Results 
indicate that the first three carbon budgets could 
be met at an average cost of around 0.4% of GDP 
a year over the period 2011–22, and the fourth 
carbon budget could be met at an average cost 
of around 0.6% of GDP a year over the period 
2023–27. The impacts on GDP could be lower or 
higher depending on a range of factors, including 

primary (fossil) energy costs and the costs of low 
carbon technologies. 

B4.3 It should be noted that this modelling does not 
reflect all the potential benefits and costs. On the 
benefits side, it does not reflect social externalities 
such as health benefits from, for example, improved 
air quality and lower congestion, innovation benefits 
are not fully captured, and the modelling largely 
assumes that the UK acts unilaterally, rather than 
reflecting action to reduce emissions by other 
countries. Importantly, the modelling results also do 
not account for the benefit of avoiding significant 
risks to future UK growth (particularly in the long 
term) from global climate change. On the costs side, 
the modelling assumes that policies are implemented 
both on time and to cost, and does not take account 
of any social costs such as the welfare impacts of any 
behaviour change (e.g. reduced travel). 

fiscal impact of energy and 
climate change policies 
B4.4 Meeting the fourth carbon budget requires 
no new policies this Parliament, and thus is 
consistent with Government’s deficit reduction 
plans as set out in Spending Review 2010, Budget 
2011, and the recent Autumn Statement. 

B4.5 In the longer term, government will take into 
account the fiscal impact, including the impacts on 
taxation, public spending and public borrowing, 
when deciding upon the mix of policies used to 
meet the fourth carbon budget. The technical 
abatement characterised in section B3 of this 
annex could be accessed by a range of different 
policies including voluntary agreements, regulation, 
taxation and spending. The fiscal impacts of climate 
policy will also depend upon a range of factors 
such as technology costs, carbon prices, fossil fuel 
prices and policy effectiveness. 

81	 The Stern Review (www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/sternreview_index.htm) found that the global costs of climate change could be between 5% and 20% 
of GDP per annum if we fail to act, dwarfing the costs of effective international action, estimated at 1–2% of global per capita consumption by 2050. 
The lower figure is a minimum. When the model incorporates non-market impacts and more recent scientific findings, the total average cost is 14.4%. 
The 20% figure also reflects the disproportionate burden of impacts on poor regions of the world. 

http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/sternreview_index.htm




182 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

B4.6 Broadly speaking, the taxable capacity of 
the economy is linked to GDP. Within overall 
taxable capacity, as noted by the Committee 
on Climate Change82 and the Office for Budget 
Responsibility,83 the move to a low carbon 
economy could increase receipts from some taxes 
while putting downward pressure on others, 
suggesting that the contribution of different taxes 
to revenues is likely to change over the long term. 
In the Coalition Agreement,84 the Government 
committed to increase the proportion of tax 
revenue accounted for by environmental taxes. 

impacts on electricity security 
of supply 
B4.7 There are three different linked challenges 
under the general banner of security of electricity 
supply: 

•	 diversification of supply: how to ensure that 
we are not over-reliant on one energy source 
or technology and reduce our exposure to high 
and volatile prices; 

•	 operational security: how to ensure that, 
moment to moment, supply matches demand, 
given unforeseen changes in both; and 

•	 resource adequacy: how to ensure that there is 
sufficient reliable capacity to meet demand, for 
example during winter anticyclonic conditions 
where demand is high and wind generation low 
for a number of days. 

B4.8 Increasing amounts of inflexible and/or 
intermittent low carbon generation should help to 
address the first challenge. However, a higher level 

of intermittent generation potentially makes the 
second and third challenges greater. 

B4.9 As part of the Electricity Market Reform 
(EMR) programme, the Department of Energy 
and Climate Change has concluded that there 
are risks to future security of electricity supply. 
The analysis and evidence underpinning that 
judgement are contained in the EMR White Paper 
and the accompanying Impact Assessment.85 In 
order to reduce the risks to security of electricity 
supply, the Department of Energy and Climate 
Change has indicated that a capacity mechanism is 
necessary and, as part of the EMR White Paper, 
the Government has consulted on the most 
appropriate type of capacity mechanism. The 
Government will publish its decision on the choice 
of capacity mechanism at the turn of the year. 

B4.10 The assessment of future security of 
electricity supply has been updated to take account 
of revised fossil fuel prices, demand assumptions 
and carbon values as part of the Carbon Plan. 
Evidence from modelling of the electricity system 
by consultants Redpoint Energy suggests that in 
the absence of a capacity mechanism, margins 
could fall to low levels and increase risks to security 
of supply. Chart B11 shows de-rated capacity 
margins over the period to 2030 under both 100 


g CO2

/kWh and 50 gCO


2

/kWh scenarios (i.e. the 

percentage by which generation exceeds peak 
demand taking into account the probability that 
plants of different types will be unavailable). It also 
shows that with a capacity mechanism, margins can 
be maintained at a higher level.86 

B4.11 The years immediately after 2010 are 
characterised by increasing capacity margins. This 
is a result of a combination of pre-committed 

82	 Committee on Climate Change (2010) The Fourth Carbon Budget: Reducing emissions through the 2020s. Available at: www.theccc.org.uk/reports/fourth­
carbon-budget 

83	 Office for Budget Responsibility (2011) Fiscal Sustainability Report. Available at: http://budgetresponsibility.independent.gov.uk/fiscal-sustainability-report­
july-2011/ 

84 www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/news/coalition-documents 
85 See: www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/legislation/white_papers/emr_wp_2011/emr_wp_2011.aspx 
86	 Note that the capacity mechanism reflected in this chart is a strategic reserve, but in the modelling, either a strategic reserve or a market-wide mechanism 

will have the effect of increasing de-rated capacity margins to around 10% or as close as is possible given the lumpy nature of investment. 

http://www.theccc.org.uk/reports/fourth-carbon-budget
http://budgetresponsibility.independent.gov.uk/fiscal-sustainability-report-july-2011/
http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/news/coalition-documents
http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/legislation/white_papers/emr_wp_2011/emr_wp_2011.aspx




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 183 

Chart B11: De-rated peak capacity margins under different power sector scenarios 


0% 5% 




10% 




15% 




20% 




25% 




30% 




35% 


Contracts for difference (CfD) with capacity mechanism CfD – 50 gCO2/kWh CfD – 100 gCO2/kWh 

203020252020 
Year 

20152010 


De-rated capacity margin 

gas-fired stations coming online and demand 
being lower than expected given the economic 
downturn. After 2012, the de-rated capacity 
margin falls as old coal stations are scheduled to 
retire under the Large Combustion Plant Directive 
around the middle of the decade, and nuclear 
plants reach the end of their scheduled lifetimes. 
Note that demand is not projected to rise to 2020 
due to relatively low economic growth forecasts 
and improvements in energy efficiency. However, 
plant retirements and increasing amounts of 
intermittent generation lead the de-rated capacity 
margin to fall below 10% in the early 2020s and 
reaching 5% in more than one year under both 
decarbonisation policies. 

B4.12 Note that in the modelling analysis, 
following a 100 gCO


2

/kWh or 50 gCO


2

/kWh 

decarbonisation trajectory makes relatively little 
difference in terms of capacity margins as the 
modelling assumes that retirement and new build 
decisions for unabated fossil fuel plant adjust to 
the different wholesale price signals under the 
two scenarios. In the 100 gCO


2

/kWh scenario, the 

wholesale electricity market provides sufficient 
price signals for investment in new gas stations. In 
the 50 gCO


2

/kWh scenario, wholesale electricity 

prices fall significantly due to the amount of new 
low carbon, low generating cost plant in the 
generation mix, thereby reducing the opportunities 
for conventional generators to earn a return on 
their investment. Consequently, there is no new 
investment in gas power stations beyond the  
pre-committed gas plant that comes online around 
2012. Under both scenarios, a capacity mechanism 
reduces the risk of demand not being met. 




184 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

sustainability and wider 
environmental impacts 

Summary 
B4.13 Policies to meet the fourth carbon budget 
pose risks and opportunities relating to air quality, 
water, noise, biodiversity and landscape and their 
associated ecosystem services. Increased use of 
bioenergy in particular appears to have the greatest 
potential impacts on the wider environment. 

B4.14 Scenario 3, which assumes high abatement 
from electrification, has the highest potential 
benefits for air quality and noise. 

B4.15 Various mechanisms exist already to limit 
extreme impacts on the wider environment from 
decarbonisation policies; however, the use of an 
ecosystem approach at policy and project level is 
needed to achieve a more optimal use of natural 
capital that addresses risks and synergies at the 
appropriate spatial scale. 

Purpose, scope and approach 
B4.16 This section offers a preliminary and broad 
assessment of the wider environmental impacts 
of the policy directions and scenarios envisaged 
for the fourth carbon budget. Section 13(3) of the 
Climate Change Act 2008 states that proposals 
and policies for meeting carbon budgets must, 
when taken as a whole, ‘be such as to contribute 
to sustainable development’. Tackling climate 
change is essential for maintaining a healthy, 
resilient natural environment, as highlighted in 
the Government’s Natural Environment White 
Paper,87 published in June 2011. The White Paper 
re-committed to ensuring that the value of nature 
(which is often hidden) is appropriately reflected in 
all relevant policy decisions.88 

B4.17 The White Paper, building on the ground-
breaking UK National Ecosystem Assessment 
(NEA), uses the concept of ‘natural capital’: nature 
represents a stock of assets, which provides 
flows of ‘ecosystem services’89 from which society 
benefits in numerous although often undervalued 
ways. It includes living things in all their diversity, 
the landscape and its heritage, wildlife, rivers, lakes 
and seas, urban green space, woodland and farmed 
land. Natural capital interacts with produced, 
human and social capital to support economic 
activity and human wellbeing.90 

B4.18 Monetised estimates of the ecosystem 
values at stake are partial and uncertain but 
substantial. For instance, one major study 
found that optimising climate change policies 
to improve air quality could yield benefits of 
£24 billion by 2050; the annual value of protecting 
marine biodiversity in UK waters is estimated at 
£1.7 billion, and the annual benefits of achieving 
good ecological status for water bodies are in the 
region of £1 billion. The NEA sets out further 
evidence on monetised values classified by 
ecosystem service type.91 

B4.19 A range of policies at domestic and 
European level have been developed to safeguard 
and enhance these values, such as air emission 
limits, the Water Framework Directive, the 
Birds and Habitats Directive, the Environmental 
Noise Directive and marine planning. In October 
2010 the UK Government played a key role in 
concluding the historic global agreement in Nagoya 
to protect and enhance biodiversity worldwide, 
which led to the England Biodiversity Strategy, 
launched in August 2011. The strategy, like the 
NEA, emphasises the importance of long-term 
planning to achieve a more integrated use of 
natural capital that delivers multiple ecosystem 
services. The White Paper and the NEA also stress 

87 Defra (2011) The Natural Choice: securing the value of nature. Available from: www.defra.gov.uk/environment/natural/whitepaper/ 
88	 This assessment is intended to also inform the White Paper commitment to ‘establishing a research programme to fill evidence gaps about impacts on the 

natural environment of the level of infrastructure needed to meet 2050 [low carbon] objectives’. 
89 See: Millennium Ecosystem Assessment and TEEB (2010) The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity. These services have been categorised as: provisioning 

(e.g. food, timber); regulating (e.g. water purification, pollination); cultural (e.g. recreation, aesthetic) and supporting (e.g. soil formation, genetic diversity). 
90 Defra (2010) A Framework for Understanding the Social Impacts of Policy and their Effects on Wellbeing. 

Available from: www.defra.gov.uk/publications/files/pb13467-social-impacts-wellbeing-110403.pdf 
91 See: www.defra.gov.uk/publications/files/pb13583-biodiversity-strategy-2020-110817.pdf 

http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/natural/whitepaper/
http://www.defra.gov.uk/publications/files/pb13467-social-impacts-wellbeing-110403.pdf
http://www.defra.gov.uk/publications/files/pb13583-biodiversity-strategy-2020-110817.pdf




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 185 

the need for decision making at appropriate spatial 
scales, valuing changes in services where possible 
but considering ‘shared social values’ as well as 
economic valuations. 

B4.20 The Department for Environment, Food 
and Rural Affairs (Defra) environmental appraisal 
guidance incorporates this ecosystems approach 
and the White Paper has also committed to 
publishing supplementary HM Treasury Green 
Book guidance on valuing the natural environment 
in appraisals.92 This guidance has informed 
this initial assessment and will be important 
to incorporate into policy and project 
development. 

Assessment of risks and opportunities 
B4.21 Table B23 below summarises the most 
important risks, synergies and trade-offs that 
the fourth carbon budget presents to the wider 
environment. The rest of this section provides 
a more detailed assessment by type of measure 
and sector, and the potential for mitigating risks, 
drawing on qualitative and (for air and noise) 
quantitative analysis. 

B4.22 A high-level assessment of the impacts from 
the fourth carbon budget scenarios in the wider 
environment is set out in the list on page 186, 
followed by more detail on particular technologies 
and their wider impacts. 

Table B23: Risks and opportunities associated with the fourth carbon budget 

Risks Opportunities 

Air quality •	 Use of biomass, with an estimated cost of 
£48 million in Scenario A and £31 million for 
the non-traded Scenario 2 

•	 Transport – increased fuel efficiency leading 
to increased vehicle usage 

•	 Clean electricity production (excluding 
biomass) has potential benefits of between 
£25 million and £72 million for Scenarios A 
and B respectively 

•	 Electrification of transport creates potential 
benefits of approximately £102 million (as per 
Scenario 1) 

Biodiversity •	 Potential long-term impacts from the 
conversion of natural habitats to comply 
with high bioenergy scenarios (i.e. increased 
use of biomass and biofuels from first 
generation crops) 

•	 Potential benefits if domestic bioenergy 
expansion brings unmanaged woodland into 
management and diversifies range of habitats 

•	 Cleaner power stations could reduce 
eutrophication 

Landscape •	 Potential risks from siting and design of new 
electricity generation infrastructure 

•	 Potential benefits where fourth carbon 
budget policies incentivise active management 
of woodlands (bioenergy) 

Noise and •	 Transport – increased vehicle efficiency •	 Impacts of transport measures, including 
nuisance leading to increased vehicle usage 

•	 Noise from some renewable sources may 
lead to unwelcome neighbourhood­ level 
impacts 

sustainable travel measures, could reduce 
noise, with a net benefit of £61 million in 
Scenario 1 

Marine •	 Risk of impacts to marine habitat and noise­
sensitive species from expansion of offshore 
activities and tidal energy 

•	 Possible ecological benefits from the artificial 
reef provided by foundations to offshore 
wind turbines 

Water •	 Impacts on water availability arising from 
abstraction by new power stations, depending 
on location and climate 

•	 Ground-source heating and cooling schemes 
impact water quality and ecology 

•	 Fourth carbon budget policies could 
incentivise active management of woodlands 
(bioenergy) 

92 See: www.defra.gov.uk/corporate/about/how/policy-guidance/env-impact-guide/ 

http://www.defra.gov.uk/corporate/about/how/policy-guidance/env-impact-guide/




186 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

•	 Scenario 1, having a focus on high abatement in 
low carbon heat, implies that higher tensions are 
expected from noise. 

•	 Scenario 2, which has a focus on high 
abatement in transport and bioenergy demand, 
is associated with higher tensions in air quality 
and biodiversity from increased biomass use, 
although there may be some biodiversity and 
landscape benefits. 

•	 Scenario 3, which has a focus on high 
electrification, has the highest potential benefits 
for air quality and noise. 

•	 Scenario 4 and Scenario B allow for the use 
of international credits and so the ambition 
of domestic climate change mitigation 
policies is reduced. As a result, both potential 
opportunities and risks could be shifted abroad. 

•	 Scenario A refers to high ambition in the 
power sector and presents a wider range of 
potential for tensions: air quality, landscape, 
noise, water and marine. There is potential for 
mixed impacts in biodiversity and waste, but 
also some potential opportunities for air quality. 

Agricultural measures 
B4.23 On-farm voluntary measures contained 
in the fourth carbon budget offer both synergies 
and tensions between reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions and other environmental outcomes, 
such as air quality, biodiversity and water pollution. 
Broader soil measures to reduce carbon (such 
as measures to maintain soil organic matter and 
reduction in the horticultural use of peat as 
outlined in the Natural Environment White Paper) 
could bring carbon and biodiversity benefits. Defra 
will be working with stakeholders to minimise 
adverse impacts and develop integrated advice  
for farmers. 

Low carbon heat and bioenergy 
expansion 
B4.24 One of the fourth carbon budget scenarios 
focuses on the expansion of low carbon heat 
using technologies such as ground-source heat 
pumps and air-source heat pumps (Scenario 1). 

There is a need to carefully balance the desire to 
see take-up in these technologies with the need 
to ensure that local impacts are acceptable. Unless 
properly designed, ground-source heat pumps 
can pose risks to water ecology. Air-source heat 
pumps can also produce unwelcome noise for the 
surrounding neighbourhood; poor siting, installation 
and maintenance can exacerbate these effects. 
Where the fourth carbon budget scenarios focus 
on the expansion of biomass use for electricity 
and/or low carbon heat (as per Scenario 2 in the 
non-traded sector and Scenario A in the traded 
sector), this can have unintended environmental 
impacts that must also be considered. A large-
scale move to biomass boilers could emit levels 
of harmful particulate matter and nitrous oxide 
that impact on air quality. This may in turn 
threaten compliance with both ambient air quality 
and national emission ceilings directives. The air 
quality impacts of the increased use of biomass 
under Scenario A are around £48 million and 
approximately £31 million for Scenario 2 where 
there is low carbon heat ambition but relatively 
higher use of biomass compared with Scenarios 1 
and 3. 

B4.25 Domestically, a change of land management 
from arable crops or grassland to biomass or 
energy crops brings opportunities as well as risks. 
More active and sustainable management of 
woodlands for wood fuel could lead to landscape, 
recreational and biodiversity gains. Analysis in the 
National Ecosystem Assessment (NEA) (using 
Wales as a case study) highlights the potential 
for major recreational benefits where woodland 
is created in lowland urban fringe areas, close 
to population centres. It also indicates the dual 
risks where the planting of forests in peatland 
areas dries out wetlands and can result in net 
carbon release rather than storage. There is 
strong evidence to support woodland creation 
in appropriate locations to achieve water 
management and water quality objectives, including 
tackling diffuse pollution and regulating water flow. 

B4.26 Department of Energy and Climate Change 
analysis on the sustainability of bioenergy supply 
highlights that certain sectors may need to rely 
on imports to meet demand in the near and 
longer term (i.e. biofuels for transport, and woody 




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 187 

biomass and domestic biogas for heat). This could 
lead to land use change abroad, with direct or 
indirect loss of natural or near natural habitats/ 
ecosystems and the services provided to local 
populations if adequate sustainability controls are 
not in place. See from paragraph B4.42 below for a 
discussion on bioenergy supply. 

B4.27 Combined heat and power could also have 
air quality impacts by moving combustion closer 
to residential locations. Some of these negative 
impacts may be offset through associated increases 
in efficiency and emissions control. 

B4.28 Potential to mitigate risks: Air pollution 
from the combustion of biomass can be controlled 
through strong limits on the levels of emissions 
on both large-scale use (through the Industrial 
Emissions Directive) and small-scale sources (such 
as introducing emissions standards on domestic 
boilers). Negative landscape impacts could be 
minimised by carefully considering the location 
of land use changes and uptake of sustainable 
management practices. The ability to reduce site 
specific impacts on biodiversity is reinforced by 
current requirements to carry out Environmental 
Impact Assessments (EIAs) where there are likely 
to be significant environmental effects. Through 
judicious choice of location, good design and 
good management, there will be opportunities to 
mitigate and in some places enhance biodiversity 
and associated ecosystem services as envisaged in 
national biodiversity action plans. 

New power plants 
B4.29 Virtually all nationally significant energy 
infrastructure projects will have effects on the 
landscape. Landscape effects depend on the 
existing character of the local landscape, how 
highly it is valued and its capacity to accommodate 
change. Impacts on biodiversity may be reduced 
by the construction of cleaner power stations 
(coal power stations produce nitrogen oxides that 
cause eutrophication and acidification), but there 
may also be potential for habitat disturbance from 
construction of stations and power lines. 

B4.30 Impacts on water availability could occur in 
the future if new stations are built in areas where 
water or discharge capacities are not adequately 
developed. These impacts could exacerbate 
future water availability issues as a result of climate 
change and population growth. Traditional power 
plants tend to have low water loss93 factors, which 
vary depending on the generation type and the 
method of cooling used, yet volumes of water 
abstracted can impact on fish and other aquatic 
life. Reduction in river flows due to climate change 
could exacerbate this issue. Carbon capture and 
storage (CCS) can increase water use. Recent 
studies of the extra water demand associated 
with CCS indicate that it can increase water use 
by 91–100%,94 which may have implications in the 
catchments where fossil fuel power stations are 
currently clustered. This could make such CCS 
power stations more vulnerable at low water 
flow times (late summer), with potential to affect 
security of electricity supply. Defra is working 
closely with the Department of Energy and 
Climate Change and the Environment Agency 
over the coming year to further understand 
these issues. 

B4.31 CCS could also have an impact on air 
quality as CCS requires more power (in particular 
for capture and compression) than conventional 
plants. However, it should be noted that plants 
fitted with CCS will have to comply with emissions 
limits set by the Industrial Emissions Directive. 
CCS generation as assumed in Scenario A, where 
carbon intensity in the power sector falls to  
50 g/kWh by 2030, leads to an estimated air 
quality cost of around £69 million relative to a 
counterfactual without the Electricity Market 
Reform measures. In contrast, Scenario B, with 
a carbon intensity of 100 g/kWh by 2030 and a 
lower reliance on CCS generation relative to the 
same counterfactual, leads to an estimated benefit 
of £3 million. 

B4.32 Potential to mitigate risks: There are 
various ways to minimise the wider environmental 
impacts of new power stations, including measures 
that can be taken at the planning and design 

93 Water that is not returned to the river after being used for cooling (such as water losses produced by evaporation). 
94	 Zhai, H and Rubin, ES (2010) Performance and cost of wet and dry cooling systems for pulverised coal power plants with and without carbon capture and 

storage. Energy Policy 38(6):5653–5660; National Energy Technology Laboratory (2005) Power Plant Water Usage and Loss Study. United States Department 
of Energy. 




188 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

stage. The Overarching National Policy Statement 
for Energy sets out guidance for considering the 
wider impacts of nationally significant energy 
developments, including when they are proposed 
within a protected area.95 

Offshore and onshore wind power 
B4.33 Commercial-scale wind turbines by their 
nature (typically 125–150 m tall) will have an 
impact on the landscape and seascape. There 
may also be impacts on areas that are important 
for nature and heritage conservation. Large-scale 
wind farms, especially offshore, also pose significant 
demands for new cable links and substations that 
can cover large areas (around 20 ha). 

B4.34 The construction of offshore turbines 
mainly poses risks for marine biodiversity. Noise 
from exploration, construction, operation and 
decommissioning of wind power can have a 
negative impact on noise-sensitive species. While 
new offshore turbine foundations that provide 
a hard substrate can increase the diversity of 
the immediate environment, they can also act 
as stepping stones for invasive species that can 
colonise and spread. 

B4.35 Potential to mitigate risks: National Policy 
Statements (NPSs) for energy infrastructure and 
other planning policy steer major and large-scale 
commercial development of onshore turbines 
away from protected landscapes and internationally 
designated sites. For onshore wind turbines that 
are likely to have significant environmental effects, 
an EIA will be necessary, which should identify 
mitigation measures to remove or reduce the 
effects to acceptable levels. 

B4.36 Larger offshore wind developments will 
be covered by NPSs for energy instrastructure, 
while wider decisions on offshore development96 

will now be taken under the new system of 
marine planning and licensing. Regulators will 
also require an EIA for any renewable energy 
licence applications where there is a likelihood of 
significant environmental effects and will identify 

mitigation options. There are explicit requirements 
under the Marine Strategy Framework Directive 
to ensure that permanent alterations to 
hydrographical conditions, including underwater 
noise, do not adversely affect the marine 
environment. 

Tidal and wave power generation 
B4.37 Tidal energy generation and installation 
can affect marine biodiversity through habitat 
change and loss, depending upon the type of 
device and habitat. Devices with moving parts are 
likely to have greater impacts than those without. 
Tidal power may also affect the characteristics of 
the flow regime in estuaries. There may also be 
the potential for direct impacts on species, for 
example barrier effects (especially for migratory 
species), collisions and noise from installation, 
operation and decommissioning. 

Transport 
B4.38 There are potential synergies and tensions 
for air quality in the transport sector that relate to 
measures identified in the fourth carbon budget. 
The transport measures assumed in Scenario 1 
lead to potential improvements in air quality of 
around £102 million over the period (2011–27). 
This figure only takes into account the direct 
impacts on transport emissions, with the additional 
power sector impacts accounted for elsewhere. 

B4.39 Noise benefits under this scenario would 
be approximately £61 million and relate to 
sustainable transport measures, which reduce car 
kilometres travelled, as well as some additional 
benefits from increased electrification. 

B4.40 Improvements in average fuel efficiency 
that are achieved through increased conventional 
car fuel efficiency would have notable noise 
impacts. Analysis of the impacts of current policies 
that help to meet the first three carbon budgets 
reveals significant costs associated with increased 
noise and nuisance (approximately £402 million 
over the period). This is mainly a consequence 
of the increase in kilometres driven in response 

95 DECC (2011) Overarching National Policy Statement for Energy (EN-1). 
96 This framework also applies to tidal and wave power generation as described in the next section. 




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 189

to greater fuel efficiency and the resultant fall in 
driving costs.

B4.41 Potential to mitigate impacts: Higher 
blends of biofuels than are currently envisaged 
for use in the UK vehicle fleet could potentially 
increase emissions from vehicles97, whereas 
others – such as biomethane – can deliver air 
quality benefits. Moving away from diesel vehicles 
could also have a positive impact on air quality. 
Any actions that encourage the electrification of 
the vehicle fleet are expected to improve both 
environmental noise by reducing engine noise and 
air pollution by reducing emissions. 

Sustainability of bioenergy resource 
supply
B4.42 A high-level assessment was carried out 
to compare current estimates of sustainable 

bioenergy supply with the bioenergy demand 
trajectories forecast for the Carbon Plan. 

B4.43 The potential range of bioenergy demand 
was derived from the emissions projections and 
analysis of the additional abatement measures 
described from paragraph B3.26. This consolidated 
the demand for biofuels from transport; the 
demand for biomass and biogas from low carbon 
heat measures; and the use of waste and biomass 
in electricity generation. The available supply 
of bioenergy was considered drawing on three 
scenarios from AEA’s UK and Global Bioenergy 
Resource report98 and E4Tech’s99 biofuel supply 
projections for the Department for Transport 
Modes work. 

B4.44 The analysis suggests that, when 
considering bioenergy as a whole, there should 
be sufficient sustainable supply to meet demand 

Chart B12: Biomass supply and demand, including heat, power and transport, 2020–30 (petajoules)

2,500

2,000

1,500

1,000


Petajoules5000

2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025



Year


2026 2027 2028 2029 2030

Supply high Supply central Scenario 2 Scenarios 1 & 3

Scenario 4 Supply low Supply extra low

97 Such as NOx from high strength biodiesel or aldehydes from bioethanol.
98 AEA (2011) ‘UK and Global Bioenergy Resource – Final report’. 
99 See: www.e4tech.com/en/consulting-projects.html#Bioenergy

http://www.e4tech.com/en/consulting-projects.html#Bioenergy




190 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 

trajectories. Chart B12 shows total biomass 
supply and demand for the heat, power and 
transport sectors. 

B4.45 However, considering biomass as a whole 
can mask the sustainable supply constraints that 
may be felt for certain sectors and technologies. 
Although the actual deployment levels are highly 
uncertain and will depend on investment decisions 
that renewable energy generators choose to 
make based on the economics of the technologies, 
scenario analysis of the potential pathways indicates 
that some tensions between supply and demand 
for feedstocks could appear during the 2020s. 

B4.46 Although domestic resources will play an 
important role in the supply of woody biomass, the 
UK is likely to require significant woody biomass 
imports in addition to UK resources. To meet the 
demand of the potential deployment trajectories 
to 2030 would require a greater proportion of 
woodland resource to be managed for wood 
fuel production, more woody feedstocks to be 
harvested and, possibly, the establishment of new 
energy forests and short rotation coppice. Higher 
demand trajectories might also require a significant 
expansion of marginal land devoted to woody 
biomass production to meet the demand from 
domestic sources. The use of energy crops would 
also play an important role in meeting potential 
needs. Removing energy crops from supply 
estimates in order to test for the uncertainties of 
the availability of these resources given potential 
land availability and indirect impact constraints 
shows that supply could be sufficient to meet 
demand in the near term but that tensions could 
start appearing from the mid 2020s onwards. 

B4.47 In addition, demand for biofuels may 
also prove constrained in low sustainable supply 
scenarios for the fourth carbon budget period, 
especially when considering biodiesel feedstocks. 
However, testing higher availability scenarios based 
on the existing literature shows that sustainable 
supply could be sufficient to meet the potential 
ranges of demand. Future supply for biodiesel and 
bioethanol will largely depend on the sustainability 
of first generation feedstocks and the impact of 
forthcoming policy on indirect land use change. 

B4.48 Finally, the scenario analysis also shows that 
the supply of feedstocks for biogas in the heat 
sector may prove constrained and potentially 
hinder the significant deployment in the sector 
over the fourth carbon budget period. In contrast, 
supply of biogas to the power sector, which uses 
different feedstocks100 than the heat sector, is 
expected to surpass demand for the whole period. 

B4.49 The analysis highlights that, in future, 
different technologies and sectors are likely to 
experience different pressures on the availability 
of sustainable feedstocks. This will have an impact 
on the price at which the UK can access these 
feedstocks and will depend not only on the UK’s 
ability to successfully exploit domestic resources 
but also on the development of international 
markets and associated demand. The forthcoming 
cross-government Bioenergy Strategy will make 
a more thorough assessment of the potential 
availability of sustainable feedstocks to 2020 
and beyond and the implications of this on the 
potential role of bioenergy across electricity, heat 
and transport as a way of achieving cost effective 
carbon reductions. 

100 This analysis assumes total supply of biogas from: sewage sludge, landfill gas, food waste and livestock manure. It is assumed that the power sector uses only 
biogas from sewage sludge and landfill. 




B5. Detailed tables 
emissions by sector 
The table below shows the updated emissions projections (UEP) broken down by the main National Communication sectors.101 

Table B24: Projected net UK carbon account by sector, National Communication basis (MtCO


2e) 

Total greenhouse gas emissions (MtCO


2e) 

National 
Communication 
sector breakdown 

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 

Energy supply 219 195 196 184 185 178 177 166 150 145 131 127 129 124 118 116 115 110 104 100 

Business 97 86 94 91 90 90 91 91 89 88 86 84 82 82 81 79 78 78 77 77 

Industrial processes 16 10 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 12 

Transport 128 122 122 118 117 117 116 115 114 113 112 111 109 112 111 111 110 109 108 108 

Residential 83 79 88 79 76 72 71 70 69 68 68 67 66 67 67 68 68 69 70 70 

Public 9 8 9 10 10 10 10 10 10 9 9 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 

Agriculture 50 49 50 49 49 49 49 49 48 47 47 46 46 45 46 46 46 46 46 46 

Land use change −4 −4 −4 −3 −3 −3 −3 −2 −2 −2 −2 −2 −1 −1 −1 −1 0 0 0 0 

Waste management 18 18 18 17 17 16 15 15 15 14 14 13 13 13 12 12 12 12 11 11 

Total 618 564 586 557 553 541 538 524 505 495 476 467 463 461 454 450 448 442 436 431 

EU ETS allowances 
purchased by UK 

19 −12 −7 −23 −21 −4 1 −6 −17 −19 −29 −28 −22 −27 −29 22 21 16 11 6 

Net UK carbon 
account102 

599 576 593 579 575 545 538 531 523 514 505 495 486 489 483 428 427 426 425 425 

101 See: www.decc.gov.uk/en/consent/cms/about/ec_social_res/analytic_projs/en_emis_projs/en_emis_projs.aspx 
102 The net UK carbon account estimates for the fourth carbon budget (2023–27) assume an EU ETS cap of 690 MtCO


2e. A

nnex B


: Carbo


n budgets analytical annex 191 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/consent/cms/about/ec_social_res/analytic_projs/en_emis_projs/en_emis_projs.aspx




emissions savings by policy 
The tables in this section set out the updated policy emissions savings to deliver the first three carbon budgets.103, 104 

Table B25: Projected non-traded sector emissions savings by policy in the baseline (MtCO e)105 


2

Residential 

Building Regulations Part L (2002 
and 2005/06) 

Warm Front and fuel poverty 
measures 

Supplier Obligation (EEC1, EEC2, 
original CERT) 

Total 

Carbon budget 1 Carbon budget 2 Carbon budget 3 

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 

2.6 3.2 3.7 4.5 4.9 5.4 5.8 6.2 6.5 6.8 7.1 7.3 7.5 7.3 6.9 

−1.2 −1.4 −1.7 −1.8 −1.8 −1.7 −1.4 −1.2 −1.1 −0.9 −0.8 −0.7 −0.5 −0.4 −0.2 

1.9 2.7 3.9 5.2 5.4 5.4 5.5 5.4 5.4 5.7 5.8 5.8 5.5 5.1 4.8 

3.3 4.4 5.9 7.8 8.5 9.1 9.8 10.4 10.8 11.5 12.0 12.4 12.5 12.0 11.6 

Carbon budget period 

1 2 3 

2008– 


12 

2013– 


17 

2018– 


22 

18.8 30.6 36.1 

−7.9 −6.3 −2.7 

19.0 27.4 27.0 

30.0 51.6 60.5 

Commercial and public services 

Carbon Trust measures 1.2 1.1 1.1 0.9 0.7 0.6 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 4.8 2.0 0.5 

Energy Performance of Buildings 
Directive106 

0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.5 1.5 1.5 

UK Emissions Trading Scheme 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 

Building Regulations Part L (2002 
and 2005/06) 

0.7 0.9 1.0 1.2 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.4 5.1 7.0 7.5 

Total 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.4 2.2 2.2 2.1 2.0 2.1 2.1 2.0 1.9 1.9 1.8 1.7 11.5 10.4 9.4 

103 For detail on how the policy emissions savings have been modelled please see chapter 4 of the latest published Updated Energy and Emissions Projections report available from:  
www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/about/ec_social_res/analytic_projs/en_emis_projs/en_emis_projs.aspx 

104 Demand reduction through the impact of price uplifts are included in the baseline and have generally not been quantified in these tables. The exceptions are the impact of the EU ETS carbon price and Carbon Price Floor 
in the ESI, which are quantified. Such price impacts arise from: CCL fuel duties, the need to purchase CRC allowances and the cost recovery of policy measures undertaken by energy suppliers, this includes supply side 
measures such as grid reinforcement, RO and FiTs, as well as CERT/ECO. 

105 For the purposes of this table, baseline is akin to the updated emissions projections baseline (pre-Low Carbon Transition Plan policies). The table shows emissions savings from only some of the policies included in the 
baseline. It is not possible to quantify the emissions savings from all baseline policies individually. However, it should be noted that this does not impact on either the baseline or any of the newer policy emissions projections 
scenarios. Savings in the transport sector from the Renewable Transport Fuels Obligation and EU voluntary agreements on new car emissions have been published previously. These have not been re-estimated for this 
publication. 

106 The original Energy Performance of Buildings Directive (EPBD) introduced Energy Performance Certificates, Display Energy Certificates and other measures to improve the energy performance of buildings. Carbon 
savings given here only reflect the impact of the policy on the small and medium-sized enterprises sector, to avoid overlap with policies in other areas. The numbers relating to the EPBD in this annex are the same as given 
in the Low Carbon Transition Plan (DECC, 2009) and so are not consistent with numbers for the other policies here, which use updated energy and carbon assumptions. The EPBD recast currently being developed does not 
feature in these numbers owing to overlaps with the savings already accounted for elsewhere. 

192 A
nnex B


: Carbo


n budgets analytical annex 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/about/ec_social_res/analytic_projs/en_emis_projs/en_emis_projs.aspx




Industry 

Carbon Trust measures 

UK Emissions Trading Scheme 

Building Regulations Part L (2002 
and 2005/06) 

Total 

Carbon budget 1 Carbon budget 2 Carbon budget 3 

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 

0.5 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 

0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 

0.3 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.6 0.6 

1.0 1.0 1.1 1.1 1.0 0.9 0.9 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.6 

Carbon budget period 

1 2 3 

2008– 


12 

2013– 


17 

2018– 


22 

2.2 0.9 0.3 

0.9 0.4 0.1 

2.1 3.0 3.2 

5.2 4.3 3.5 

Overall total 6.5 7.7 9.4 11.2 11.7 12.2 12.8 13.3 13.7 14.4 14.8 15.1 15.1 14.5 13.9 46.6 66.4 73.4 


A

nnex B


: Carbo


n budgets analytical annex 193 




Table B26: Projected non-traded sector emissions savings by policy additional to the baseline (MtCO e)107 


2

Carbon budget period 

Carbon budget 1 Carbon budget 2 Carbon budget 3 1 2 3 

Residential 
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2008– 


12 

2013– 


17 

2018– 


22 


Supplier Obligation (CERT +20% 
and CERT extension) 

0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 2.0 4.1 4.1 4.1 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.1 4.0 3.9 3.9 2.7 20.3 19.9 

Building Regulations Part L (2010) 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.1 1.5 1.8 2.1 2.4 2.7 3.0 3.2 3.5 0.4 7.4 14.9 

Smart Metering108 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 0.1 2.1 5.0 

EU Products policy (Tranche 1, 
Legislated)109 

0.0 0.0 −0.2 −0.5 −0.7 −1.0 −1.2 −1.4 −1.6 −1.7 −1.9 −2.0 −2.0 −2.0 −1.9 −1.4 −7.0 −9.8 

EU Products policy (Tranche 2, 
Proposed)110 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.5 −0.1 0.0 2.1 

Community Energy Saving 
Programme 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.3 

Zero Carbon Homes 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.0 0.1 2.0 

Energy Company Obligation and 
Domestic Green Deal111 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.6 0.9 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.2 1.4 1.5 0.0 4.4 6.9 

Renewable Heat Incentive 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.8 0.9 0.9 0.9 0.1 1.6 4.1 

Total 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.0 1.8 4.4 5.0 5.8 6.6 7.4 8.1 8.7 9.0 9.5 10.0 1.9 29.2 45.3 

107 This table shows non-traded emissions savings additional to the baseline (Low Carbon Transition Plan and newer policies). 
108 All Smart Metering emissions savings are based on the latest published Impact Assessment, available at: www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/consultation/smart-metering-imp-prog/2549-smart-meter-rollout-domestic-ia-180811.pdf 
109 Products policy includes legally binding EU minimum standards on energy-related products, which raise the minimum level of efficiency of energy-using products available in the market. It also includes labelling which 

encourages manufacturers to go beyond the minimum standards. The first tranche of measures has been delivered; the energy savings are taken from the related Impact Assessments. 
110 The second tranche of measures has not been completed and therefore any projected savings are less well understood, as the scope, timing and stringency of these measures has not been finalised. The current modelling 

reports projections of energy savings from products policy. These are more uncertain over later years as it becomes less clear whether products policies drive efficiency improvements, or whether this would be driven 
regardless by (i) consumers’ future preferences for better products, and/or (ii) forecast energy prices and traded carbon prices that increase at a faster rate post-2020. Tapers are applied post-2020 to signal uncertainties 
in the long run on energy savings. For the net present values, further caution still is applied, with the estimates provided only for the savings until the end of the third carbon budget reporting period – given that it is unclear 
whether the market will have responded or whether energy efficiency improvements will need to continue to be delivered through products policy in later years. 

111 All ECO and Domestic Green Deal emissions savings are based on the latest Impact Assessment. The latest estimates differ from the estimates included in the October 2011 Updated Emissions Projections which are 
based on the December 2010 Impact Assessment and include heating measures. Non-traded emissions savings fall in 2020 owing to assumptions about the roll-out of heat systems in fuel poor households. See the Impact 
Assessment for further details: www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/consultation/green-deal/3603-green-deal-eco-ia.pdf 

194 A
nnex B


: Carbo


n budgets analytical annex 

http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/consultation/smart-metering-imp-prog/2549-smart-meter-rollout-domestic-ia-180811.pdf
http://www.decc.gov.uk/assets/decc/11/consultation/green-deal/3603-green-deal-eco-ia.pdf




Commercial and public servicesl 

Building Regulations Part L (2010) 

Business Smart Metering 

EU Products policy (Tranche 1, 
Legislated) 

EU Products policy (Tranche 2, 
Proposed) 

Small business energy efficiency 
interest-free loans 

Salix, public sector loans, 10% 
commitment for central govt 

Non-Domestic Green Deal 

Carbon Reduction Commitment 
Energy Efficiency Scheme 

Renewable Heat Incentive 

Total 

Carbon budget 1 Carbon budget 2 Carbon budget 3 

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.8 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.4 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.7 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.2 −0.2 −0.2 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 

0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.7 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.7 1.2 1.7 2.4 3.2 4.0 4.9 4.9 4.9 

0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.5 0.8 1.2 2.1 3.0 4.2 5.4 6.5 7.5 7.7 7.8 

Carbon budget period 

1 2 3 

2008– 


12 

2013– 


17 

2018– 


22 

0.1 1.7 3.4 

0.0 1.4 3.6 

−0.1 −0.6 −0.7 

−0.1 −0.4 −0.7 

0.1 0.1 0.0 

0.3 0.1 0.0 

0.0 0.8 3.0 

0.2 1.8 4.5 

0.3 6.4 21.8 

0.8 11.3 34.8 A
nnex B


: Carbo


n budgets analytical annex 195 




Industry 

Building Regulations Part L (2010) 

EU Products policy (Tranche 1, 
Legislated) 

EU Products policy (Tranche 2, 
Proposed) 

Small business energy efficiency 
interest-free loans 

Climate Change Agreements 
(2011–18)112 

Non-Domestic Green Deal 

Carbon Reduction Commitment 
Energy Efficiency Scheme 

Renewable Heat Incentive 

Total 

Carbon budget 1 Carbon budget 2 Carbon budget 3 

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 

– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.6 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.5 0.7 1.2 1.7 2.4 3.3 4.2 4.2 4.2 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.1 1.7 2.4 3.2 4.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 

Carbon budget period 

1 2 3 

2008– 


12 

2013– 


17 

2018– 


22 

0.0 0.6 1.3 

0.0 0.0 0.0 

0.0 0.0  −0.1 

0.1 0.1 0.0 

– – – 

0.0 0.3 1.2 

0.1 1.0 2.5 

0.4 4.5 18.3 

0.6 6.5 23.2 

196 A
nnex B


: Carbo


n budgets analytical annex 

112 CCAs and the Climate Change Levy are estimated to have no additional savings beyond business as usual emissions projections. CCA targets will be set in 2012 following negotiations with industry. 




Transport113 

EU new car CO


2

 mid-term target 

130 gCO


2

/km in 2015 

EU new car CO


2

 long-term 

95 gCO


2

/km in 2020 

Renewable Energy Strategy  
transport biofuel (8% by energy 
in 2020)114 

EU new van CO


2

 regulation 

147 gCO


2

/km in 2020 

EU complementary measures 
for cars 

Low rolling resistance tyres for 
HGVs 

Industry-led action to improve 
HGV efficiencies 

Local Sustainable Transport Fund 

Low carbon buses 

Rail electrification115 

Total 

Carbon budget 1 Carbon budget 2 Carbon budget 3 

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 1.0 1.4 1.7 2.0 2.3 2.6 3.1 3.4 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.7 1.4 2.3 3.4 5.0 6.1 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.5 1.1 1.8 2.4 3.0 3.5 4.1 0.0 0.0 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.5 0.8 1.0 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.8 1.9 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.7 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.4 0.4 0.6 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.2 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.4 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.6 1.2 2.0 3.3 4.7 5.8 7.6 9.6 12.0 14.2 12.8 14.6 

Carbon budget period 

1 2 3 

2008– 


12 

2013– 


17 

2018– 


22 

0.4 5.3 13.4 

0.1 1.5 18.2 

0.0 5.7 10.5 

0.0 0.6 3.0 

0.3 3.4 7.7 

0.0 0.5 3.2 

0.3 2.2 2.7 

0.6 3.7 2.0 

0.0 0.2 1.4 

0.0 0.1 1.0 

1.8 23.4 63.1 


A

nnex B


: Carbo


n budgets analytical annex 197 

113 Transport savings for the EU new car and van regulations and Renewable Energy Strategy biofuel are modelled directly in the Department of Energy and Climate Change’s Energy Model. Other transport savings are 
forecast using the Department for Transport’s National Transport Model. 

114 Estimates of the savings from Transport biofuels are based on achievement of 8% fuel share by 2020. An assumption of 10% was used in the June 2010 projections. This change is for modelling purposes only and does not 
imply any change in policy or in the Government’s commitment to renewables. 

115 Electrification of the Great Western Main Line as far as Cardiff, and the North West. 




Agriculture and waste (non-CO


2) 


emissions116 

Agriculture Action Plan 

Landfill tax 

Defra waste policy 

Carbon budget 1 Carbon budget 2 Carbon budget 3 

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.6 1.5 2.2 2.7 3.2 3.4 3.4 

– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – 

– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – 

Carbon budget period 

1 2 3 

2008– 


12 

2013– 


17 

2018– 


22 

0.0 2.1 14.9 

– – – 

– – – 

Overall total 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.9 3.8 7.7 10.3 13.7 17.8 23.0 28.4 34.0 39.1 38.7 41.2 5.1 72.5 181.4 

198 A
nnex B


: Carbo


n budgets analytical annex 

116 Latest projections for waste emissions do not include an explicit estimate of the impact of landfill tax or waste policy: these have been absorbed into a single baseline projection. 




Table B27: Projected traded sector emissions savings by policy included in the baseline (MtCO e)117 


2

Power 

EU Emissions Trading System 

Renewables 

Large Combustion Plant Directive 

Total 

Carbon budget 1 Carbon budget 2 Carbon budget 3 

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 

13.0 9.5 7.6 12.2 7.6 5.5 5.2 5.3 4.5 4.9 6.1 7.4 8.2 6.0 5.6 

8.0 9.3 9.6 11.6 13.6 14.0 14.5 15.0 16.1 17.2 18.6 20.0 21.5 22.0 22.0 

2.8 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 

23.8 21.6 20.0 26.6 23.9 22.4 22.5 23.1 20.6 22.2 24.7 27.4 29.8 28.0 27.6 

Carbon budget period 

1 2 3 

2008– 
2012 

2013– 
2017 

2018– 
2022 

49.8 25.4 33.3 

52.0 76.9 104.2 

14.0 8.4 0.0 

115.8 110.7 137.5 

Residential 

Building Regulation Part L (2002 
and 2005/06) 

Warm Front and fuel poverty 
measures 

Supplier Obligation (EEC1, EEC2, 
original CERT) 

Total 

0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 

1.2 1.4 1.7 1.8 1.8 1.7 1.4 1.2 1.0 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.4 0.2 

1.4 2.7 3.7 4.2 4.2 4.0 3.8 3.7 3.6 3.0 2.4 1.8 1.8 1.7 1.6 

2.7 4.3 5.5 6.2 6.1 5.9 5.5 5.1 4.9 4.1 3.4 2.7 2.6 2.3 2.1 

0.8 1.0 1.1 

7.9 6.2 2.7 

16.2 18.2 9.3 

24.9 25.4 13.1 

Commercial and public services 

Carbon Trust measures 

Energy Performance of Buildings 
Directive 

UK Emissions Trading Scheme 

Building Regulations Part L (2002 
and 2005/06) 

Total 

1.2 1.2 1.2 0.9 0.7 0.6 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 

0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 

0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 

1.9 1.8 1.9 1.7 1.5 1.3 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.1 1.0 0.9 0.9 0.8 

5.2 2.0 0.5 

2.2 2.2 2.2 

0.1 0.0 0.0 

1.3 1.8 1.9 

8.8 6.1 4.7 


A

nnex B


: Carbo


n budgets analytical annex 199 

117 For the purposes of this table, baseline is akin to the updated emissions projections baseline (Pre-Low Carbon Transition Plan policies). The table shows emissions savings from only some of the policies included in the 
baseline. It is not possible to quantify the emissions savings from all baseline policies individually. However, it should be noted that this does not impact on either the baseline or any of the newer policy emissions projections 
scenarios. 




Industry 

Carbon Trust measures 

UK Emissions Trading Scheme 

Building Regulations Part L (2002 
and 2005/06) 

Total 

Carbon budget 1 Carbon budget 2 Carbon budget 3 

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 

0.9 0.9 1.0 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 

0.5 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 

0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 

1.5 1.4 1.4 1.2 1.0 0.9 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.2 

Carbon budget period 

1 2 3 

2008– 
2012 

2013– 
2017 

2018– 
2022 

4.1 1.7 0.5 

2.0 1.0 0.1 

0.5 0.7 0.7 

6.6 3.4 1.3 


200 A

nnex B


: Carbo

n budgets analytical annex 

Overall total 29.8 29.2 28.9 35.7 32.6 30.5 29.9 30.0 27.3 28.0 29.7 31.5 33.4 31.3 30.7 156.0 145.6 156.6 




e)118 Table B28: Projected traded sector emissions savings by policy additional to the baseline (MtCO


2

Power 

Industrial Emissions Directive 

Carbon Capture and Storage 
Demonstration Programme 

Carbon Price Floor 

Renewables119 

Total 

Carbon budget 1 Carbon budget 2 Carbon budget 3 

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 1.3 1.3 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.1 1.5 2.1 2.3 4.4 5.6 5.6 5.6 5.6 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 5.7 0.9 0.7 0.9 1.8 2.7 1.1 0.3 0.8 5.8

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.6 3.3 5.8 10.1 14.2 16.3 17.8 19.8 21.1 22.4 23.5 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.7 9.0 7.8 12.3 17.1 20.4 24.9 26.7 27.1 30.1 36.2 

Carbon budget period 

1 2 3 

2008– 


12 

2013– 


17 

2018– 


22 

0.0 0.0 2.8 

0.0 7.0 26.8 

 0.2 9.9 10.8 

0.6 49.7 104.6 

0.8 66.7 145.0 

Residential 

Supplier Obligation (CERT +20% 
and CERT extension) 

Building Regulations Part L (2010) 

Smart Metering 

EU Products policy (Tranche 1, 
Legislated) 

EU Products policy (Tranche 2, 
Proposed) 

Community Energy Saving 
Programme 

Zero Carbon Homes 

Energy Company Obligation and 
Domestic Green Deal 

Renewable Heat Incentive 

Total 

0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.9 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 

0.0 0.0 0.5 1.4 2.2 3.0 3.7 4.3 4.9 5.3 5.7 6.0 6.2 6.1 5.9 

0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.6 1.0 1.4 1.7 2.1 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.1 3.1 3.1 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.3 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.6 1.0 1.3 1.6 1.9 2.2 2.9 2.9 2.9 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 

0.0 0.2 0.9 2.1 3.5 5.5 7.1 8.7 10.1 11.4 12.6 13.6 14.9 14.9 14.9 

1.2 4.1 3.0 

0.1 1.3 2.5 

0.1 2.4 5.9 

4.1 21.2 29.9 

1.2 8.6 14.8 

0.1 0.4 0.4 

0.0 0.0 1.0 

0.0 4.9 12.8 

0.0 0.1 0.7 

6.7 42.7 70.9 


A

nnex B


: Carbo


n budgets analytical annex 201 118 This table shows traded emissions savings additional to the baseline (Low Carbon Transition Plan and newer policies).


 

119 Renewables savings include savings from the Renewables Obligation, Electricity Market Reform (Feed-in Tariffs with Contracts for Difference) and small-scale Feed-in Tariffs. 




Commercial and public services 

Building Regulations Part L (2010) 

Business Smart Metering 

EU Products policy (Tranche 1, 
Legislated) 

EU Products policy (Tranche 2, 
Proposed) 

Small business energy efficiency 
interest-free loans 

Salix, public sector loans, 10% 
commitment for central govt 

Non-Domestic Green Deal 

Carbon Reduction Commitment 
Energy Efficiency Scheme 

Renewable Heat Incentive 

Total 

Carbon budget 1 Carbon budget 2 Carbon budget 3 

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.6 1.8 1.9 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 

0.0 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.9 1.2 1.5 1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.4 2.3 

0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.2 1.4 1.6 2.0 2.1 2.1 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 

0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.6 0.6 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 −0.1 −0.1 −0.2 −0.3 −0.5 −0.7 −0.9 −1.0 −1.0 −1.0

0.0 0.1 0.4 0.8 1.5 2.1 2.9 3.4 4.0 4.6 5.1 5.5 6.1 6.2 6.4 

Carbon budget period 

1 2 3 

2008– 


12 

2013– 


17 

2018– 


22 

0.2 3.9 8.0 

0.0 0.6 1.6 

1.6 8.2 11.6 

0.6 4.4 9.3 

0.1 0.1 0.0 

0.2 0.1 0.0 

0.0 0.8 2.9 

0.0 0.0 0.4 

 0.0 −1.2 −4.6 

2.8 16.9 29.2 

202 A
nnex B


: Carbo


n budgets analytical annex 




Industry 

Carbon budget 1 Carbon budget 2 Carbon budget 3 

2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.6 0.6 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.4 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 

– – – – – – – – – – – – – – – 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 

0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.1 1.5 1.9 2.4 2.4 2.4 

0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.7 1.0 1.4 1.8 2.4 2.9 3.6 4.2 4.2 4.2 

Carbon budget period 

1 2 3 

2008– 


12 

2013– 


17 

2018– 


22 

0.1 1.3 2.6 

0.2 1.5 3.0 

0.1 0.7 1.6 

0.2 0.1 0.1 

– – – 

0.0 0.4 1.3 

0.0 0.0 0.0 

0.1 3.2 10.6 

0.7 7.2 19.2 

Building Regulations Part L (2010) 

EU Products policy (Tranche 1, 
Legislated) 

EU Products policy (Tranche 2, 
Proposed) 

Small business energy efficiency 
interest-free loans 

Climate Change Agreements 
(2011–18) 

Non-Domestic Green Deal 

Carbon Reduction Commitment 
Energy Efficiency Scheme 

Renewable Heat Incentive 

Total 

Transport 

Rail electrification 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 −0.1 0.0 −0.1 −0.5 

Overall total 0.0 0.3 1.4 3.1 6.1 17.3 18.7 25.8 33.1 38.6 45.4 49.2 52.2 55.4 61.6 10.9 133.4 263.7 


A

nnex B


: Carbo


n budgets analytical annex 203 




204 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex

fourth carbon budget scenarios marginal abatement cost curves
Charts B13–B16: Abatement included under illustrative Scenarios 1 to 4

The marginal abatement cost (MAC) curves below show the abatement and cost effectiveness of those 
measures taken up under the fourth carbon budget scenarios and described in section B3 of this annex. 
The abatement covers the five-year fourth carbon budget (2023–27). The cost effectiveness covers 
the lifetime of the measure. They do not purport to show all potential abatement, only that abatement 
potential that is actually taken up under the scenario.

Scenario 1


          180 

170160150140130120110


 

10010


 0  43  


20020


 30  190 

40  50 60  70 80  90


 –500




–400




–300


–2,400



–200




–100700600500400300100




–6000200Cost e�ectiveness (£/t CO2e)


MtCO2e

Agriculture  

Industrial process

Low carbon heat (business)


 

Low carbon heat (industry) 

Low carbon heat (public) 


 

Low carbon heat (residential) 

Residential new build  

Services new build  


 

Services retrofit  

Transport  

Residential retrofit  




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 205

Scenario 2



43  


0  1 100 110 120 130 140 150 160 170 180 1902010 200


 

30 40 50 60 70 80 90


7006005004003001000200Cost e�ectiveness (£/t CO2e)


MtCO2e


  –500




–400




–300


–2,400



–200




–100




–600


Agriculture  

Industrial process

Low carbon heat (business)


 

Low carbon heat (industry) 

Low carbon heat (public) 


 

Low carbon heat (residential) 

Residential new build  

Services new build  


 

Services retrofit  

Transport  

Residential retrofit  

Scenario 3


43

0  10


 

100 110 120 130 150 160 170 180 19020


 

20030


 

14040  50 60  70 80  90



–500




–400




–300


–2,400



–200




–100700600500400300100




–6000200Cost e�ectiveness (£/t CO2e)


MtCO2e


  

Agriculture  

Industrial process

Low carbon heat (business)


 

Low carbon heat (industry) 

Low carbon heat (public) 


 

Low carbon heat (residential) 

Residential new build  

Services new build  


 

Services retrofit  

Transport  

Residential retrofit  




206 Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex

Scenario 4

900  10 100 110


43

120 130 140 150 160 170 180 19020 30 20040 50 60 70 80



–500




–400




–300


–2,400



–200




–100700600500400300100




–6000200Cost e�ectiveness (£/t CO2e)


MtCO2e


  

Agriculture  

Industrial process

Low carbon heat (business)


 

Low carbon heat (industry) 

Low carbon heat (public) 


 

Low carbon heat (residential) 

Residential new build  

Services new build  


 

Services retrofit  

Transport  

Residential retrofit  




Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex 207

Charts B17–B18: Abatement included under the illustrative traded sector scenarios (excluding 
Electricity Market Reform) under central and high electricity demand

Central demand



0  1 1 


201510  25 30 35 40 45  5  50 55  65


 

70  60  75

MtCO2e


6080–100




–120




–140




–160




–180–20




–200




–220–40–60–8020010012014040Cost e�ectiveness (£/t CO2e)


Industrial process

Low carbon heat (business)


 

Low carbon heat (industry) 

Low carbon heat (public) 


 

Low carbon heat (residential)

 Services retrofit  

High demand



60  




80      25 

30 35 40 45  5  50



20  


55  60  65 70  7520  15


 10  0  


100  

120  

140  



40  Cost e�ectiveness (£/t CO2e)


MtCO2e

Industrial process

Low carbon heat (business)


 

Low carbon heat (industry) 

Low carbon heat (public) 


 

Low carbon heat (residential)

 Services retrofit  



–100




–120




–140




–160




–180–20




–200




–220–40–60–8020

8 Annex C: Carbon Plan action summary


 

Area Start date End date Description Department(s) 
responsible 

Is action in 
Departmental 
Business Plan 
published 
Nov 2010? 

Secure, sustainable 
low carbon energy 

Started Dec-2011 Publication of refreshed Electricity Networks Strategy Group (ENSG) analysis of 
potential transmission network requirements to meet 2020 renewable energy 
targets (2020 Vision) 

DECC N 

Started Dec-2011 Set arrangements for the independent assessment of the safety, security and 
environmental impact of new reactor designs 

DECC Y(DECC) 

Started Dec-2011 Finalise the framework that will ensure that new nuclear operators have 
arrangements in place to meet the full costs of decommissioning and their full 
share of waste management costs through publication of statutory Funded 
Decommissioning Guidance and a pricing methodology for government taking 
ownership of the operator’s waste 

DECC Y(DECC) 

Started Apr-2012 Publish National Planning Policy Framework DCLG Y(DCLG) 

Started Apr-2012 Introduce as part of the national planning framework a strong presumption in favour 
of sustainable development 

DCLG Y(DCLG) 

Started Apr-2012 Undertake first major review of Feed-in Tariffs for small-scale renewable energy; 
consult and implement changes (fast-track consideration of some aspects to be 
completed in 2011) 

DECC Y(DECC) 

Apr-2012 Apr-2012 Transfer relevant functions from the Infrastructure Planning Commission (IPC) into 
the Major Infrastructure Planning Unit 

DCLG Y(DCLG) 

Started May-2012 Deliver Electricity Market Reform (EMR) clauses for inclusion in an early second 
session Energy Bill, which will implement: a new Feed-in-Tariff with Contracts 
for Difference (FIT CfD) for all low carbon technologies; a Capacity Mechanism 
to ensure security of supply; an Emissions Performance Standard (EPS); and the 
institutional arrangements necessary to deliver them 

DECC N 




Area Start date End date Description Department(s) 
responsible 

Is action in 
Departmental 
Business Plan 
published 
Nov 2010? 

Secure, sustainable 
low carbon energy 
(continued) 

Dec-2012 Dec-2012 Publish, with the nine other nations in the North Seas Countries’ Offshore Grid 
Initiative, North Sea grid configuration options and proposals for tackling regulatory, 
legal, planning and technical barriers 

DECC Y(DECC) 

Started Apr-2013 Work with the Department for Communities and Local Government to allow 
communities that host renewable energy projects to keep the additional business 
rates they generate – implement business rate retention for renewable energy 
development 

DECC Y(DECC) 

Started Apr-2013 Conduct four-yearly review of Renewables Obligation (RO) Banding (levels of 
financial support for different technologies) to ensure that the RO provides the 
correct level of support to maintain investment in large-scale renewable energy 
generation 

DECC Y(DECC) 

May-2012 Apr-2013 Legislation will be brought forward as soon as Parliamentary time allows for the 
establishment in statute of an independent Office for Nuclear Regulation 

DECC N 

Apr-2013 Apr-2013 New RO Bands implemented (except for offshore wind) DECC Y(DECC) 

Apr-2014 Apr-2014 New RO Bands implemented for offshore wind DECC Y(DECC) 

Saving energy 
in homes and 
communities 

Started Dec-2011 To set up a new Energy Efficiency Deployment Office (EEDO) DECC N 

Started Jun-2012 Review water efficiency advice to be given as part of broader sustainability 
information available under the Green Deal 

Defra N 

Started Apr-2012 Improve the content, format and quality of Energy Performance Certificates (EPCs) 
to support the Green Deal, and ensure requirements are complied with 

DCLG, DECC N 

Started Jul-2012 Subject to consultation, work with industry to confirm technical specifications and 
begin roll-out of Smart Meters across Britain 

DECC Y(DECC) 

Started Oct-2012 Develop policies to increase demand for the Green Deal, alongside core finance offer DECC Y(DECC) 

Started Oct-2012 Support Green Deal implementation by providing access to EPC data DCLG, DECC N 


A

nnex C


: Carbo


n plan actio
n sum


m

ary 209 




Area Start date End date Description Department(s) 
responsible 

Is action in 
Departmental 
Business Plan 
published 
Nov 2010? 

Saving energy 
in homes and 
communities 
(continued) 

Started Oct-2012 Drive Green Deal demand by introducing energy efficiency regulations for private 
rented sector housing and commercial rented property from 2018 (conditional on 
there being no net or upfront costs to landlords) and consider as part of the Part L 
2013 Building Regulations review ways of generating take-up of greater levels of 
energy efficiency measures in existing buildings in order to help support demand for 
the Green Deal. 

DCLG, DECC N 

Started Oct-2012 Encourage local authorities to become involved in delivering energy efficiency in their 
areas and social landlords to take action to improve the energy performance of their 
social housing stock, which will also stimulate the Green Deal and provide greater 
certainty to suppliers, e.g. through Permissive Guidance to be published by April 2012 

DCLG, DECC N 

Started Jan-2012 Consult on secondary legislation to enable the Green Deal, including the new 
obligation on energy companies 

DECC Y(DECC) 

Dec-2011 Mar-2012 Consult on revisions to Part L 2013 conservation of fuel and power of the Building 
Regulations 

DCLG Y(DCLG) 

Jan-2012 Mar-2012 Lay secondary legislation to enable the Green Deal before Parliament DECC Y(DECC) 

2016 2016 Zero carbon standard comes into effect for new homes DCLG N 

Reducing emissions 
from business and 
industry 

Started Dec-2011 Put staff and back office systems in place for the Green Investment Bank, in 
preparation for the launch of the incubation phase 

BIS Y(BIS) 

Started Dec-2011 Publish report outlining abatement potential, barriers and opportunities for key 
energy intensive sectors 

BIS, DECC, 


HMT N 

Started Dec-2011 Continue market testing for the role of the Green Investment Bank beyond the 
incubation phase 

BIS Y(BIS) 

Started Jan-2012 Consult on secondary legislation to enable the Green Deal, including the new 
obligation on energy companies 

DECC Y(DECC) 

Jan-2012 Jan-2012 Lay secondary legislation to enable the Green Deal before Parliament DECC Y(DECC) 

Dec-2011 Mar-2012 Consult on revisions to Part L 2013 conservation of fuel and power of the Building 
Regulations 

DCLG Y(DCLG) 

210 A
nnex C


: Carbo


n plan actio
n sum


mary 

Area Start date End date Description Department(s) 
responsible 

Is action in 
Departmental 
Business Plan 
published 
Nov 2010? 

Reducing emissions 
from business and 
industry (continued) 

Started Jun-2012 Review water efficiency advice to be given as part of broader sustainability 
information available under the Green Deal 

Defra N 

Sep-2012 Sep-2012 Green Investment Bank operational BIS Y(BIS) 

Started Mar-2013 Encourage voluntary take-up of Display Energy Certificates to the commercial sector DCLG, DECC N 

Started Oct-2012 Develop policies to enable application of the Green Deal to the commercial sector, 
alongside household offer 

DECC N 

May-2013 May-2013 First annual data released on the funds in and size of investments made by the Green 
Investment Bank 

BIS Y(BIS) 

2019 2019 Zero carbon standard comes into effect for new non-domestic buildings DCLG N 

Towards low carbon 
transport 

Dec-2011 Dec-2011 Complete transposition of transport elements of the Renewable Energy Directive DfT N 

Dec-2011 Dec-2011 Complete transposition of greenhouse gas (GHG) savings requirements of the Fuel 
Quality Directive 

DfT N 

Started Jan-2012 Implement the inclusion of aviation within the EU Emissions Trading System DfT Y(DfT) 

Started Mar-2012 Review strategy to support transition from early ultra-low emission vehicle market to 
mass market 

DfT Y(DfT) 

Started Mar-2012 Push for early EU adoption of electric vehicle infrastructure standards DfT Y(DfT) 

Dec-2011 May-2012 Establish (a) a National Chargepoint Registry that will allow chargepoint 
manufacturers and operators to make information on their infrastructure, including 
location, available in one place; and (b) a Central Whitelist that enables users of 
chargepoint networks to access chargepoints across the country 

DfT N 

May-2012 May-2012 Release details on the second tranche of projects to be supported by the Local 
Sustainable Transport Fund 

DfT N 

Mar-2012 Jul-2012 Consult on sustainable aviation framework for UK DfT Y(DfT) 

Mar-2012 Aug-2012 Launch of competition for low carbon trucks demonstration trial. DfT N 

Jun-2012 Jun-2012 Release details on the large projects to be supported by the Local Sustainable 
Transport Fund 

DfT N 


A

nnex C


: Carbo


n plan actio
n sum


m

ary 211 




Area Start date End date Description Department(s) 
responsible 

Is action in 
Departmental 
Business Plan 
published 
Nov 2010? 

Towards low 
carbon transport 
(continued) 

Mar-2012 Aug-2012 Launch of competition for public gas refuelling infrastructure projects (for gas-
fuelled trucks) 

Dft N 

Jan-2012 Sep-2012 Review progress from industry-led schemes to reduce fuel consumption and 
emissions from the freight sector and reconsider the case for government 
intervention 

DfT N 

Dec-2012 Dec-2012 Decide whether or not to include international aviation and shipping in UK carbon 
budgets and 2050 target 

DfT, DECC N 

Started Jan-2013 Provide input into the European Commission’s ongoing review of the EU’s new car 
and van CO


2

 targets for 2020 

DfT N 

Started Mar-2013 Release second round funding to successful bidders for Plugged-in Places pilots 
programme to encourage the establishment of electric vehicle recharging 
infrastructure 

DfT Y(DfT) 

Mar-2013 Mar-2013 Adopt sustainable aviation framework DfT Y(DfT) 

Mar-2013 Jun-2013 Provide an update to the Plug-in Vehicle Infrastructure Strategy DfT N 

Cutting emissions 
from waste 

Started May 2015 Implement the set of actions outlined in the Review of Waste Policies in England Defra N 

Managing land 
sustainably 

Started Jun-2012 Conduct a pilot project to develop and trial methods for delivering integrated 
environmental advice for farmers (including on reducing GHG emissions) 

Defra Y(Defra) 

Apr-2012 Apr-2012 The Independent Panel on Forestry makes recommendations on the future direction 
of forestry and woodland policy in England. The Government will respond in due 
course. 

Defra, 
Forestry 
Commission 


N 

Started Jun-2012 Publication of Sustainable Growing Media Taskforce roadmap Defra N 

Apr-2012 Nov-2012 Review of progress made towards reducing GHG emissions from agriculture Defra Y(Defra) 

Jan-2015 Dec-2015 Horticultural Use of Peat policy progress review Defra N 

Started 2016 Invest £12.6 million to improve the GHG inventory for agriculture, thereby 
strengthening our understanding of on-farm emissions 

Defra, 
Devolved 
Administrations 

Y(Defra) 

May-2012 2017 Initiate a research programme on Sustainable Pathways for Low Carbon Energy 
to help understand what a sustainable energy mix would look like in 2050, taking 
account of cost, GHG savings and wider impacts 

Defra N 

212 A
nnex C


: Carbo


n plan actio
n sum


mary 

Area Start date End date Description Department(s) 
responsible 

Is action in 
Departmental 
Business Plan 
published 
Nov 2010? 

Reducing emissions 
in the public sector 

Started Mar-2015 Reduce GHG emissions, waste generated, water consumption and domestic business 
air travel and encourage sustainable procurement  for the whole central government 
estate 

CO, All 
departments 


N 

Developing 
leadership within the 
European Union 

Started Dec-2011 Support the European Commission to publish an energy roadmap to 2050 which 
sets out scenarios for how the power industry can be decarbonised and maximise 
Member States’ support 

DECC Y(DECC) 

Started Dec-2011 Encourage a strong EU position in the UN Framework Convention on Climate 
Change negotiations in Durban, South Africa 

FCO, DECC Y(FCO) 

Started Dec-2011 Agree EU legislation on transparency and integrity of wholesale energy markets DECC N 

Started Jun-2012 Agree EU legislation on energy infrastructure to support projects of European 
interest and facilitate commercial infrastructure investment needed for security of 
supply and low carbon transition 

DECC Y(DECC) 

Started Oct-2012 Support the European Commission in implementing the low carbon roadmap DECC N 

Started Dec-2012 Complete review of EU regulation on fluorinated greenhouse gases and conclude 
possible negotiations on any proposals 

Defra N 

Started Dec-2012 Work with the EU to agree energy efficiency and labelling standards for remaining 
energy using products in residential and tertiary sectors, and some industrial 
products 

Defra Y 

Started Dec-2012 Work with international partners to increase take-up of effective product policies 
and to move towards harmonised global product standards 

Defra N 

Started Dec-2012 Work with partners in Europe to establish standards for smart grids and Smart 
Meters by the end of 2012 

DECC N 

Dec-2012 Dec-2012 Complete negotiations on next EU budget spending period (Multiannual Financial 
Framework (MFF)) – including agreeing an increase in the share of low carbon 
spending within an MFF settlement that increases by no more than inflation overall 

HMT N 


A

nnex C


: Carbo


n plan actio
n sum


m

ary 213 




Area Start date End date Description Department(s) 
responsible 

Is action in 
Departmental 
Business Plan 
published 
Nov 2010? 

Developing 
leadership within 
the European Union 
(continued) 

Dec-2012 Dec-2012 Publish proposals for tackling the regulatory, legal, planning and technical barriers to 
co-ordinated offshore grid development in the North and Irish Seas 

DECC Y(DECC) 

Started Dec-2014 Develop EU technical codes to improve functioning/integration of EU energy markets DECC N 

Started May-2015 Drive efforts within the EU to amend the Emissions Trading Scheme Directive to 
deliver full auctioning of allowances 

DECC Y(DECC) 

Started May-2015 Accelerate the global transition to a low carbon climate resilient economy, working 
with EU institutions and partners 

FCO Y(FCO) 

Started May-2015 Extend the internal market, energy security and liberalisation; promote global free 
trade with a special regard for global poverty alleviation and co-ordinated action to 
build a low carbon economy and avoid dangerous climate change; implement the 
Energy Third Package effectively 

FCO Y(FCO) 

Building the case 
for global ambition 
with key countries 
and international 
institutions 

Started Dec-2011 Subject to funding, UK Climate Security Envoy to have engaged with US, Canada, 
Japan, African Union and Australia on national and global security risks of 
climate change 

FCO, MOD, 
DECC 


N 

Started Dec-2011 Agree action plan for co-operation with Norway on oil and gas, carbon capture and 
storage and renewables 

DECC Y(DECC) 

Started Dec-2011 Support the Government of India in its work to improve industrial energy efficiency, 
including through the PAT scheme and building of capacity to enable Indian industry 
to take full advantage of the scheme 

DECC, DFID N 

Started Feb-2012 Monitor the carbon impacts of UK consumption of goods and services by obtaining 
updated annual estimates of ‘embedded’ carbon emissions 

Defra N 

Apr-2012 Apr-2012 UK hosts Clean Energy Ministerial meeting, securing further progress on practical 
collaborations on key low carbon technologies 

DECC N 

May-2012 May-2012 Secure continued commitment to ambitious action on international climate change 
via the G8 summit 

DECC, FCO N 

Jun-2012 Jun-2012 Take part in UN Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20) discussions on 
Green Economy in the context of sustainable development and poverty eradication 
and institutional frameworks 

Defra Y(Defra) 

214 A
nnex C


: Carbo


n plan actio
n sum


mary 

Area Start date End date Description Department(s) 
responsible 

Is action in 
Departmental 
Business Plan 
published 
Nov 2010? 

Building the case 
for global ambition 
with key countries 
and international 
institutions 
(continued) 

Started Dec-2012 Continued in principle support for phase-down of hydrofluorocarbon production 
and use, using the Montreal Protocol 

Defra Y(Defra) 

Started Dec-2012 Work with the Convention on Biological Diversity to improve synergies between 
climate change and biodiversity policy, including on biodiversity safeguards in REDD+ 
strategies to reduce emissions from deforestation 

Defra N 

Started May-2015 Low carbon campaign in priority markets of India, China, Brazil and US West Coast, 
in addition to support for low carbon exporters in other markets 

UKTI N 

Supporting the 
development of 
low carbon, climate 
resilient economies 

Started Dec-2011 Agree action plan for co-operation with Norway on oil and gas, carbon capture and 
storage (CCS) and renewables 

DECC Y(DECC) 

Started Nov-2012 Continuing to engage bilaterally with key countries and international fora involved in 
CCS such as the Carbon Sequestration Leadership Forum, the International Energy 
Agency, the Global CCS Institute and European CCS bodies 

DECC N 

Nov-2012 Nov-2012 Publish final EU report on fast-start funding DECC, DFID, 


HMT N 

Started Dec-2012 Encourage governments, through a range of initiatives, to design and deliver low 
carbon development 

DECC N 

Started Dec-2012 Establish the Capital Markets Climate Initiative to use private sector expertise to 
test new and innovative instruments for leveraging private finance to tackle climate 
change in developing countries 

DECC, DFID Y(DECC) 

Started Dec-2012 Deliver £300 million of UK fast start finance to reduce emissions from deforestation DECC, DFID, 
Defra 

Y(DECC) 

Started Dec-2013 Roll out Strategic Climate Programme Reviews in all programme countries to ensure 
that climate issues are addressed in DFID country business plans 

DFID Y(DFID) 

Started Dec-2014 Support, together with commitments from other donors, the Global Environment 
Facility (GEF) 

DFID N 


A

nnex C


: Carbo


n plan actio
n sum


m

ary 215 




Area Start date End date Description Department(s) 
responsible 

Is action in 
Departmental 
Business Plan 
published 
Nov 2010? 

Supporting the 
development of 
low carbon, climate 
resilient economies 
(continued) 

Started Apr-2015 Support for a range of programmes at country level through DFID’s bilateral 
programme to support poor countries to adapt to climate change, protect forests 
and support low carbon development 

DFID N 

Started Apr-2015 Support the Climate and Development Knowledge Network (CDKN) 
to enable developing countries to access the best climate change knowledge, research 
and data to enable them to build resilience to climate change, adopt low carbon 
growth and tackle poverty 

DFID N 

Started Apr-2015 Complete the disbursement of £2.9 billion of climate finance DECC, DFID, 
HMT, Defra 


N 

Ensuring progress 
within international 
climate negotiations 

Started Dec-2011 Design a new international Green Fund with international partners DECC Y(DECC) 

Started Dec-2011 Work for a comprehensive global agreement on climate, including securing significant 
progress at the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 
negotiations in Durban, South Africa 

FCO, DECC Y(FCO) 

Dec-2012 Dec-2012 Work through the UNFCCC negotiations to make progress towards a global deal on 
reducing emissions and the provision of climate finance 

DECC N 

Sep-2012 Mar-2013 Monitor and evaluate the impact and value for money of the Advocacy Fund to help 
the poorest countries take part in international negotiations 

DFID Y(DFID) 

Dec-2013 Dec-2013 Negotiations under the International Civil Aviation Organization and the International 
Maritime Organization to encourage reduction in emissions from the aviation and 
maritime sectors 

DfT N 

2013 2015 Support work through the UNFCCC to review progress towards the 2 degree 
target and its adequacy in the light of the latest science 

DECC N 

216 A
nnex C


: Carbo


n plan actio
n sum


mary 

Area Start date End date Description Department(s) 
responsible 

Is action in 
Departmental 
Business Plan 
published 
Nov 2010? 

Action in Northern 
Ireland, Scotland and 
Wales 

Started Dec-2011 Achieve emissions reductions from new buildings through a progressive tightening of 
thermal standards required under Building Regulations. Department of Finance and 
Personnel (DFP) to take this forward in two stages – 2011 and 2013 

DFP n/a 

Started Mar-2012 Consider Planning Policy Statement 1 (Sustainability) which is being undertaken to 
take account of, and give support to, planning reform implementation 

DOE n/a 

Started Dec-2012 Achieve renewable electricity target of 12% as part of the Department of Enterprise, 
Trade and Investment (DETI) Strategic Energy Framework (SEF) 

DETI n/a 

Jan-2013 Mar-2013 Achieve emissions reductions from new buildings through a progressive tightening of 
thermal standards required under Building Regulations. DFP to take this forward in 
two stages – 2011 and 2013 

DFP n/a 

Started Mar-2014 Deliver Sustainable Development Plan Office of the 
First Minister 
and deputy 
First Minister 
(OFMDFM) 



n/a 


Started Mar-2015 Refine agricultural greenhouse gas inventories DARD n/a 

Jan-2011 2020 Achieve renewable electricity target of 40% as part of the DETI SEF DETI n/a 

Jan-2011 2020 Achieve heat from renewable sources target of 10% as part of the DETI SEF DETI n/a 

Dec-2011 Dec-2011 Limit on use of carbon units to be set for 2013–17 (with successive batches at 
five-year intervals thereafter) 

Scottish 
Government 



n/a 


Dec-2011 Dec-2011 Target to generate 31% of final electricity demand from renewables Scottish 
Government 



n/a 


Jan-2012 Jan-2012 Report on progress requested from the Committee on Climate Change (and 
annually thereafter) 

Scottish 
Government 



n/a 


Mar-2012 Mar-2012 Scottish Government response to Committee on Climate Change progress report 
(and annually thereafter) 

Scottish 
Government 



n/a A

nnex C


: Carbo


n plan actio
n sum


m

ary 217 




Area Start date End date Description Department(s) 
responsible 

Is action in 
Departmental 
Business Plan 
published 
Nov 2010? 

Action in Northern 
Ireland, Scotland and 
Wales (continued) 

Jun-2012 Jun-2012 Report on Proposals and Policies for 2023–27 Scottish 
Government 



n/a 


Oct-2012 Oct-2012 Scottish Government report on whether annual target met (and annually thereafter) Scottish 
Government 



n/a 


Jan-2013 Jan-2013 Implementation of outcomes of review of new-build domestic energy standards for 
2013 – intention of further improvement to achieve a 60% reduction in emissions 
compared with 2007 

Scottish 
Government 



n/a 


Dec-2013 Dec-2013 50% of waste collected from households to be recycled, composted and prepared 
for re-use 

Scottish 
Government 



n/a 


Oct-2011 Oct-2011 UK Climate Change Committee advice to Welsh Government on delivery of Climate 
Change Strategy and review of actions (and annually thereafter) 

Welsh 
Government 



n/a 


Dec-2011 Dec-2011 Climate Change Commission for Wales report on Welsh Government delivery of 
Climate Change Strategy (and annually thereafter) 

Welsh 
Government 



n/a 


Jan-2012 Mar-2012 Welsh Government report to National Assembly for Wales on delivery of Climate 
Change Strategy and refresh of Delivery Plans (and annually thereafter) 

Welsh 
Government 



n/a 


Sep-2012 Sep-2012 Final greenhouse gas emissions inventory figures for 2010, enabling confirmation of 
2006–10 average emissions baseline (against which the 3% target is measured) 

Welsh 
Government 



n/a 


Sep-2013 Sep-2013 Greenhouse gas emissions inventory figures for 2011, enabling accurate reporting of 
progress for first year of 3% target (and annually thereafter) 

Welsh 
Government 



n/a 


218 A
nnex C


: Carbo


n plan actio
n sum


mary 

Department of Energy and Climate Change 
3 Whitehall Place 
London SW1A 2AW 

www.decc.gov.uk 

© Crown copyright 2011 

http://www.decc.gov.uk

	The Carbon Plan: Delivering our low carbon future
	Contents
	Foreword
	Executive summary
	Progress so far
	Vision
	Sectoral plans
	Low carbon buildings
	Low carbon transport
	Low carbon industry
	Low carbon electricity
	Agriculture, land use, forestry and waste

	A plan that adds up
	Building a coalition for change

	Part 1: The Government’s approach to energy and climate change
	Introduction
	The threat of climate change
	Maintaining our energy security

	Our principles
	The vision for 2050
	2050 futures
	Planning for the future

	Part 2: Our strategy to achieve carbon budgets
	Achieving carbon budgets
	Achieving carbon budgets one to three
	Our current policy framework
	Emissions projections for carbon budgets one to three

	Achieving the fourth carbon budget
	Emissions projections for the fourth carbon budget
	How to achieve the fourth carbon budget




	Buildings
	Where we are now
	Where we will be in 2050
	How we will make the transition

	Transport
	Where we are now
	Where we will be in 2050
	How we will make the transition
	Next steps

	Industry
	Where we are now
	Where we will be in 2050
	How we will make the transition

	Secure, low carbon electricity
	Where we are now
	Where we will be in 2050
	How we will make the transition
	Carbon capture and storage
	Renewable electricity
	Unabated gas
	Reducing electricity demand and balancing the electricity system

	Agriculture, Forestry and Land Management
	Where we are now
	Where we will be in 2050
	How we will make the transition
	Next steps

	Waste and resource efficiency
	Where we are now
	How we will make the transition
	Next steps

	Working with the EU and Devolved Administrations
	The European Union
	Northern Ireland
	Scotland
	Wales




	Part 3: Delivering the fourth carbon budget
	Scenarios to deliver the fourth carbon budget
	Delivering non-traded sector emissions reductions
	Scenario 1: High abatement in low carbon heat
	Scenario 2: High abatement in transport and bioenergy demand
	Scenario 3: Focus on high electrification 
	Scenario 4: Purchase of international credits

	Delivering traded sector emissions reductions
	Scenario A: Power sector carbon intensity of 50 gCO2/kWh
	Scenario B: Power sector carbon intensity of 100 gCO2/kWh

	Considerations for achieving the fourth carbon budget
	Managing uncertainty
	Costs of meeting the fourth carbon budget

	Managing our performance

	Annex A: 2050 analytical annex
	2050 futures
	Core MARKAL
	‘Higher renewables; more energy efficiency’
	‘Higher nuclear; less energy efficiency’
	‘Higher CCS; more bioenergy’

	Understanding the costs of 2050 futures
	Costs of 2050 futures
	Sensitivity testing the three futures




	Annex B: Carbon budgets analytical annex
	Contents
	Note on methodology
	List of charts
	List of tables
	B1. Carbon budget levels and the net Uk carbon account
	B2. Meeting carbon budgets
	B3. Potential for the fourth carbon budget
	B4. Wider impacts
	B5. Detailed tables

	Annex C: Carbon Plan action summary




