

  

Next steps in CCS:  

Policy Scoping Document 


      

Developing an approach for the next phase of 
Carbon Capture & Storage projects in the UK 


  


August 2014 


    2    

© Crown copyright 2014  

URN 14D/281  


 

You may re-use this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, 
under the terms of the Open Government Licence.  

To view this licence, visit www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/   

or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU,  

or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk .  


 

Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at: 

Office of Carbon Capture and Storage 

Department of Energy & Climate Change, 

3 Whitehall Place, 

London, SW1A 2AW 

Tel: 0300 060 4000 

Email: occs@decc.gsi.gov.uk 


 

This document can be found on DECC’s website:  

www.gov.uk/decc   


 

http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/
mailto:psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk
mailto:occs@decc.gsi.gov.uk
https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-of-energy-climate-change


  3 


Foreword  

In the 1930s, in the midst of London’s pea-soup fog, Battersea Power 
Station was the first power station in the world


1

 to deploy an innovative 

technology known as “Flue Gas Desulphurisation” (FGD) to clean up 
sulphur dioxide in its toxic fumes – a key cause of London’s air pollution. 


   

The cost of that technology was significant and in the 1930s there were no financial or 
regulatory incentives to deploy FGD.  Battersea was ahead of its time – for a variety of 
reasons, it took another 70 years before the technology was fully commercialised.  But FGD is 
now installed in over 1700


2

 power stations across the world and the energy industry expects to 

invest around $8bn


3

 in the technology in 2015 alone.  


 

Today the problem is not sulphur dioxide, but carbon dioxide.  And to solve this problem we 
need more clean energy from renewable and nuclear sources, alongside cleaner energy from 
gas.  But we also need a new generation of coal and gas power stations equipped with Carbon 
Capture and Storage (CCS) for the 21


st

 century. 


 

The UK is leading Europe in developing CCS technology, and the world’s first power CCS 
projects in North America will come on stream this year.  But we can’t wait another 70 years.  
We need CCS to be commercial in a decade.  The prize is a big one - with CCS we can 
achieve our carbon targets more cheaply and support over 15,000 jobs per year by 2030


4.  

It is not just the technology which continues to mature.  The regulatory, commercial, legal and 
financial structures which will allow industry to move forward also need to develop.  The 
Government thinks that the best and quickest way to achieve this is to make available 
significant support to ensure the UK’s first commercial scale CCS projects are established.  In 
addition to working intensively to support those projects, the Government is also thinking 
ahead to how we can support industry to build on the infrastructure which could be put in place 
by these projects, in a second phase of CCS development.   


 

The UK is recognised as having the most advanced policy and regulatory framework in the 
world


5

 to encourage CCS.  But we need to do more and we need your help.  This Coalition 

Government pioneered open policy making, as set out in the Civil Service Reform Plan.  That 
plan stated that the best way to develop “high quality, creative policy is to open the policy 
development process to external sources”, beyond the Civil Service and Whitehall mandarins. 


 

It is in that spirit, and to continue the excellent work which the CCS industry started under its 
Cost Reduction Task Force, that I offer this Policy Scoping Document to stimulate discussion 
and look ahead to further engagement over the coming months on how we can make Phase 2 
of CCS deployment in the UK a reality. 

Rt Hon Edward Davey MP, Secretary of State

                                            


1

 www.ukerc.ac.uk/support/tiki-download_file.php?fileId=2411 


2

 Energy Industries Council, http://www.modernpowersystems.com/features/featureflue-gas-desulphurisation-trends-and-opportunities/ 


3

  http://home.mcilvainecompany.com/index.php/component/content/article/7-news/706-nr1927 


4

 http://www.ccsassociation.org/index.php/download_file/view/748/76/ 


5

 Global Status of CCS 2013, GCCSI  http://decarboni.se/publications/global-status-ccs-2013/43-ccs-policy-index 

https://intranet.decc.gsi.gov.uk/about/ministers/sos/Pages/default.aspx


  4  

          


    5 


Contents 
Foreword ................................................................................................................................... 3 

General information ................................................................................................................. 6 


 

1. Executive Summary....................................................................................................... 8 


 

Section A ................................................................................................................................. 11 

2. Introduction .................................................................................................................. 12 

3. Interventions to date ................................................................................................... 16 


 

Section B ................................................................................................................................. 21 

4. Financial Incentives and Electricity Market Reform ................................................. 22 

5. Financing CCS projects .............................................................................................. 28 

6. Transport and storage infrastructure ........................................................................ 30 

7. Part Chain and Full Chain projects ............................................................................ 36 

8. Enhanced oil recovery (EOR) ..................................................................................... 38 

9. Industrial CCS .............................................................................................................. 41 

10. Bio-CCS / BECCS......................................................................................................... 46 

11. Carbon Capture and Utilisation (CCU) ....................................................................... 48 

12. Supply chain ................................................................................................................ 49 

13. Knowledge transfer (KT) ............................................................................................. 51 

14. Research, development and innovation .................................................................... 53 


 

Section C ................................................................................................................................. 54 

15. Catalogue of questions ............................................................................................... 55 

Annex I - Government’s approach to Risk Allocation under Phase 1 of the 
Commercialisation Programme [i] ............................................................................. 58 

Annex II - Government’s approach to Risk Allocation under Phase 1 of the 
Commercialisation Programme [ii] ............................................................................ 62 


     6 

General information 

Purpose of this document: 

The Government aims to deliver a secure, affordable, low carbon energy system.  As part of 
this, the Government’s long-term vision for the electricity market, through its Electricity Market 
Reform programme, is to transition to a point where low carbon technologies can compete 
fairly on price. Competition between technologies will allow us to meet our objectives in the 
most cost-effective way. Carbon Capture and Storage is a key technology which will enable 
this.  Therefore, the Government is committed to supporting the commercialisation and cost 
reduction of CCS alongside the efforts of industry and governments internationally.   

This document summarises the Government’s policies and actions already taken to support 

CCS deployment in the UK, and what we believe to be the main challenges to further 
commercial deployment of CCS in the UK.  It invites views, inputs and evidence on addressing 
those challenges.  

The Government committed


6

 to engage further with the industry on how mechanisms 

implemented by the Government’s Electricity Market Reform could be applied to early stage 
CCS projects.  This document sets out key aspects of those discussions to date, and key 
areas which need further development.     

The Government anticipates that further policy statements or consultations may be needed as 
detailed aspects of policy are refined. 


 

CCS terminology 

When CCS is referred to in this document, unless stated otherwise it will refer to CCS in its 
broadest sense: 

 capturing carbon from either power generation or industrial processes; 

 transporting the CO2; and 

 storing CO2 in geological formations underneath the seabed, or utilising the CO2 
in products (Carbon Capture and Utilisation - CCU) such as plastic and cement, 
or as part of the Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR) technique.  


 

This document is not intended to be a technical guide to CCS, and will not detail the different 
technologies. 


 

Issued: 7 August 2014 


 

Respond by: 23 October 2014 


 

                                            


6

 Para 3.35; EMR: Contract for Difference: Contract and Allocation Overview, Aug 2013 

https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/233004/EMR__Contract_for_Difference__Contract_and_Allocati
on_Overview_Final_28_August.pdf 


 7 

Territorial extent: 

This policy scoping document covers Great Britain.  The Department for Trade and Industry 
(DETINI) is responsible for CCS policy in Northern Ireland as energy policy is transferred to the 
Northern Ireland Assembly.  


 

How to respond: 

Your response will most useful if it is framed in direct response to the questions posed, though 
further comments and evidence are also welcome.  

Electronic format is preferred – please send any responses to occs@decc.gsi.gov.uk. 
However, hard copy responses may also be sent to the Department at the address on page 2.  


 

The Office of Carbon Capture and Storage (OCCS) also sends out updates and bulletins.  To 
register to receive these, please send an e-mail to occs@decc.gsi.gov.uk 


 

Additional copies: 

You may make copies of this document without seeking permission. An electronic version can 
be found at www.gov.uk/decc. 


 

Versions of this document in Braille, large print or audio-cassette are available on request. This 
includes a Welsh version. Please contact us under the above details to request alternative 
versions. 


 

Confidentiality and data protection: 

Information provided in response to this policy scoping document, including personal 
information, may be subject to publication or disclosure in accordance with the access to 
information legislation (primarily the Freedom of Information Act 2000, the Data Protection Act 
1998 and the Environmental Information Regulations 2004).  

If you want the information that you provide to be treated as confidential please state so clearly 
in writing when you submit your response. It would be helpful if you could explain to us why 
you regard the information you have provided as confidential. If we receive a request for 
disclosure of the information we will take full account of your explanation, but we cannot give 
an assurance that confidentiality can be maintained in all circumstances. An automatic 
confidentiality disclaimer generated by your IT system will not, of itself, be regarded by us as a 
confidentiality request. 

We will summarise all responses and place this summary on our website at www.gov.uk/decc. 
This summary will include a list of names or organisations that responded but not personal 
information such as addresses or other contact details. 


    

mailto:occs@decc.gsi.gov.uk
mailto:occs@decc.gsi.gov.uk
http://www.gov.uk/decc
http://www.gov.uk/decc


  8 


1. Executive Summary 

CCS – and actions the Coalition Government has taken 

 The Government is committed to supporting the commercialisation and cost reduction of 1.1.
Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) as a key mechanism for delivering a secure, 
affordable, low carbon energy system.   

 CCS is not a single technology, but a suite of different technologies, which in some 1.2.
cases have been used for decades.  However, there is limited experience of 
implementing CCS on power generation worldwide and currently no commercial-scale 
projects in the UK which are capturing carbon dioxide (CO2), transporting and then 

storing it deep beneath the sea-bed. 

 The policies made and actions taken by the Coalition Government have meant the UK is 1.3.
leading Europe in the development of CCS – with the best R&D in our universities and 
two commercial scale projects under active development as part of our world-leading 
Commercialisation Programme, one of which has secured €300m from the European 
Commission – the only project in Europe to attract such funding.  

 We anticipate that one or both of these projects, White Rose and Peterhead, could form 1.4.
the first phase of CCS deployment in the UK.  They would help prove the concept, 
create important infrastructure that may be used for subsequent projects, create 
commercial relationships between the different elements of the CCS chain, and begin to 
build interest from competing businesses and their supply chains.  In addition to working 
intensively to help support these first projects, the Government is also thinking ahead. If 
the market can demonstrate that costs are falling in line with expectations, the 
Government will assess how it can support industry to build on the infrastructure put in 
place through the first projects, to deliver future CCS deployment. 

Moving forward - topics covered by this document  

 This document invites views, inputs and evidence on our existing policies that could 1.5.
support those projects, and also on future policy development which may be needed.  
Key aspects are: 

 Financial Incentives & Electricity Market Reform (Chapter 4):  The 
Government’s long-term vision for the electricity market, through its Electricity 
Market Reform programme, is to transition to a point where low carbon 
technologies can compete fairly on price.  The Government has already noted its 
intention


7

 that any future Contract for Difference (CfD) allocation for CCS projects 

would take place through competitive project selection processes, wherever 
practical and effective, and noted that bilateral negotiation remains an alternative 
where such processes are not practical; it has also committed


8

 to further 

discussions with CCS developers on these issues.   

 In order to continue to make progress in the course of the remainder of 2014 and 
2015, DECC will engage with developers on the design of a generic CCS CfD and 

                                            


7

 Para 3.33, August 2013 publication on EMR Contract and Allocation Overview 


8

 Para 3.35, August 2013 publication on EMR Contract and Allocation Overview 


 9 

options for the criteria which might be applied in any future allocation frameworks. 
Without prejudice to future decisions on the Levy Control Framework or any future 
allocation processes under the EMR enduring regime, this work should enable an 
appropriate suite of enabling architecture to be in place for CCS by 2016. 

 Financing CCS (Chapter 5): The Government has recognised that raising 
finance for low carbon energy and other major infrastructure projects, including 
CCS, from traditional sources may be challenging, and therefore has a range of 
mechanisms available to support investors. This chapter provides a brief 
summary of those mechanisms. 

 Transport and Storage infrastructure (Chapter 6): Analysis shows that effective 
investment in and use of transport and storage infrastructure could deliver 
significant cost reductions.  This chapter sets out the Government’s approach to 
date and seeks views on future direction. 

 Part chain projects (Chapter 7):  This chapter addresses the possibility that 
early Phase 2 projects could be “part-chain” CCS projects; clarifies what “part-
chain” refers to; and briefly outlines some of the issues affecting such projects. 

 Enhanced Oil Recovery (Chapter 8): The Government is exploring with industry 
the extent to which CO2-EOR could play a significant role in the UK’s CCS 
deployment and maximise future recovery from the North Sea.  This chapter 
outlines the potential opportunity available, provides an update of recent work and 
seeks views on how to further encourage activity in this area. 

 Industrial CCS (Chapter 9): To meet the UK’s longer term ambitions on climate 
change, carbon dioxide emissions from energy intensive industries will need to be 
substantially reduced.  For some of these industries, CCS is likely to be a key part 
of the technology mix required to make such reductions.  This chapter 
summarises the Government’s activity to date and seeks views on possible next 
steps.   

 Bio-CCS / Bioenergy with CCS (Chapter 10): In the long term, combining 
bioenergy with CCS (BECCS) to produce negative emissions is predicted to offer 
a key route by which the UK could meet its 2050 targets. This chapter briefly sets 
out Government policy development to date. 

 CCU (Chapter 11): Carbon Capture and Utilisation (CCU) technologies could 
offer a route by which to make CO2 a commodity rather than a waste product.  
This chapter summarises the Government’s current approach. 

 Supply Chain (Chapter 12): The CCS supply chain is likely to be similar to those 
for other major energy infrastructure projects.  This chapter outlines how the 
Government will help companies who wish to exploit the opportunities in this 
nascent sector. 

 Knowledge Transfer (Chapter 13): Knowledge transfer is a key philosophy 
which underpins the CCS Commercialisation Programme – CCS projects in 
receipt of Government funding  will be expected to share their experience and 
learning with the wider industry to support development and cost reduction.  This 
chapter summarises the Government’s current approach and explores possible 
approaches under any future projects.  

 Underpinning Research, Development and Innovation (Chapter 14): 
Continued research, development and innovation is a key way in which to further 


 10 

reduce the costs of CCS by creating better, cheaper components and processes.  
This chapter summarises the Government’s current approach and possible future 
actions. 

Next steps 

 We welcome views on the issues identified in this document or more widely. Details of 1.6.
how to respond to questions raised in this document can be found on page 7. 

 We will be engaging with the CCS Development Forum


9

 on these issues. We will also 1.7.

be discussing with those interested in the development of CCS, both individually and 
collectively, the issues raised.  

 Over the past three years, the Government has issued a series of documents and 1.8.
consultations as policy on Electricity Market Reform and generic CfDs for renewables 

was refined. 

 This document marks a continuation of aspects of that dialogue, and we anticipate 1.9.
further documents and consultations may be issued as detailed aspects of CCS policy 
are refined. 


  

                                            


9

 https://www.gov.uk/government/groups/ccs-development-forum 


 11 

Section A 


   12 

2. Introduction 

This chapter sets out why the Government is encouraging the development and deployment of 
CCS, and sets out how CCS may be deployed in three phases in the UK as the industry 
matures.   

Context 

 Supporting the development of Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) is a priority for the 2.1.
Coalition Government


10

. Cost-competitive CCS has the potential to provide a significant 

contribution to meeting three of DECC’s core objectives:  

(i) Promote UK Growth 

(ii) Deliver secure energy on the way to a low carbon future  

(iii) Drive ambitious action on climate change at home and abroad  

 These objectives are set against the backdrop of a legally binding greenhouse gas 2.2.
emission reduction target of at least 80% by 2050 and a need to put the UK on a cost-
effective pathway to meeting this target. 

Why CCS 

 The UK energy system is complex.  We use energy in many different ways – to light and 2.3.
heat our homes, to power our industry, and to get to work and go on holiday.  Our 
energy comes from many different sources: renewable, nuclear and fossil fuels to 
generate electricity; gas to generate heat; oil, in the form of petrol and diesel, in our cars 
and planes. 

 DECC’s award winning 2050 Pathways Calculator


11

 enables people to explore this 2.4.
system and see how choices in one area have an impact on others.  To change the 
energy system to a secure, affordable, low carbon one, many experts, including the 
International Energy Agency (IEA) and the Energy Technologies Institute (ETI), agree 
that CCS will need to be at the heart of it. 

 This is because CCS can be used to address different parts of the energy system.  First, 2.5.
to achieve the UK’s 2050 climate change targets, the UK Government’s 2011 Carbon 


Plan12

 showed that the UK would need to substantially decarbonise its electricity system 

by 2030.  The 2013 Electricity Market Reform Delivery Plan set out several scenarios by 
which this could be achieved, including a high CCS scenario delivering up to 13GW of 
decarbonised electricity by 2030.  Second, to continue to meet climate ambitions, the 
UK will then need tackle the carbon emissions which originate from energy intensive 
industry.  For some of these industries, CCS is likely to be a key technology through 

which to achieve this.  Finally, in the long term, when combined with biomass and 
bioenergy, CCS creates the potential of “negative emissions” – the possibility of 
removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere by permanently storing the carbon 
temporarily locked in plants.  The potential of “negative emissions” removes or reduces 

                                            


10

 The Coalition: our programme for government (2010); The Coalition government mid-term review (2013) 


11

 https://www.gov.uk/2050-pathways-analysis 


12

 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-carbon-plan-reducing-greenhouse-gas-emissions--2 


 13 

the need to develop and deploy more expensive carbon mitigation technologies 
elsewhere in the economy. 

 Analysis by the CCS Association (CCSA) showed that deploying CCS in our energy 2.6.
system could reduce energy bills compared with a business as usual approach and 
support over 15,000 jobs per year by 2030


13.  

 CCS provides a means by which fossil fuels, which currently produce around 60% of the 2.7.
UK’s electricity and play a vital role in enabling the system to respond flexibly to 
demand, are able to continue to make a valuable contribution to our energy needs in a 
low carbon future.  

 The Government is therefore committed to work with industry and other governments to 2.8.
help develop CCS as a commercially viable carbon abatement technology. We believe 
that the immediate priority is to demonstrate the commercial and economic viability of 

CCS at commercial scale in the power generation sector. The UK Government 
programme is part of a wider international effort, which should see the first commercial 
scale power stations equipped with CCS operating from this year in North America.   

Cost reduction 

 Most new technologies reduce in cost as they develop and mature.  Examples of this 2.9.
cost reduction theory include mobile phones, electric vehicles and photo-voltaic solar 
panels.   

 For CCS, like other low carbon energy technologies such as offshore wind, this cost 2.10.
reduction is crucial for it to play a part in the UK’s electricity system to 2030 and in the 
longer term in UK’s wider energy system. 

 In 2013, the CCS Cost Reduction Task Force (CRTF)


14

 undertook a thorough analysis, 2.11.
which concluded that CCS costs could be significantly reduced to a level which is 
competitive with other forms of low carbon generation in the UK. 

 The Government endorsed those conclusions in its response to the Cost Reduction 2.12.
Task Force’s report and, through the CCS Development Forum


15

, continues to work with 

industry as it develops, and puts in place, plans for achieving these outcomes.  

Three phases of CCS development and deployment 

 The maturing of CCS as a commercial technology is unlikely to take place through a 2.13.
linear process.  The Government has previously


16

 set out a conceptual framework of 

how CCS could be developed and deployed in three broad phases in the UK: 

 The first phase of CCS projects is made up of first-of-a-kind (FOAK) projects, 
taken forward under the Commercialisation Programme.  The Government 
considers that the quickest and most effective way to reduce the cost of CCS is to 
support the UK’s first commercial-scale project(s).  A FOAK project is critical in 
establishing CCS infrastructure in the UK, developing and testing the market-led 
commercial and legal frameworks for projects of this type, and thereby 
significantly reducing the risks and barriers faced by subsequent projects.  

 The second phase of CCS projects: This is a transition phase between heavily 
state supported Phase 1 and cost-competitive Phase 3 projects.  Our discussions 

                                            


13

 http://www.ccsassociation.org/index.php/download_file/view/748/76/ 


14

 https://www.gov.uk/government/groups/ccs-cost-reduction-task-force 


15

 https://www.gov.uk/government/groups/95 


16

 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ccs-in-the-uk-government-response-to-the-ccs-cost-reduction-task-force--3 


 14 

with the industry over the past few months have indicated that project developers 
may still face some of the challenges of Phase 1 projects – in terms of not being 
able to absorb all the technical and commercial risks of CCS, and therefore 
deploying CCS at a cost which is not yet competitive with some other forms of low 
carbon generation.  

 As set out in the Government response to the Cost Reduction Task Force, Phase 
2 projects might be developed on a similar timeline, as well as subsequent to the 
Commercialisation Programme projects.  It is feasible that early Phase 2 projects 
may take Final Investment Decisions (FID) later this decade, but before Phase 1 
projects have completed construction and commissioning.  Later Phase 2 projects 
may come forward in the early 2020s once Phase 1 projects are operating 
successfully.   

 The third phase: By Phase 3 we expect the CCS industry to have developed to a 
point where projects are fully commercial and are able to compete in the market 
on the basis of cost with other low carbon technologies, as set out in the EMR 
Delivery Plan.  Our policies are designed to help bring CCS to this third phase as 
quickly as possible.  Our objective is a competitive, low carbon energy market, 
with different technologies competing on price and providing the best value for 
money for the consumer. 

 The Government remains fuel and capture-technology agnostic.  Policies have been 2.14.
designed so as to be equally applicable to CCS on coal or gas power stations, and to 
projects which utilise any of the three main groupings of carbon capture technology: pre-
combustion, post-combustion or oxyfuel.   

 As mentioned in the Government Response to the CRTF, the Government anticipates 2.15.
that Phase 2 projects could capture CO2 emissions from either power stations or energy 
intensive industry.  Project developers may also choose to exploit Enhanced Oil 
Recovery techniques. 

Scoping document 

 This document is intended to provide industry with a clearer indication of our plans to 2.16.
support the continued deployment of CCS.   

 The document summarises the policies and actions which the Government has already 2.17.
taken to support Phase 1 of CCS deployment in the UK.  It then sets out how those 
policies, including plans to put in place enabling architecture for possible future award of 
CfDs for CCS projects under Electricity Market Reform, could support Phase 2 CCS 
Projects and beyond. This is without prejudice to future decisions on the Levy Control 
Framework or any future allocation processes under the EMR enduring regime. 

 It seeks views, evidence and input on this, and on the full spectrum of issues which 2.18.
could impact future policy development on CCS, to enable industry to deliver up to the 
high CCS scenario from the EMR Delivery Plan.  

Open policy making 

 The Coalition Government is committed to open policy making, as set out in the Civil 2.19.
Service Reform Plan.  That plan states that the best way to develop “high quality, 
creative policy is to open the policy development process to competition from external 
sources”. 


 15 

 This document is designed to provide an opportunity for sources outside the Civil 2.20.
Service to provide their input, views and evidence on the future of CCS in the UK. 


 16 

3. Interventions to date  

The 2012 UK CCS Roadmap


17

 set out a comprehensive package of interventions and funding 
by the Government to support the first commercial scale CCS projects in the UK.   

This chapter provides a summary of our interventions to date. 

Rationale and Government role 

 The Government believes that CCS is one of a number of technologies with the 3.1.
potential to help the UK meet its decarbonisation objectives. We are therefore keen to 
encourage the development of CCS as a low-cost alternative to other forms of 
decarbonisation. 

 The current market in the UK, and internationally, is not delivering investment in CCS on 3.2.
the scale needed to reduce costs and enable widespread deployment of CCS in the 
2020s.  Deployment on this timescale is needed if CCS is to fulfil its potential and 
contribute to the Government’s long-term decarbonisation objectives.  The Government 
considers that the quickest and most effective way to reduce the cost of CCS is for the 
UK to deploy its first commercial-scale projects.  In 2012 the Government published its 
CCS Roadmap.  This set out a programme of measures and interventions to support 
industry in reducing the costs of CCS, to a point where the technology is cost-
competitive with other forms of low carbon generation and carbon abatement 
technology.  The five key areas set out in the 2012 Roadmap were: 

 £1bn CCS Commercialisation Programme 

 Electricity Market Reform 

 £125m Research, Development and Innovation Programme 

 Addressing key barriers to commercialisation such as regulation 

 International engagement and knowledge sharing   

Interventions to date 

CCS Commercialisation Programme 

 The CCS Commercialisation Programme aims to support the deployment of the UK’s 3.3.
first commercial scale CCS project(s).  

 This will be critical in establishing CCS infrastructure in the UK, developing and testing 3.4.
the market-led commercial and legal frameworks for projects of this type, and thereby 

significantly reducing the risks and barriers faced by subsequent projects.  

 In recognition of the technical, financial and commercial challenges initial projects face, 3.5.
the Government is providing extensive support.  This includes around £100m to support 
the majority of both development and front end engineering and design (FEED) costs for 
the two projects in the Commercialisation Programme; making available the remainder 
of the £1bn capital funding Government has committed to CCS to support the 
investment required for constructing these projects; providing operational support 

                                            


17

 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-ccs-roadmap 


 17 

through tailored low carbon Contracts for Difference (CfDs), subject to value for money; 
and putting in place arrangements, tailored to individual projects, for Government to 
share CCS specific risks (industry will take on business as usual risks).  As a condition 
of this significant level of public investment, knowledge and know-how developed will be 
actively disseminated.   

 The Competition was launched alongside the Roadmap in April 2012 and attracted 3.6.
significant interest from industry. From an initial eight bids submitted, two projects have 
been taken forward into FEED:    

 White Rose Project in Yorkshire, England – this project proposes to capture about 
90% of the CO2 from a new super-efficient coal fired power station at the Drax 
site, and to store it in a saline formation deep beneath the Southern North Sea 
seabed. The project involves Alstom, Drax Power, BOC and National Grid.  


    18 

 Peterhead Project in Aberdeenshire, Scotland – this project proposes to capture 
about 85% of the CO2 from part of the existing gas fired power station before 
transporting it and storing it in a depleted gas field deep beneath the Central North 
Sea seabed.  The project involves Shell and SSE. 


      


 Both projects are expected to take Final Investment Decisions towards the end of 3.7.
FEED, around the end of 2015, with Government decisions shortly thereafter.  
Construction, commissioning and operation will follow as soon as possible. 

Electricity Market Reform (EMR) 

 Electricity Market Reform (EMR) will deliver the low carbon electricity and reliable 3.8.
supplies that the country needs, at the lowest possible cost. It will transform the UK 
electricity sector to one where low-carbon generation can compete with conventional, 
unabated fossil-fuel generation – ensuring we build the right mix of generation for the 
long-term. 

 Up to a fifth of generation capacity will close by 2020, whilst UK electricity demand could 3.9.
double by 2050 as our economy grows and heat and transport systems are increasingly 
electrified.  Around £100 billion


18

 of investment is required by 2020, and to achieve this 

investment we need to attract new sources of capital, and do so whilst keeping costs to 
consumers as low as possible.  In order to meet our low carbon objectives and to put us 
on the right path to 2050, much of our electricity generation will need to be 
decarbonised by 2030, of which up to 13GW could be from CCS.  

 EMR is the Government’s response to this challenge and is the biggest reform to the 3.10.
electricity sector since its privatisation. EMR has three goals: to decarbonise electricity 
generation; to keep the lights on; and to minimise the cost to consumers.  The EMR 
Delivery Plan was published in December 2013. 

                                            


18

 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/delivering-uk-energy-investment-2014 


 19 

 The key mechanism under Electricity Market Reform (EMR) for bringing forward 3.11.
investment in CCS and other low carbon generation are Contracts for Difference (CfDs). 
CfDs will provide efficient long term support for all forms of low carbon generation – 
including CCS.  

 CfDs provide certainty and stability on prices: generators will receive in effect a fixed 3.12.
price for the low carbon electricity they produce - known as the ‘strike price’. When the 
market reference price is below the strike price generators will receive a top-up payment 
from suppliers. Conversely if the reference price is above the strike price, the generator 
must pay back the difference.  

 A CfD will be a private law contract between a generator and the newly established 3.13.
Government-owned counterparty body – the Low Carbon Contracts Company.  This 
body will provide a single accountable party for generators to interact with over the 
lifetime of the CfDs.   

 Our long-term vision is for low-carbon generation to compete fairly on cost without 3.14.
financial support, other than that provided indirectly by the carbon price.  

 The first CfDs for CCS will be negotiated with the two projects under the Government’s 3.15.
CCS Commercialisation Programme.  In order to receive CfDs, these projects will need 
to demonstrate value for money. The design of a generic CCS CfD will take into account 
progress of these negotiations. 

CCS Research, development and innovation 

 The 2012 Technology Innovation Needs Assessment (TINA)


19

 and the 2013 Cost 3.16.
Reduction Task Force confirmed that further cost reductions in CCS would likely come 
from continued research, development and innovation. 

 The UK has a world-class CCS research base and the Government is committed to 3.17.
supporting this work.  We are delivering a 4-year, £125 million CCS Research and 
Development programme with our funding partners (the Research Councils, Technology 
Strategy Board and Energy Technologies Institute) to support: 

(i) Fundamental research and understanding at our universities and research 
organisations.    

(ii) The development of better, cheaper components and processes.   

(iii) Pilot scale projects to bridge the gap between lab-scale research and 
commercial scale deployment.     

 In total, around 100 separate projects are being funded through this programme


20

.  3.18.

 The Government has also supported the establishment of the UK CCS Research Centre 3.19.
(UKCCSRC)


21

 – a £13 million investment which brings together the UK’s top CCS 

academics to promote and coordinate UK CCS research capability and increase 
academic collaboration with industry. 


  

                                            


19

 http://www.carbontrust.com/media/168543/tina-ccs-carbon-capture-storage-summary-report.pdf 


20

 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/cross-government-carbon-capture-and-storage-r-d-programme-2011-2015-list-of-projects 


21

 https://ukccsrc.ac.uk/ 


 20 

Regulation 

 The UK is recognised as one of the most favourable policy and regulatory environments 3.20.
for CCS in the world, according to the Global CCS Institute's (GCCSI) CCS Policy 
Indicator


22

.  The UK has led the world in the development of a regulatory framework to 

facilitate CCS.  The Government undertook a comprehensive review of the regulation 
necessary to enable CCS in 2007 and has quickly addressed barriers when identified.  
For example, the Government added powers to the Energy Act 2011 to address a 
barrier to the reuse of existing capital assets for the purpose of CO2 storage and 
transport. 

 The Government also recognises the importance of long term regulatory and price 3.21.
signals for investor certainty. For this reason we have brought forward a ‘triple lock’ of 
policies which will, among other effects, encourage deployment of CCS. These are (i) 
the stipulation that there should be no new coal power plants over 300MW built without 
CCS; (ii) the Carbon Price Floor which gives an economic incentive to reduce emissions 
from fossil fuelled power stations; and (iii) the Emissions Performance Standard which 
provides a regulatory backstop to the requirement of no new coal without CCS.  

International engagement and knowledge sharing 

 Our international engagement is focussed on promoting knowledge sharing between 3.22.
projects and countries to help cost reduction and to support the deployment of CCS. 

 The Government is engaging through regional, bilateral and multilateral relationships to 3.23.
collaborate and help overcome the challenges of commercial-scale CCS deployment.  
We participate in a number of bilateral relationships as well as through international fora 
such as the Carbon Sequestration Leadership Forum, the North Sea Basin Task Force 
and the Clean Energy Ministerial; working with countries facing similar challenges to the 


UK. 


 We are also engaging with individual countries and supporting international 3.24.
collaboration on R&D. For example in Canada we have supported the UK CCS 
Research Centre to establish a research exchange and sign a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU) with Sask Power. 

 In April 2012, the Government announced


23

 the allocation of up to £60 million to support 3.25.
the development of CCS technology in emerging markets. This pledge is part of the 
global commitment made by governments in 2011 through the Clean Energy Ministerial 
Carbon Capture, Use and Storage Action Group to allocate $200 million to accelerate 
the deployment of CCS in the near term.  Working with the Asian Development Bank, 
£35 million


24

 of this funding will be used to support CCS projects in China and 

Indonesia; and working with the World Bank, the remaining £25 million will support CCS 
projects in South Africa and Mexico. 


   

                                            


22

 Global Status of CCS 2013, GCCSI http://decarboni.se/publications/global-status-ccs-2013/43-ccs-policy-index 


23

 https://www.gov.uk/government/news/uk-allocates-up-to-60m-to-support-development-of-ccs-in-emerging-markets 


24

 https://www.gov.uk/government/world-location-news/uk-supports-china-and-indonesia-to-develop-carbon-capture-and-storage  


 21 

Section B 

The CCS Commercialisation Programme is designed to bring forward the first 
commercial scale project(s) in the UK and overcome many barriers.   


 

The purpose of this section is to identify remaining barriers to further deployment, and 
to seek views, input and evidence on how to address them to inform ongoing policy 
development. 


   22 

4. Financial Incentives and Electricity 
Market Reform 

The Government’s long-term vision for the electricity market, through its Electricity Market 
Reform programme, is to transition to a point where low carbon technologies can compete 
fairly on price.  

DECC will continue to make progress towards this goal in the course of the remainder of 2014 
and 2015 by broadening its engagement with the industry, on a non-exclusive and no-
commitment basis, on the design of a generic CCS Contract for Difference (CfD); on potential 
future arrangements for awarding CCS CfDs; and on the criteria which it might apply to project 
selection.  

This chapter sets out some of the issues which will be explored over the next 18 months, with 
a view to putting in place a suite of enabling architecture for future CCS projects by 2016. 

Context  

 The Government is in the process of reforming the electricity market to bring forward 4.1.
investment in low carbon generation, as part of the transition to a secure, affordable, low 
carbon energy system. 

 The Government’s long-term vision for the electricity market, through its Electricity 4.2.
Market Reform programme, is to transition to one in which low carbon technologies can 
compete fairly on price. Competition between technologies will allow us to meet our 
objectives in the most cost-effective way. 

 Some technology-tailored approaches will be necessary to ensure investment comes 4.3.
forward in the early stages of the transition, while industries are maturing and while cost 
reductions are being achieved and demonstrated.  We set out below our approach to 
financial support for Phase 1 CCS and initial plans to build on this approach for Phase 2 
and beyond. 

Approach to supporting Phase One CCS Projects – White Rose and Peterhead 

 In recognition of the importance of CCS, and the fact that no commercial scale power 4.4.
projects are operational anywhere in Europe, the Government launched the CCS 
Commercialisation Programme in 2012.  Under this programme, significant levels of 
Government support have been made available to bring forward these First-Of-A-Kind 
(FOAK) projects (see table 1).  This support includes:  

 Support for FEED development costs.  FEED (Front End Engineering and 
Design) is the pre-construction stage of engineering and planning necessary to 
achieve a greater certainty of cost, system design and technical performance.  
During this stage of work, projects under the Commercialisation Programme are 
also required to undertake broader work around commercial and financial risk 
reduction.  Through FEED, the developer should become certain enough on the 
cost of the project to justify further investment which then allows the Government 
to also take decisions on how much support is justified. The Government is 
meeting up to 75% of the costs (around £100m in total) supporting the FEED 
activity of the White Rose and Peterhead CCS projects.  The private sector 
sponsors of both projects are funding the remainder from their own resources. 


 23 

 Support for construction costs.  In recognition of the significant capital 
investment required, and the challenge of raising funds to finance these multi-
billion pound FOAK infrastructure projects, the Government will also provide 
support from the remainder of the £1bn capital funding it has committed to the 
Programme. In addition to any capital support from Government, both projects 
would have to raise the majority of capital investment through equity or external 
finance. 

 Support during operation.  Should one or both of the projects, and Government, 
take positive Final Investment Decisions, the projects will be eligible for 
operational support through a CfD. This CfD will pay for the additional operating 
costs associated with CCS and provide an adequate return on the capital the 
consortia have invested.   

 There remains a significant degree of uncertainty over the costs and operational risks 4.5.
around FOAK projects. We expect FEED to allow for some cost discovery and therefore 
reduce uncertainty. However, various CCS specific risks may materialise in different 
phases of the projects during design, build, commissioning, operation and 
decommissioning. If these risks were to materialise the associated costs could impact 
on the economic viability of the plant.  

 A key aspect of the Government support on offer to the White Rose and Peterhead 4.6.
projects, therefore, is potential risk sharing of CCS-specific risks during construction and 
operation.  As part of the Commercialisation Programme, Government analysed the 
business-as-usual and CCS specific risks FOAK projects are likely to face in a Baseline 
Risk Allocation Matrix (BRAM) and set out its high-level approach to risk sharing


25

 (see 

Annex I and II). The Government agreed to share a limited number of CCS specific risks 
and details of those arrangements will be developed through negotiation with 
developers. Once agreed, these arrangements will be implemented through specifically 
tailored project contract terms and a CfD.   

Towards Phase 2 

 The EMR Delivery Plan set out a range of scenarios for decarbonising the electricity 4.7.
system, including through the deployment of CCS of up to 13GW by 2030 in the high 
CCS scenario. For the commercialisation objective to be realised, this implies that 
subsequent projects should involve significant risk transfer from Government and the 
consumer to the developer, beyond that envisaged for Phase 1 projects.   

 Within these parameters, there are a number of considerations that will need to be 4.8.
addressed in the enabling architecture for any Phase 2 CCS projects.  Some of these 
are highlighted below and we welcome preliminary views on these high level issues. We 
expect to consult on specific issues in greater detail over the course of the next 18 
months. 

Pre-Capital investment 

 A CfD requires a developer to be sufficiently confident of the capital and operational 4.9.
costs of its project to estimate, with reasonable certainty, the strike price it will need over 
the lifetime of the project. Reliable estimates of these costs are usually only available 
once FEED is complete. 

                                            


25

 Tender documents are available at: 
https://online.contractsfinder.businesslink.gov.uk/Common/View%20Notice.aspx?site=1000&lang=en&noticeid=560937&fs=true 


 24 

 However, developing a project through FEED to a point where the developer can take 4.10.
an investment decision in itself involves significant costs. Investors in more established 
low carbon generation technologies are prepared to make similar investment without the 
certainty of a CfD. On the other hand, during initial discussions, CCS developers have 
noted the high risks created by the uncertainty, complexity and interdependencies of the 
CCS chain. They were therefore not prepared to fund such FEED investment entirely at 
their own risk without the offer of a CfD. 

 Whilst this is understandable given the currently nascent state of CCS in the UK, in the 4.11.
longer term CCS developers will need to develop projects at their own risk, as is the 
case for other low carbon technologies, up to the point where they can attract sufficient 
interest from investors. 

Q1. To what extent would developers be prepared to invest in FEED costs ahead 
of allocation of a CfD?  What measures could be adopted so that the developers 
have sufficient certainty of their costs and a Strike Price to form the basis of an 
investment decision? 

Capital Investment 

 The Commercialisation Programme combines revenue support through Contracts for 4.12.
Difference with an element of capital support.  Follow-on projects will be eligible to apply 
for infrastructure guarantees and other finance mechanisms such as through UK Green 
Investment Bank and European Investment Bank (see chapter 5), to support them in 
raising finance from non-public sources. 

 The Commercial Development Group, established under the Cost Reduction Task 4.13.
Force, and which reports to CCS Development Forum is working to support project 
developers in engaging with finance markets. 

Q2.  How best should the industry-led CCS Commercial Development Group work 
to support project developers in engaging with finance markets? 

Operational support via Contracts for Difference  

 CfDs are long-term, private law contracts where Generators sell their electricity into the 4.14.
market in the usual way and where variable payments are made to ensure the generator 
receives the agreed “strike price”. CfDs stabilise returns for generators at a fixed level 
over the duration of the contract. This removes the generator’s long term exposure to 
electricity price volatility, substantially reducing the commercial risks faced by these 
projects.  CfDs are not intended to provide protection against project development, 
technical or operational performance risks. The Government does not believe that they 
should fulfil this role for CCS.  

 However, initial feedback from developers is that the generic CfD may require some 4.15.
adaptation to be investible for CCS projects, including early stage Phase 2 projects, for 
example enabling flexibility to be able to adjust the Strike Price to take account of: 

 movement in capital estimates; and  

 changes to some operational costs once the Strike Price is agreed.  

 This is because there are a number of uncertainties which have the potential to impact 4.16.
the overall cost and return on investment of CCS projects along its full chain. Examples 
include:  


 25 

 Uncertainties in future fuel price assumptions, as CCS has significant fuel costs 
unlike some other low carbon generation.  

 Availability of cost effective infrastructure which can over time lead to cost 
reduction.  

 Availability of valuable alternatives for the disposal of carbon dioxide (e.g. the use 
of carbon dioxide in enhanced oil recovery).  

 The performance of the storage sites.  

Q3.  To what extent should Government reflect long-term risks of full chain CCS 
projects in the design of a CCS CfD? In particular, we will want to explore the 
extent to which similar risks also arise in other sectors and the changes that may 
be needed in CfD design to put CCS on an equivalent basis to other low carbon 
technologies. 

 In the 2013 EMR Contract and Allocation Overview


26

 the Government noted its intention 4.17.
that any future CfD allocation for CCS projects would take place through competitive 
project selection processes, wherever practical and effective. This is in line with 
Government policy of increasing competition within and between low carbon 
technologies, which will assist with meeting Government’s goals for least-cost 
decarbonisation of the power sector over the longer term. It also noted that bilateral 
negotiation remains an alternative for CCS CfD allocation where competitive processes 
are not practical. Any final allocation decision would still be subject to strict value for 
money considerations and an assessment of overall budget constraints.  

 The Government committed


27

 to engage further with CCS developers, assessing the 4.18.
applicability of the generic CfD to early stage CCS projects and whether this needs to 
be tailored to provide appropriate support for this technology. 

 In order to continue to make progress towards achieving cost competition within and 4.19.
between low carbon technologies, DECC will therefore, in the course of the remainder 
of 2014 and 2015, broaden its engagement with the industry on a non-exclusive and no-
commitment basis on the design of a generic CCS CfD and options for how these may 
be allocated in future. The design of a generic CCS CfD will also take into account 
progress in the CCS competition, where relevant, for other early stage CCS projects. 
Without prejudice to future decisions on the Levy Control Framework or any future 
allocation processes under the EMR enduring regime, this work should enable an 
appropriate suite of enabling architecture to be in place for CCS by 2016.        

 The current approach for the Phase 1 projects, and potential future approach for Phases 4.20.
2 and 3 is summarised in table 1 below. 


  

                                            


26

 EMR: Contract for Difference – Contract and Allocation Overview August 2013. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/233004/EMR__Contract_for_Difference__Contract_and_Allocati
on_Overview_Final_28_August.pdf 


27

 Ibid 


 26  

TABLE 1 

High-level principles for HMG intervention to support CCS – reducing levels of support 
through phases to full commercialisation 

 Phase 1 

Peterhead 

White Rose 

Phase 2 

Transition phase 

Phase 3 

Full commercialisation 

HMG Contribution to 
FEED costs 

Yes Subject to decision No 

HMG contribution to 
construction costs 

Yes* No 

HMG risk sharing 
during construction 

Yes* No 

HMG risk sharing 
during operation 

Yes* No 

CfD Yes* In principle, subject 
to decision


† 


In principle - all low 
carbon technologies 
compete on price


† 


Notes: 

* Subject to negotiations, Final Investment Decisions by consortia and Government, an assessment of affordability 
and value for money; and state aid approval 


† 

Without prejudice to future allocations from the current Levy Control Framework; or future decisions on the next 

Levy Control Framework period 

Next steps 

 In order to put in place by 2016 the enabling architecture to bring forward a second 4.21.
phase of CCS in the UK, the Government will work to broaden its consultation with 
industry over the next 18 months on: 

 The design principles of a generic CCS CfD. 

 Options for how such a CfD may be allocated in future, including criteria that may 
apply.   

 These consultations will be without prejudice to future decisions on the Levy Control 4.22.
Framework or any future allocation processes under the EMR enduring regime. 

 We welcome views at this stage on whether the challenges outlined above on pre-4.23.
capital investment, capital investment and operational support are appropriate issues on 
which to focus further consultations, and any further issues we will need to consider. 


  

Subject to 

decision† 


 27 

Questions: 

Q1. To what extent would developers be prepared to invest in FEED costs ahead of 
allocation of a CfD? What measures could be adopted so that the developers 
have sufficient certainty of their costs and a Strike Price to form the basis of an 
investment decision? 

Q2. How best should the industry-led CCS Commercial Development Group work to 
support project developers in engaging with finance markets? 

Q3.  To what extent should Government reflect long-term risks of full chain CCS 
projects in the design of a CCS CfD? In particular, we will want to explore the 
extent to which similar risks also arise in other sectors and the changes that may 
be needed in CfD design to put CCS on an equivalent basis to other low carbon 
technologies. 


      28 

5. Financing CCS projects 

The Government has recognised that raising finance for low carbon energy and other major 
infrastructure projects, including CCS, from traditional sources may be challenging, and 
therefore has a range of mechanisms available to support investors. 

This chapter provides a brief summary of those mechanisms. 

Context  

 As evidenced by White Rose and Peterhead, full-chain CCS projects are major, multi-5.1.
billion pound infrastructure projects.  These projects are part of the Government’s Top 
40 priority investments, as set out in the National Infrastructure Plan


28. 

 Up to 2020 alone, the UK needs to attract a further £100bn investment


29

 in its energy 5.2.
infrastructure.  The changes to the Electricity Market and the creation of Contracts for 
Difference (CfDs) are designed to provide project developers with revenue certainty.  
However, project developers still need to raise capital funding to finance the 
construction of their projects.   

 As for other infrastructure projects, that finance will need to come from market.  5.3.
However, the Government has recognised that raising such finance for these low 
carbon energy projects from traditional sources may be challenging, and therefore has a 
range of mechanisms available to support investors in raising sufficient capital from non-
public sources to take forward their projects.  The key mechanisms are provided by the 
Green Investment Bank and Infrastructure UK. 

Green Investment Bank 

 The Green Investment Bank (GIB) was established to accelerate investment in the UK’s 5.4.
transition to a green economy. The UK Government is the sole shareholder and 
provided an initial £3.8bn of capital to be invested with the aim of helping to lower the 
cost of capital for green projects. 

 The GIB has a key role to play given the restricted availability of long-term debt to low-5.5.
carbon infrastructure projects. Investments are made in demonstrably green projects 
and programmes with the aim of mobilising private capital. To date, the GIB has 
committed £1.3bn of capital and in doing so has mobilised a further £4.6bn. Products 
available through the GIB include debt, mezzanine, equity and guarantees, offered on 
terms equivalent to others in the market, but not low cost finance or grants. 

Infrastructure UK 

 Infrastructure UK (IUK)


30

 is a unit within the Treasury that works on the UK’s long-term 5.6.
infrastructure priorities, of which CCS is one, and helps secure private sector 
investment. IUK manages the UK Guarantee Scheme, a mechanism through which the 
Government is seeking to kick-start crucial infrastructure projects.  

                                            


28

 https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/263159/national_infrastructure_plan_2013.pdf 


29

 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/delivering-uk-energy-investment-2014 


30

 https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/infrastructure-uk 


 29 

 The Treasury has made available £40bn of financial guarantees for such infrastructure 5.7.
projects. This support is offered as a financial guarantee of scheduled principal and 
interest to a lender or investor in a UK infrastructure project and on behalf of the 
relevant borrower or issuer of debt.  

European Investment Bank 

 The European Investment Bank (EIB) is the bank of the European Union and is one of 5.8.
the largest multilateral borrowers and lenders by volume in the world. The bank provides 
finance and expertise for sound and sustainable investment projects which contribute to 
furthering EU policy objectives. 

 The vast majority of the EIB’s financing is through loans, but they also offer guarantees, 5.9.
equity investment, intermediary project loans through local banks, project bonds, 
venture capital and microfinance among their range of products. Support from the EIB 

can be used to assist in unlocking financing from other sources. 

Q4. Are these existing products sufficient to support CCS projects in raising 
finance from non-public sources?  If not, please explain why, with supporting 
evidence, and what kind of additional financing or products would be needed? 

Experiences from White Rose and Peterhead projects 

 As part of the FEED contracts signed with the Government, White Rose and Peterhead 5.10.
will share key aspects of their experience and learning with the wider industry (this 
approach is set out in more detail in chapter 13).  This learning will include how the 
projects are financed (within the terms of commercial confidentiality), what viable 
financial structures look like and financial model templates for the use of prospective 
CCS developers. 


 

Question: 

Q4. Are the existing products offered by the Green Investment Bank (GIB), 
Infrastructure UK (IUK) and the European Investment Bank (EIB) sufficient to 
support CCS projects in raising necessary finance from non-public sources?  If not, 
please explain why, with supporting evidence, and what kind of additional financing 
or products would be needed? 


    30 

6. Transport and storage infrastructure 

Analysis


31

 shows that effective investment in, and use of, transport and storage infrastructure 
could deliver significant cost reductions.   

This chapter sets out the Government’s approach to date, and seeks views on future direction. 

Context  

 Regulatory arrangements for transport and storage are in place in the UK and will need 6.1.
to be tested in practice as projects get underway. The Government has also introduced 
measures to ensure that we are able to make most effective use of CCS specific 
infrastructure at a national level as it is constructed. The challenge is to promote 

investment in transport and storage to enable deployment while there remains 
significant uncertainty about the timing, location and scale of CCS deployment. 

 Transport and storage are fundamental to the effective commercialisation of CCS. 6.2.
Investment at scale, and ahead of demonstrable demand, is key to unlocking the cost 
reductions the Cost Reduction Task Force (CRTF) has identified as essential if CCS is 
to be cost effective compared with low carbon alternatives. Transport and storage also 
requires substantial investment and poses performance risk to a CCS project which 
must be managed. 

Expected requirement  

 Permanent, environmentally secure storage is fundamental to successful CCS. There is 6.3.
good evidence to suggest that the UK’s geology is well suited to the permanent 
containment of carbon dioxide.  This capacity has been comprehensively mapped


32

, but 

developing potential sites into operational storage capacity will require significant 
investment. That investment requires a high level of confidence that the store will be 
used and will perform as expected.  

Clustering - shared transport and storage infrastructure 

 Work done by the UK CCS Cost Reduction Task Force


33

 suggests that investment in, 6.4.
and effective use of, shared transport and storage infrastructure could deliver about half 
of the cost savings necessary for CCS to be cost competitive with other low carbon 
forms of generation. This is greater than any other contributory factor analysed in their 
report. This analysis suggests that, subject to technical limits on capacity, sharing of 
infrastructure could be key if CCS is to compete with other low carbon generation.  A 
key challenge is therefore the extent to which this investment in shared infrastructure 
can be justified. 

 The Government has sought to facilitate investment in CO2 transport and storage in 6.5.
recent years. These efforts have focussed on: 

 Establishing a system for permitting and leasing of offshore CO2 storage 
sites. Comprehensive arrangements were set out in legislation in 2008 and detail 
subsequently added on the permitting conditions and processes, as well as the 

                                            


31

 https://www.gov.uk/government/groups/ccs-cost-reduction-task-force 


32

 http://www.co2stored.co.uk/ 


33

 https://www.gov.uk/government/groups/ccs-cost-reduction-task-force 


 31 

terms of the lease necessary from The Crown Estate, to progressively develop 
specific storage sites.  These arrangements provide for the prospect of storing 
carbon dioxide in tandem with the recovery of hydrocarbons, through CO₂ EOR.  

 Understanding the Storage Potential of the UK Offshore Area. The UK 
Government has funded or part-funded a number of assessments of the UK 
offshore area. These confirm the enormous potential capacity (at least 100 years 
at current levels of CO2 emissions) but also recognise the uncertainty attached to 
the practical and economic development of those estimates, particularly for less 
characterised features such as saline aquifers. The most recent and detailed 
assessment appraised around 600 potential storage sites, with a total of up to 78 
gigatonnes of capacity. The CO2 Stored


34

 database is one of the most complete 

storage atlases anywhere in the world and is being further developed and made 
available through The Crown Estate and the British Geological Survey. 

 A regulatory backstop to encourage the shared development and use of 
CCS infrastructure. Regulations


35

 were implemented in 2011 to facilitate third 

party access to, or modification of, CCS infrastructure. These are based on a 
process of negotiated access, with the ability for the Government to adjudicate in 
the national interest in the event the parties are unable to reach agreement. 

 Current regulation does not make provision or comment on technical aspects of 
shared CCS infrastructure, such as operating parameters including pipeline 
pressures for wider networks, or specifications for the CO2 to be transported.   

Q5.  We would welcome views on whether this is a priority from an 
industry perspective. 

 The projects under the Commercialisation Programme, i.e. White Rose and 
Peterhead, both have transport and storage infrastructure capacity in excess of 
their own needs.   

Future development of transport and storage infrastructure 

 One of the actions identified by the Cost Reduction Task Force was to put in place 6.6.
arrangements to ensure optimal transport and network configuration.  As a result the 
Storage Development Group was established, reporting into the CCS Development 
Forum. The Government is keen for this Group to have strong industry participation and 
leadership, and to come forward with practical actions needed to help reduce the risks 
of investing in storage site exploration, development and operation identified by the Cost 
Reduction Task Force. We will continue to work with the Group with this objective in 
mind. 

 A number of commentators have pointed to the longer lead times for storage site 6.7.
development compared with other parts of the CCS chain. This is unlikely to be a 
problem for integrated full-chain projects, where the project plan will factor in the 
different duration of each part of the chain. However, there are currently few market 
incentives to invest in exploring and developing storage sites outside of these 
circumstances. If this is the case then future CCS projects will need either to develop 
their project on a timetable consistent with the time needed to explore for and develop 

                                            


34

 http://www.co2stored.co.uk/ 


35

 http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2011/2305/made 


 32 

new CCS transport and storage infrastructure, or make use of existing infrastructure if 
that is practical and available.  

 The Government introduced legislation to facilitate effective utilisation of existing 6.8.
infrastructure in 2011, and we are keen to better understand what further steps may be 
necessary to stimulate private investment in infrastructure deployment. This is already 
an area that the Storage Development Group is considering, but we would also 
welcome views of other interested parties on this point.  

Q6.  What further steps may be necessary to stimulate private investment in 
infrastructure deployment? 

 We have also considered previously how far the current market led approach to CCS 6.9.
infrastructure is capable of delivering the investment needed if CCS is to be widely 
deployed. The essence of this approach is that investment is private sector led and 

stimulated by demand, but with a regulatory backstop (2011 CO2 Infrastructure 
legislation) to enable projects and facilities to be modified where it is in the wider interest 
to do so, and to enable third parties to access existing infrastructure.  In developing the 
Commercialisation Programme, the Government believed that this approach is more 
likely to result in cost-effective investment in CCS infrastructure than would a 
programme of public investment in transport and storage. 

 In 2010 Government consulted on whether a national or regional monopoly (either in the 6.10.
private or public sectors) supplier of transport and storage services should be created 
as an alternative to this market based approach.  Based on the responses received, it 
concluded


36

 that this was unnecessary given the current state of development of CCS, 

but said it would keep the option under review.  It is not apparent that circumstances 
have changed significantly since then. In particular uncertainty about the timing, location 
and scale of CCS deployment, which is essential for CCS infrastructure to be effectively 
planned, does not appear to have reduced significantly since 2010. 

CO2 storage site permits and provision for liabilities under the CCS Directive  

 Carbon dioxide storage can only take place in the UK under the terms of a permit 6.11.
issued by the appropriate regulatory body.  The terms of the permit are set out in 
European legislation, and the permit controls the process of storage as well as placing 
obligations on the permit holder to manage the storage site in an environmentally 
acceptable manner.  It also imposes obligations on the storage site permit holder to take 
remedial action where necessary and to bear the cost of any environmental damage 
caused by the storage site, including climate damage in the event that carbon dioxide 
leaks into the atmosphere. The permit holder is relieved of long-term liability for the site 
once injection comes to an end, the associated infrastructure has been 
decommissioned and the evidence points toward complete and permanent containment 
of the CO2. 

 A number of prospective developers of CO2 sites have identified these regulatory 6.12.
requirements as a disincentive to invest in storage site development.  In particular they 
are concerned about the potential climate change contingent liability that could 
crystallise during the period the permit is in place and - whilst very unlikely - could be 
significantly greater than the revenue earned during the operation of the store if it did 
materialise.  Concern tends to be focussed on the financial implications of the 

                                            


36

 https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/developing-our-carbon-capture-and-storage-ccs-industry 


 33 

obligations, should the most extreme circumstances arise, rather than the obligations 
themselves. 

 There is little scope within current European legislation for Member States to modify the 6.13.
obligations on a storage permit holder. The Government’s approach is therefore to work 
with the industry to help better understand the financial implications of storage liabilities 
that might arise. We recently published an assessment of the potential financial 
consequences from the theoretical leakage of carbon dioxide


37

. In virtually all 

circumstances these consequences are likely to be finite, and remedial measures would 
be available to mitigate the cause of the damage. The European Commission is 
currently reviewing the CCS Directive (as set out below), but it is too early to know 
whether these provisions will be adjusted as a result.  We want to work with industry to 
understand what further work we could do collectively that would help build confidence 
in the financial implications of storage site integrity.  

Q7.  We would welcome views on the current arrangements for permitting the 
operation of storage sites, whether these are proving to be a barrier to 
investment, and if so how these barriers might be overcome. 

CCS Directive 

 The European Commission is currently reviewing the CCS Directive.  The Commission 6.14.
will submit a review report to the European Parliament and to the Council by March 
2015.  An external evaluation study consisting of an on-line survey, follow-up interviews 
and stakeholders meetings is underway.  

 The Commission has signalled that the review will also be a broad based policy review 6.15.
and therefore an opportunity to consider wider European CCS policy – particularly in the 
light of the forthcoming agreement on the 2030 climate and energy package. 

Q8.   Are there elements of the way the CCS Directive has been implemented in 
the UK that ought to be revisited?  What should the UK be asking for during 
the Directive review process? 

Projects of Common Interest (PCI) / Connecting Europe Facility (CEF) funding 

 In October 2013, the European Commission adopted a list of 248 key energy 6.16.
infrastructure projects. These projects had been selected by twelve regional groups 
established by the new guidelines for trans-European energy infrastructure (TEN-E). 
Carrying the label "projects of common interest" (PCI) they will benefit from faster and 
more efficient permit granting procedures and improved regulatory treatment. 

 This list will be updated in October 2015 and could potentially include CO2 transport 6.17.
projects.  In order to progress any potential inclusion on such a list, and to consider any 
CO2 transport proposals if included, the European Commission requires a “thematic 
group” to be established. The North Sea Basin Task Force is currently exploring 
whether it can take on the role of such a thematic group. 

 The European Commission documentation


38

 sets out the eligibility criteria for CO2 6.18.
transport projects.  

                                            


37

 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/co2-storage-liabilities-in-the-north-sea-an-assessment-of-risks-and-financial-consequences-
summary-report-for-decc-may-2012 


38

 http://ec.europa.eu/energy/infrastructure/pci/pci_en.htm 


 34 

 For a project to be included in the list, it has to have significant benefits for at least two 6.19.
Member States (or at least one Member State and one State from the European 
Economic Area); contribute to market integration and further competition; enhance 
security of supply, and reduce CO2 emissions. CO2 transport projects should also 
enable the connection of multiple CO2 sources and storage sites via common 
infrastructure and minimise environmental burden and risks.  

 PCIs may be able to access financial support from the Connecting Europe Facility 6.20.
(CEF), under which a €5.85 billion budget has been allocated to trans-European energy 
infrastructure for the period 2014-20.  Projects can receive co-funding up to 50%. This 
rate can be exceptionally increased to 75% if the project proves through its cost-benefit 
analysis that it contributes to significantly increased regional or Union-wide security of 
supply, that it strengthens the solidarity of the Union or that it comprises highly 
innovative solutions.  CEF can provide financial instruments (project or corporate 
financing) and grants for studies (which minimise risk factors) or works (filling the 
funding gap for non-commercial projects).  

 Given the potential funding opportunity, the Government would encourage the CCS 6.21.
industry to consider how potential project proposals should be identified and developed. 

London Protocol 

 Geological formations underneath the North Sea could act as a storage hub for Europe.  6.22.
However, current international regulation, referred to as the London Protocol


39

, could in 

some circumstances prevent this.  The London Protocol has been interpreted by 
contracting parties as prohibiting the export of CO2 from a contracting party to other 
countries for injection into sub‐seabed geological formations.  

 The protocol was amended by contracting parties in 2009 to allow for cross‐border 6.23.
transportation of CO2 for sub‐seabed storage, but the amendment must be ratified by 
two‐thirds of contracting parties to enter into force.  To date, only a handful of 
contracting parties have ratified.  

 The UK will continue to raise awareness among relevant Governments of the 6.24.
importance to global CCS deployment of ratifying international marine treaty 
amendments, including the London Protocol Article 6 amendment. 


 

Questions: 

Q5. To what extent is it a priority from an industry perspective for regulation to cover 
technical aspects of shared CCS infrastructure, such as operating parameters 
including pipeline pressures for wider networks, or specifications for the CO2 to 
be transported?  

Q6. What further steps may be necessary to stimulate private investment in CO2 
transport and storage infrastructure deployment? 

                                            


39

 1996 Protocol to the 1972 Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter 


 35 

Q7. What are your views on the current arrangements for permitting the operation of 
storage sites?  Are these arrangements proving to be a barrier to investment, and 
if so how might these barriers be overcome? 

Q8. Are there elements of the way the CCS Directive has been implemented in the 
UK that ought to be revisited?  What should the UK be asking for during the 
Directive review process? 


   36 

7. Part Chain and Full Chain projects 

This chapter looks at the interaction between full-chain and part-chain CCS projects in 
developing UK CCS infrastructure. 

Context 

 The Government considers that the best, quickest way to reduce the costs of CCS is to 7.1.
support the deployment of the UK’s first commercial scale CCS projects which 
incorporate the full-chain of CCS activity – capture, transport and safe, permanent 
geological storage.   

 The criteria for the Commercialisation Programme therefore prioritised such full-chain 7.2.
projects.  Part-chain projects were not excluded, but needed to demonstrate potential to 
ultimately form a full-chain project.   

 The full-chain projects under the Commercialisation Programme, i.e. White Rose and 7.3.
Peterhead, both have transport and storage infrastructure capacity in excess of their 
own needs.  Cost Reduction Task Force analysis showed that shared use of 
infrastructure could deliver the biggest cost reduction as compared to other cost 
reductions from cheaper financing, technology learning and engineering improvements, 
and potentially EOR.   

 The Government has not taken any decision on whether potential future support might 7.4.
be directed at full-chain projects, part-chain projects or both, and all projects will need to 
demonstrate that they can deliver value for money.  Notwithstanding this, the full-chain 
infrastructure developed through Phase 1 creates the possibility of future part-chain 
projects, and we set out below some of the issues that might need to be addressed in 
such projects.   

Commercial structures of part-chain projects 

 Part-chain projects, utilising the infrastructure laid down for example by the Phase 1 7.5.
project(s) or any subsequent infrastructure providers, could be formed at either end of 
the pipeline: 

 Part-chain capture projects:  Power stations or heavy industry installing carbon 
capture technology, and plugging into any existing infrastructure in order to 
dispose of their CO2.  

 Part-chain storage projects:  Project developers wishing to make use of 
Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR) techniques in particular may wish to enter some 
form of commercial arrangements to buy captured and transported CO2.   

 It is also possible that infrastructure providers may choose to invest in additional 7.6.
transport infrastructure to link-in with any existing transport and storage infrastructure.  

 A major area where the market still appears immature is the commercial structures 7.7.
which would be needed for part-chain projects to exploit the infrastructure created by 
Phase 1 project(s) or other infrastructure providers. 


 37 

 As set out in chapter 6, the regulatory framework


40

 has been established, by which CCS 7.8.
projects, including Phase 1 project(s), will be expected to allow access to their 
infrastructure on fair and reasonable terms. 

 One key aspect of any commercial structures will be the payment flow of possible CfDs. 7.9.
The core rationale of the CfD under Electricity Market Reform is a strike price to 
incentivise the generation of clean electricity.     

 Conceptually, if a part-chain capture project entered into commercial agreements with 7.10.
Phase 1 projects or any subsequent infrastructure providers on access to their 
infrastructure, the part-chain project could demonstrate that its electricity was clean and 
thereby qualify for a CfD. 

 The part-chain capture project could then use CfD revenue to meet the cost of any tariff 7.11.
agreed with the provider or operator of the existing transport and storage infrastructure.    

Q9.  The Government does not consider it currently has a role, beyond existing 
third party regulations, in establishing the terms and conditions of any 
such agreements.  What steps do you think industry should take to further 
develop the commercial models for any such agreements? 

Question: 

Q9. The Government does not consider it currently has a role, beyond existing third party 
regulations, in establishing the terms and conditions of any agreements between part-
chain projects and full-chain / CO2 infrastructure providers.  What steps do you think 
industry should take to further develop the commercial models for any such 
agreements? 


  

                                            


40

 http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2011/2305/made 


 38 

8. Enhanced oil recovery (EOR) 

The Government is exploring with industry the extent to which CO2-EOR could play a 
significant role in the UK’s CCS deployment and maximise future recovery from the North Sea.   

This chapter outlines the potential opportunity available, provides an update of recent work and 
seeks views on how to further encourage activity in this area. 

Context 

 The UK’s offshore oil and gas reserves, and the industry which has grown to exploit 8.1.
those reserves, has made a significant contribution to the economy and job creation. 
Achieving optimal recovery from the UK’s reserves is demanding, but with the average 

UK Continental Shelf (UKCS) recovery factor from oil fields projected to be 
approximately 47% at end of field life, there is still a significant prize to be gained by 
maximising recovery from the existing oil fields. 

 Enhanced oil recovery (EOR) refers to a range of techniques used to recover 8.2.
incremental oil beyond that which can be extracted from the more conventional 
depletion and waterflood recovery mechanisms.  CO2-based EOR, part of the miscible 
gas injection technique, is one such method. 

 CO2-EOR is sometimes referred to under the umbrella term of “Carbon Capture and 8.3.
Utilisation” (CCU), particularly in the US and China.  Broader CCU issues are explored 
in chapter 11. 

 The CO2-EOR industry has been long established in North America, with over 150 fields 8.4.
in operation generating c250,000 barrels of oil a day


41.   


 The Cost Reduction Task Force recognised the potential contribution of CO2-EOR to the 8.5.
UK’s CCS industry, and calculated that the technique, and revenue generated, could 
reduce the cost of CCS by between £5-£26/MWh (depending on assumptions around 
the underlying power station).  However, as set out in the Government’s Response, it is 
not yet clear to what extent the North American experience can be replicated in the UK 
offshore.  Of 300 fields currently in operation on the UK Continental Shelf, only two are 
EOR schemes, although additional projects are now either in execution, such as the 
world’s first offshore Low Salinity scheme (BP’s Clair Ridge development), or are at pre-
sanction stages of evaluation. The principal barriers to implementing EOR projects 
include: 

 Higher risk for EOR offshore compared to onshore. The well spacing is much 
higher offshore, which increases reservoir uncertainty, and is more difficult to 
carry out small scale pilot projects before committing to full-field development. 

 Supply of secure, low cost EOR injectants, in particular for miscible gas (including 
CO2) EOR. 

 Weight and space limitations on offshore oil platform which make retrofitting major 
new equipment for EOR projects challenging. 


  

                                            


41

 http://www.adv-res.com/pdf/v4ARI%20CCS-CO2-EOR%20whitepaper%20FINAL%204-2-10.pdf 


 39 

The Wood Review; and PILOT EOR Work Group 

 The Wood Review, commissioned by the Government to examine how to maximise 8.6.
recovery from the UK’s oil and gas reserves also recognised the potential of CO2-EOR, 
and stated that “industry should be encouraged more in EOR schemes to avoid leaving 
significant value behind”. The Review also endorsed the work of the PILOT group


42

 - a 

partnership between the UK oil and gas industry and DECC, which established an EOR 
Work Group in 2013. 

 The PILOT EOR Work Group is undertaking a  three phase programme to: 8.7.

 Screen the UKCS fields for EOR potential.  

 Engage industry and look for synergies by geography/geology/EOR type and 
collaborative opportunities to progress EOR understanding. 

 Where possible, initiate EOR projects with operators and / or suppliers. 

 Within this programme of work, PILOT is keen to identify a candidate field for an 8.8.
independent pre-FEED study to assess economic feasibility of CO2 EOR.  However, 
such work is dependent on an operator bringing forward a proposal for detailed review. 

 This programme of work commenced in earnest in October 2013, with a workshop of 8.9.
over 40 experts.  Using an advanced screening tool, all the major oil fields were 
screened for both hydrocarbon miscible gas injection and for CO2 injection.  That 
screening also took into account the distance from the potential CO2 storage hubs that 
may be developed under the CCS Programme, as PILOT believes that CO2 EOR 
projects are more likely to develop by exploiting existing CO2 storage hubs than by 
developing stand-alone CO2 infrastructure.   

 The data from this screening led PILOT to conclude that the top 15 fields could produce 8.10.
an additional 0.6 billion barrels of oil equivalent (boe) with 0.1-0.2 billion boe as a result 
of CO2-EOR.  At an assumed market price of $100 per barrel, that would indicate a 
possible gross revenue of $10bn - $20bn. 

 DECC, as regulator for the offshore oil and gas industry, has recently contacted UKCS 8.11.
field operators to begin a series of “EOR Reviews” to look in more detail at what is 
holding back EOR project investment and what industry and government can do to 
increase EOR activity.  This programme of reviews, responsibility for which will pass to 
the Oil and Gas Authority once it is established, will start in autumn 2014 and is 
expected to take 1-2 years.  These planned reviews will include CO2-EOR proposals.  
Since field development projects are confidential during the planning stage, no further 
details are expected to be released at this stage.  

 These reviews will help inform DECC’s future approach to offshore EOR, including CO2 8.12.
EOR. 

Incentives 

 There is no consensus within industry as to how CO2-EOR could or should develop in 8.13.
the UK.  It has been suggested that Government should take further measures to 
encourage such development. The Government is aware of the significant potential for 
enhanced oil recovery on the UK Continental Shelf.  It will consider evidence from 
industry on the possible need to support gas and oil companies on EOR projects 

                                            


42

 https://www.gov.uk/government/groups/105 


 40 

through its review of the oil and gas tax regime, which was announced at Budget 2014.  
HM Treasury published a call for evidence


43

 on 14 July, marking the start of 12 weeks of 

discussions with industry and other stakeholders on the long-term future of oil and gas 
tax. 

Q10.   On issues of incentives for CO2-EOR, respondents are encouraged to input 
to the HM Treasury call for evidence on the Review of the Oil and Gas 
Fiscal Regime, which closes on 3 October 2014. 

CO2 supply and demand 

 The potential availability of CO2 and the fields in which it can be used may not match up 8.14.
in a timely manner. 

Q11.   How should industry collaborate to best match the needs of CO2 supply 

and demand for any future CO2-EOR industry and how should this be 
managed? 

 Some industry stakeholders have speculated that additional infrastructure may be 8.15.
needed over and above that proposed under Phase 1 project(s), in order to realise the 
potential of EOR - for example a pipeline from the Southern North Sea to the Central 
North Sea.   

Q12.  How should the industry collaborate to take forward any such 
requirements? 

Questions: 

Q10. On issues of incentives for CO2-EOR, respondents are encouraged to input to the 
HM Treasury call for evidence on the Review of the Oil and Gas Fiscal Regime, 
which closes on 3 October 2014 

Q11. How should industry collaborate to best match the needs of CO2 supply and 
demand for any future CO2-EOR industry and how should this be managed? 

Q12. How should the industry collaborate to take forward any additional transportation 
infrastructure requirements of any future CO2-EOR industry? 


  

                                            


43

 https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/review-of-the-oil-and-gas-fiscal-regime-a-call-for-evidence  


 41 

9. Industrial CCS 

To meet the UK’s longer term ambitions on climate change, carbon dioxide emissions will need 
to be substantially reduced.  For some energy intensive industries, CCS is likely to be a key 
part of the technology mix required to make such reductions.   

This chapter summarises the Government’s activity to date and seeks views on possible next 
steps. 

Terminology 

 Industrial CCS refers to capturing and storing carbon emissions from energy intensive 9.1.
industries such as iron and steel, cement, refineries and chemicals.  This includes 

emissions from industrial processes, and from equipment used to generate heat and 
electricity on industrial sites.    

Context 

 The Government expects Industrial CCS (ICCS) to be a key option for delivering the 9.2.
significant carbon abatement required in energy intensive industries.  

 Analysis by the International Energy Agency (IEA) shows that industrial sectors such as 9.3.
iron and steel, cement, refineries and chemicals account for 20% of total global CO2 
emissions.  Furthermore, emissions from each of these sectors are expected to grow 
until at least 2050 under current policies.  The IEA estimate that industrial applications 
could comprise half of the emission reductions achieved through CCS globally by 


205044.  

 Without CCS it may not be possible to substantially decarbonise these sectors in the 9.4.
medium or even long term as many industrial processes unavoidably generate CO2 as a 
result of chemical reactions that are integral to the formation of the final product. Whilst 
energy efficiency and fuel switching will reduce emissions they will become increasingly 
expensive. Hence economies with energy intensive industries will find their 
decarbonisation efforts becoming both more difficult and costly without large scale 
industrial CCS.  

 Whilst considerable knowledge and experience can be transferred from the power 9.5.
generation sector’s development of carbon capture technologies to energy intensive 
industries, there are also unique challenges in relation to suitable capture technologies, 
sector specific commercial considerations, and impact on end products’ cost and 
quality. 

 Recent government modelling


45

 suggests that ICCS could be an important means of 9.6.
carbon reduction for industry from the mid-2020s in the UK. However, there are 
currently just a handful of ICCS projects around the world.  


  

                                            


44

   http://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/CCS_Annex.pdf 


45

 Modelling to support The future of heating: meeting the challenge - report by Redpoint 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/197562/baringa_heat_paper_analytical_support.pdf  

https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/197562/baringa_heat_paper_analytical_support.pdf


 42 

Industrial CCS: Techno-economic study 


 

BIS and DECC funded a techno-economic study of carbon capture and carbon utilisation 

technologies in four key energy intensive industry sectors – iron and steel, cement, chemicals and 

refineries.  Companies in these sectors, along with academia, provided input and oversight 

throughout the study.   


 

The study focused on understanding possible technologies which could lead to deployment by 

2025, an ambition expressed in the Committee on Climate Change’s 4th Carbon Budget, as well as 

related costs. 


 

Key findings included: 


 

 Some (first generation) technologies such as amine solvents can be rolled out by 2025 in 

most sectors if demonstrated by 2020.   Exceptions include cement, where site conditions 

may favour calcium looping technology.  Calcium looping is at an earlier stage of 

development but published cost estimates suggest it is of lower cost than some first 

generation technologies.   


 

 Industrial carbon capture is expected to cost over £50 per tonne of CO2 captured for all 

technologies, with the exception of capture from high purity streams associated with some 

chemicals processes, notably ammonia and hydrogen manufacture. The range of costs is 

comparable to expected costs of capture in the power sector.  


 

 ‘First generation’ amine technologies are likely to be most cost-effective for all industries in 

the mid-2020s, though more cost effective technologies may become available shortly 

thereafter. 


 

 ‘Second generation’ technologies, including those more optimised for each sector, could be 

available around 2025 if development and deployment are accelerated (and are more likely 

to be cost effective in the 2030s)  


 

Work to date 

 Work in early 2013 by BIS and by the UK CCS Research Centre on technological 9.7.
aspects of CCS, found a complex picture with different technology needs in each sector 
and highly uncertain and variable costs.   

 In order to provide more evidence, BIS and DECC commissioned further analysis which 9.8.
was undertaken collaboratively with industry, and published in May 2014.  The results 
are summarised below: 


  43 

 The report identifies site level barriers, the most pertinent of which detailed engineering 

studies, pilots and demonstrations could reduce are: 

o Increased operational complexity and risks (unavailability, process dependencies) 

o New applications of existing technologies which are not yet proven at scale 

o Plant integration risks (hidden costs of additional downtime, alternative product 

supplies, technology lock-in)  

o High levels of uncertainty regarding costs  

 Carbon Capture and Utilisation (CCU) for industrial emissions is unlikely to be 

commercial by the mid-2020s (see chapter 11 for further discussion of CCU). 


  


 This techno-economic study shows CCS in industrial sectors is still at an early stage 9.9.
compared to the power sector and may require government intervention for the 
technologies to become commercial.   

Current evidence gathering and policy development  

 The Government is undertaking or supporting a number of key pieces of work to further 9.10.
understand and support the development of industrial CCS. These include work as part 
of the Tees Valley City Deal, and the Industrial 2050 Decarbonisation and Energy 
Efficiency Roadmaps project. 

Tees Valley City Deal 

 Some of the above barriers, such as uncertain costs and commercial requirements, are 9.11.
being explored in Teesside through work funded under the Tees Valley City Deal


46

.  The 

Local Enterprise Partnership, Tees Valley Unlimited, has been awarded £1m, alongside 
industry contributions, to carry out: 

 pre-FEED (Front-End Engineering and Design) analysis on capture, transport and 
storage from multiple industrial sources in Teesside; and 

 development of possible business and investment models for industrial CCS in 
Teesside 

 The project is expected to conclude towards the end of 2015. 9.12.

Industrial 2050 Decarbonisation and Energy Efficiency Roadmaps  

 The recent techno-economic study evidence is contributing to analysis by BIS and 9.13.
DECC on Industrial 2050 Decarbonisation and Energy Efficiency Roadmaps, which will 
inform medium to long term decarbonisation policies for energy intensive industries and 

will report in 2015. 

 The project involves collaborative work with eight energy intensive industries to identify 9.14.
potential emissions reduction pathways, and to agree immediate next steps to help 
enable progress. Work is already underway with all eight sectors, with iron and steel, 
and paper and pulp most advanced. 


  

                                            


46

 https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/321751/Tees_Valley_City_Deal_Document.pdf 


 44 

On-site generation / Private Networks 

 The Government consulted extensively in designing the generic CfD and allocation 9.15.
methodology, and published the draft CfD Agreement and terms and conditions (April 
2014). Furthermore, the Final CfD Operational Framework (published in November 
2012) stated that eligible low-carbon electricity generation operating on a ‘private wire’ 
network could participate within the CfD regime. The Government has since published 
the CfD for Private Network Generation: policy overview (June 2014)


47

.  The policy 

overview sets out how license-exempt, renewable generators operating on a private 
network (and with an onsite customer) will be able to participate in the CfD regime. 

 As part of the Government’s approach to developing CfDs and an allocation framework 9.16.
for CCS projects outside the CCS Competition, we would welcome views on:  

Q13.  What changes to the CfD design would developers need in order to bring 

forward projects involving industrial emitters installing CCS on their onsite 
power generation?  Respondents should note that the Government intends 
to publish further guidance on Private Network Generation in early Autumn 
2014.   

Future policy work 

 Policy for industrial CCS will continue to be developed, using the outputs from the 9.17.
techno-economic study, Tees Valley project and the Industrial 2050 Decarbonisation 
and Energy Efficiency Roadmaps.  

 We would welcome thoughts on what should be considered as part of this work.  Key 9.18.
issues to be explored include: 

Q14.  Which of the barriers are the most important and how should they be 
overcome? 

Q15.  What is the best next step for each sector?  For example, should first 
generation technologies be brought forward in all sectors, or would it be 
better to consider bespoke actions per sector? 

Q16.   How should any Government activity best support R&D and innovation for 
ICCS? 

 We intend to hold a workshop in autumn 2014 to exchange views and seek further 9.19.
inputs from industry about how best to make progress on innovation in industrial CCS.  

Questions: 

Q13. What changes to the CfD design would developers need in order to bring forward 
projects involving industrial emitters installing CCS on their onsite power generation?  

Respondents should note that the Government intends to publish further guidance 
on Private Network Generation in early Autumn 2014.   

Q14. Which of the barriers to industrial CCS are the most important and how should they 
be overcome? 

                                            


47

 https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/320667/policy_overview.pdf 

https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/305539/cfd_agreement.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/305536/generic_cfd_t_and_cs.pdf


 45 

Q15. What is the best next step for each sector?  For example, should first generation 
technologies be brought forward in all sectors, or would it be better to consider 
bespoke actions per sector? 

Q16. How should any Government activity best support R&D and innovation for ICCS? 


   46 

10. Bio-CCS / BECCS 

In the long term, combining bioenergy with CCS (BECCS) to produce negative emissions


48 is 

predicted to offer a key route by which the UK could meet its 2050 targets. 

This chapter briefly sets out Government policy development to date. 

Context 

 The 2014 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report highlighted the 10.1.
importance of Bioenergy and CCS, sometimes referred to as BECCS or BioCCS: 

 “Combining bioenergy with CCS (BECCS) offers the prospect of energy supply 
with large-scale net negative emissions”


49 

 Energy system models, such as that developed by the Energy Technologies Institute 10.2.
(ETI)


50

, also highlight the importance of BECCS and “negative emissions”. 

 Biomass can be used as the single fuel source for power generation (dedicated use) or 10.3.
in combination with conventional coal sources (co-fired generation).  

 When combined with CCS, it offers the potential of “negative emissions” by taking 10.4.
atmospheric CO2 temporarily locked in plants and storing them permanently in 
geological formations


51. 

 The Government is committed to ensuring that bioenergy used in the UK energy system 10.5.
is from sustainable sources.  DECC has developed a scientific calculator


52

 to investigate 

the impact on carbon emissions of biomass sourced from North America to produce 
electricity.   

Policy development to date 

 In 2012, the ETI


53

 undertook a study on the technical aspects of combining bioenergy 10.6.
and CCS. 

 The FEED programme for White Rose, under the UK CCS Commercialisation 10.7.
Programme, includes a design option of co-firing biomass with coal. 

 To date, through the EU Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) mechanism and 10.8.
Electricity Market Reform, there are incentives to deploy biomass combustion and CCS 
respectively.  However, there are no specific incentives to deploy bio-CCS / BECCS. 

 The Government, as set out in the Bioenergy Strategy (2012)


54

, recognises that full 10.9.
exploitation of the potential from BECCS will require further work to understand how 
trading in negative emissions may be incorporated into carbon trading mechanisms in 
the long term, either globally or at regional level, such as within the EU ETS.   

                                            


48

 https://workspace.imperial.ac.uk/climatechange/Public/pdfs/Briefing%20Papers/Briefing%20Paper%208.pdf 


49

 Pg25, Section 4.2.2, IPCC, 2014: Summary for Policymakers, In: Climate Change 2014, Mitigation of Climate Change. 
http://report.mitigation2014.org/spm/ipcc_wg3_ar5_summary-for-policymakers_approved.pdf 


50

 http://www.eti.co.uk/modelling-low-carbon-energy-system-designs-with-the-eti-esme-model/ 


51

 Definition taken from Grantham Institute briefing paper: 
https://workspace.imperial.ac.uk/climatechange/Public/pdfs/Briefing%20Papers/Briefing%20Paper%208.pdf 


52

 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/life-cycle-impacts-of-biomass-electricity-in-2020 


53

 http://www.eti.co.uk/project/biomass-to-power-with-carbon-capture-and-storage/ 


54

 https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/48337/5142-bioenergy-strategy-.pdf 


 47 

 The Committee on Climate Change’s 2014 Progress Report to Parliament


55

 10.10.
recommended that: 

“[The EU ETS Reform and] regulatory regime should also allow for negative emissions 

(e.g. from use of bioenergy with CCS) to count towards required emissions reduction.” 

Q17.  We would welcome views as to what issues the UK Government may want 
to urge the European Commission to consider regarding BECCS before 
they propose the detailed architecture of EU climate and energy policy for 
the period post-2020, including revisions to the EU ETS Directive for phase 
IV of the EU ETS (2021-2030). 

Question: 

Q17.  We would welcome views as to what issues the UK Government may want to urge 
the European Commission to consider regarding BECCS before they propose the 
detailed architecture of EU climate and energy policy for the period post-2020, 
including revisions to the EU ETS Directive for phase IV of the EU ETS (2021-
2030). 


     

                                            


55

 http://www.theccc.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/CCC-Progress-Report-2014_web_2.pdf 


 48 

11. Carbon Capture and Utilisation (CCU) 

Carbon Capture and Utilisation (CCU) technologies could offer a route to making CO2 a 
commodity rather than a waste product. 

This chapter summarises the Government’s current approach. 

Context 

 CCU refers to technologies which can capture and then convert CO2 into viable 11.1.
commercial products such as construction materials, biofuels, fertilisers and polymers. 

 Particularly in the US and China, the term “CCU” also includes Enhanced Oil Recovery 11.2.
(EOR) (see chapter 8).  

Current activity 

 As part of the 4-year, £125m CCS R&D Programme, the Government and its partners 11.3.
are investing around £10m in CCU.  The Government, through the Research Councils, 
also supports the CO2-Chem network


56

, one of the largest networking groups for 

academia and industry to share ideas on CCU. 

 Recent expert reports suggest that most CCU technologies remain at the R&D level


57

 11.4.
and are unlikely to be commercial by the mid-2020s, although some are advancing and 
already attracting private sector investment

58;59


.   


Q18.  The Government and its R&D partners will continue to monitor the 
progress of CCU technologies, as part of wider efforts on CCS.  Do you 
wish to offer any evidence of such progress? 

Question: 

Q18.  The Government and its R&D partners will continue to monitor the progress of CCU 
technologies, as part of its wider efforts on CCS.  Do you wish to offer any 
evidence of such progress? 


   

                                            


56

 http://co2chem.co.uk/ 


57

 CCU in the Green Economy, 2011 


58

 http://www.econic-technologies.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/Econic-Press-Release1.pdf 


59

 http://www.c8s.co.uk/index.php 


 49 

12. Supply chain 

The CCS supply chain is likely to share many characteristics with the supply chain for other 
major energy infrastructure projects.   

This chapter outlines how the Government will support companies to exploit the opportunities 
in this nascent sector. 


 

Context 

 A thriving CCS supply chain is beneficial for the UK economy and will be essential as 12.1.
CCS develops. The deployment of CCS, starting with the White Rose and Peterhead 
CCS projects, represents multi-billion pound opportunities for companies at all levels in 
the supply chain.   

Current approach  

 As with other infrastructure projects of similar scale, the supply chain for developing, 12.2.
constructing and operating a commercial CCS project will be complex, involving a range 
of businesses and contractual relationships. The Government has no role in dictating 
these arrangements, other than to ensure that public funding does not distort these 
normal commercial processes.  

 It is expected that the Phase 1 CCS projects will help stimulate the supply chain, 12.3.
providing opportunities across the different stages: 

 at the design and planning stage; 

 at the construction stage, the opportunity to supply equipment and services; 

 through on-going services during operation; and 

 at the decommissioning stage. 

 The Government has set out that projects wishing to apply for a CfD must have a supply 12.4.
chain plan before they can apply.  Similar requirements will be made to projects under 
the Commercialisation Programme.  The aim of the supply chain plan assessment 
process is to encourage the effective development of low carbon electricity generation 
supply chains by encouraging open and competitive tenders and the promotion of 
innovation and skills which will in turn drive down the cost of low carbon generation over 
the long term and result in lower energy costs to consumers.  By delivering low carbon 
generation as efficiently as possible and at least cost to consumers, more generation 
will be supported which will ensure that consumers have access to the secure energy 
they need at affordable prices.  

Supporting companies wishing to exploit opportunities in the CCS sector 

 The Energy Industries Council (EIC), supported by DECC, facilitated a Ministerial 12.5.
Supply Chain Event in May 2014.  Both CCS Competition projects set out their plans 
and future procurement intentions, which are likely to emerge from late 2015 onwards. 
DECC intends to work with partners to facilitate further CCS supply chain engagement 
during 2015 to raise awareness of these opportunities.  


 50 

 A number of routes are available to support companies that may wish to supply goods 12.6.
and services to CCS projects.  For example, the Department for Business, Innovation 
and Skills’ Advanced Manufacturing Supply Chain Initiative (AMSCI)


60

 provides grant 

funding to organisations. 

International projects 

 With the UK seen as leaders in the development of CCS, increasingly there are 12.7.
opportunities to supply goods and services to international CCS projects. DECC will 
continue to engage with UKTI regarding possibilities for both inward and outward 
investment as the CCS industry develops. 

Q19.  Is any further action needed to support supply chain companies wishing to 
supply good and services to CCS projects in the UK or abroad? 

Longer term CCS supply chain capacity  

 In 2012, the Government commissioned analysis


61

 which concluded that the capacity in 12.8.
the UK supply chain would not act as a constraint on future deployment of CCS out to 
2030.  Any potential barriers, outlined below, were expected to resolve themselves as 
the UK CCS market grows.   

Q20.   Do you agree that currently there does not appear to be significant supply 
chain barriers to the commercial deployment of CCS up to 2030?  If your 
answer is no, please set out why, with supporting evidence. 

Questions: 

Q19. Is any further action needed to support supply chain companies wishing to supply 
good and services to CCS projects in the UK, or abroad? 

Q20.   Do you agree that currently there does not appear to be significant supply chain 
barriers to the commercial deployment of CCS up to 2030?  If your answer is no, 
please set out why, with supporting evidence. 


   

                                            


60

 https://www.financebirmingham.com/amsci/  (the scheme is run by Finance Birmingham for BIS) 


61

 AEA’s 2012 Report “Assessing the Domestic Supply Chain Barriers to the Commercial Deployment of Carbon Capture and Storage within 
the Power Sector”; https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/140108/AEA_Technology_reprort_-
_Assessing_the_Domestic_Supply_Chain_Barriers_to_the_Commercial_Deployment_of_Carbon_Capture_and_Storage_within_the_Power_S
ector_-_FINAL.pdf 


 51 

13. Knowledge transfer (KT) 

Knowledge transfer is a key philosophy which underpins the CCS Commercialisation 
Programme. CCS projects in receipt of Government support will be expected to share their 
experience and learning with the wider industry to support development and cost reduction. 


 

This chapter summarises the Government’s current approach, and explores possible 
approaches under any future phases of CCS deployment. 


 

Context  

 Knowledge Transfer (KT) refers to the principle of sharing learning and experience 13.1.
gained by projects under the CCS Commercialisation Programme.  In broader terms, KT 
is the process of collating and disseminating information, know-how (how to do and 
deliver), skills and experience (tacit knowledge) on all aspects of delivering a large scale 
full chain CCS project through FEED, construction, commissioning, operation, 
decommissioning and post-closure monitoring.  

Current approach  

 Amongst other benefits, Phase 1 projects are intended to support commercial scale 13.2.
CCS by sharing knowledge to help mature and de-risk CCS deployment.  This 
knowledge includes programme and risk management; commercial arrangements and 
financial options; technical design and integration of all the sub-systems within the CCS 
chain; operating and maintenance philosophy; understanding the supply chain; and 
compliance with statutory and regulatory regimes.  To protect commercial and 
proprietary information, KT will not include commercially sensitive information.   

 Knowledge will be disseminated through reports made freely available to all on the 13.3.
Government’s website.  In addition, there will be mechanisms to share know-how and 
experience, such as participation at seminars and workshops and the hosting of 
secondments from the UK academic community.   

Knowledge transfer for phase two projects 

 Phase 1 projects will be contracted to provide KT as part of the capital expenditure grant 13.4.
award.   

 It is intended that this KT will cover the whole-life project cycle, from FEED through to 13.5.
decommissioning and monitoring.   

Q21.  Should similar arrangements be made for the provision of KT from any 
Government supported future CCS projects?  If so, what kind of aspects of 
KT does industry find most useful?  

 We identified the target audience for the KT from Phase 1 projects as those integral to 13.6.
the future deployment of CCS, including: prospective CCS developers, owners and 
operators; the CCS supply chain; policy makers in the UK and other governments, and 
regulators; CCS financiers and insurers; industry bodies; and the research community, 
though they can be accessed freely by all.   


 52 

Q22.  How can KT from projects under the Commercialisation Programme and 
any future projects be most usefully disseminated, e.g. via report, 
workshops, seminars etc.?   

Questions: 

Q21. Should similar arrangements be made for the provision of KT from any future CCS?  
If so, what kind of aspects of KT does industry find most useful? 

Q22. How can KT from projects under the Commercialisation Programme and any future 
projects be most usefully disseminated, e.g. via report, workshops, seminars etc.?   


    53 

14. Research, development and 
innovation 

Continued research, development and innovation is expected to further reduce the costs of 
CCS by creating better, cheaper components and processes.   

This chapter summarises the Government’s current approach, and possible future actions. 

Context 

 Further development and refinement of existing technologies and innovative 14.1.
breakthroughs are vital if the costs of CCS are to be reduced.   

Current programme  

 The UK has a 4-year (2011-2015) £125 million cross-government CCS research, 14.2.
development and innovation programme. Funding comes from the Department of 
Energy and Climate Change (DECC), the Technology Strategy Board (TSB), the Energy 
Technologies Institute (ETI) and the Research Councils and covers: 

 £62 million to support fundamental research and understanding, including £13 
million to establish the UK CCS Research Centre to bring together the UK’s top 
CCS academics to promote and coordinate UK CCS research capability and 
increase academic collaboration with industry. 

 £28 million to support the development and demonstration of CCS components 
and next generation technologies, such as new solvents and capture 
technologies, turbines and CO2 metering and monitoring technologies.    

 £35 million for pilot scale projects to bridge the gap between research and 
commercial scale deployment. 

 The Advanced Power Generation Technology Forum (APGTF), with input from the UK 14.3.
CCS Research Centre, has undertaken a prioritisation of R&D needs for CCS.


62

     

Future funding & project selection   

 As part of the £125m programme, DECC launched a £20m CCS Innovation competition.  14.4.
Based on feedback from our academic and industrial stakeholders, that competition was 
open to all aspects of CCS, provided projects could demonstrate cost reduction 
potential.  As a result, funded projects included: capture technologies, transportation 
and metering, storage, CCU and industrial CCS.   

 The Government and partners intend to make available further funding for CCS R&D for 14.5.
Financial Year (FY) 15/16, to be announced in autumn 2014. 

Question: 

Q23. For any future funding calls, should R&D funding be targeted at specific aspects of 
the CCS chain, or level of technology maturity?  

                                            


62

 Ch4, Cleaner Fossil Power Generation in the 21st Century – Moving Forward 2014 http://apgtf-uk.com/index.php/publications/publications-
2014/doc_download/15-cleaner-fossil-power-generation-in-the-21st-century-moving-forward-2014 


 54 

Section C  


 55 

15. Catalogue of questions  


  

Ch 4:  Financial Incentives and Electricity Market Reform 

Q1. To what extent would developers be prepared to invest in FEED costs ahead of 
allocation of a CfD, and if they are not able to do so what measures could be adopted 
so that the developers have sufficient certainty of their costs and a Strike Price to 
form the basis of an investment decision? 

Q2. How best should the industry-led CCS Commercial Development Group work to 
support project developers in engaging with finance markets? 

Q3.  To what extent should Government reflect long-term risks of full chain CCS projects 
in the design of a CCS CfD? In particular, we will want to explore the extent to which 
similar risks also arise in other sectors and the changes that may be needed in CfD 
design to put CCS on an equivalent basis to other low carbon technologies. 

Ch 5:  Financing CCS projects 

Q4. Are the existing products offered by the Green Investment Bank (GIB), Infrastructure 
UK (IUK) and the European Investment Bank (EIB) sufficient to support CCS projects 
in raising necessary finance from non-public sources?  If not, please explain why, 
with supporting evidence, and what kind of additional financing or products would be 
needed? 

Ch 6:  Transport and Storage Infrastructure 

Q5. To what extent is it a priority from an industry perspective for regulation to cover 
technical aspects of shared CCS infrastructure, such as operating parameters 
including pipeline pressures for wider networks, or specifications for the CO2 to be 
transported?  

Q6. What further steps may be necessary to stimulate private investment in infrastructure 
deployment 

Q7. What are your views on the current arrangements for permitting the operation of 
storage sites? Are these proving to be a barrier to investment, and if so how might 
these barriers be overcome? 

Q8. Are there elements of the way the CCS Directive has been implemented in the UK 
that ought to be revisited?  What should the UK be asking for during the Directive 
review process? 


 56 

Ch 7:  Part and Full Chain projects 

Q9. The Government does not consider it currently has a role, beyond existing third party 
regulations, in establishing the terms and conditions of any agreements between 
part-chain projects and full-chain  / CO2 infrastructure providers.  What steps do you 
think industry should take to further develop the commercial models for any such 
agreements? 

Ch 8:  Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR) 

Q10. On issues of incentives for CO2-EOR, respondents are encouraged to input to the 
HM Treasury call for evidence on the Review of the Oil and Gas Fiscal Regime, 

which closes on 3 October 2014 

Q11. How should industry collaborate to best match the needs of CO2 supply and demand 
for any future CO2-EOR industry and how should this be managed? 

Q12. How should the industry collaborate to take forward any additional transportation 
infrastructure requirements of any future CO2-EOR industry? 

Ch 9:  Industrial CCS 

Q13. What changes to the CfD design would developers need in order to bring forward 
projects involving industrial emitters installing CCS on their onsite power generation?  
Respondents should note that the Government intends to publish further guidance on 
Private Network Generation in early Autumn 2014.   

Q14. Which of the barriers to industrial CCS are the most important and how should they 
be overcome? 

Q15. What is the best next step for each sector?  For example, should first generation 
technologies be brought forward in all sectors, or would it be better to consider 
bespoke actions per sector? 

Q16. How should any Government activity best support R&D and innovation for ICCS? 

Ch 10:  Bio-CCS / BECCS 

Q17.  We would welcome views as to what issues the UK Government may want to urge 
the European Commission to consider regarding BECCS before they propose the 
detailed architecture of EU climate and energy policy for the period post-2020, 
including revisions to the EU ETS Directive for phase IV of the EU ETS (2021-2030). 


  57 

Ch 11:  CCU 

Q18.  The Government and its R&D partners will continue to monitor the progress of CCU 
technologies, as part of its wider efforts on CCS.  Do you wish to offer any evidence 
of such progress? 

Ch 12:  Supply Chain 

Q19.  Is any further action needed to support supply chain companies wishing to supply 
good and services to CCS projects in the UK, or abroad? 

Q20.   Do you agree that currently there does not appear to be significant supply chain 

barriers to the commercial deployment of CCS up to 2030?  If your answer is no, 
please set out why, with supporting evidence. 

Ch 13:  Knowledge Transfer (KT) 

Q21. Should similar arrangements as those under the Commercialisation Programme, be 
made for the provision of KT from any future CCS projects?  If so, what kind of 
aspects of KT does industry find most useful? 

Q22. How can KT from projects under the Commercialisation Programme and any future 
projects be most usefully disseminated, e.g. via report, workshops, seminars etc.?   

Ch 14:  Research, Development and Innovation 

Q23. For any future funding calls, should R&D funding be targeted at specific aspects of 
the CCS chain, or level of technology maturity?  


    58 

Annex I - Government’s approach to Risk 
Allocation under Phase 1 of the 
Commercialisation Programme [i] 

[Full documentation can be found at: 
https://online.contractsfinder.businesslink.gov.uk/Common/View%20Notice.aspx?site=1000&lang=en&noticeid=56
0937&fs=true] 


 

Chapter 5 of Invitation to Participate in Discussions (ITPD), April 2012 


 

5. Risk allocation 


 

5.1. Introduction  


 

5.1.1. Importance of risk 


 

(a) Risk identification, risk ownership and risk management are critical components to  
the successful delivery of the CCS Commercialisation Programme and to the development of a commercial CCS 
industry. They will be an important element of any commercial arrangements the Authority enters into with a 
Bidder, and the successful management of risk will be key to any Payment Mechanism and incentive 
regime. 


 

(b) The Authority has undertaken considerable analysis of the Demonstrator 1 and of  
information obtained from market soundings. It recognises that each potential Project will have a particular risk 
profile and each Bidder a particular risk appetite. 


 

5.1.2 Bidder risk assessment requirements 


 

Bidders are expected to demonstrate in their Bids that they have a clear understanding of the full range of risks 
that are associated with their Bids (see instructions to Bidders later in this section). They are expected to have 
completed and to evidence in Bids a comprehensive risk assessment, including assessment of the consequence 
of particular risks maturing and of the mitigation actions that need to be in place both to reduce the likelihood of 
risks crystallising and the impact (financial, technical and temporal) if they do. 


 

5.1.3 This section of ITPD 


 

This section of the ITPD describes the Authority’s approach and underpinning concepts for the assessment and 
allocation of risks. It sets out the Government’s position on risk allocation. It should be read alongside Part 4 of 
this ITPD which describes how risk allocation will be contractualised. 


 

5.2 Authority’s approach to risk 


 

5.2.1 General principle of risk allocation 


 

(a) Risks will primarily be allocated to the party with the best ability to influence and manage such risks. The 
Authority therefore expects industry to be responsible for managing the many risks inherent in the development 
and operation of CCS Projects which are within their natural sphere of competence – risks such as ensuring that 
timely construction conforms with design, that private capital is available when contracted to be available and that 
systems are properly operated once constructed. These have been categorised as "Business As Usual "risks. 


 

(b) Industry’s expert ability to manage these risks, and to apply this expertise to finding 
solutions to the novel problems posed by CCS, is at the heart of the CCS Commercialisation Programme. 


 

5.2.2 CCS-specific risks 


 

Before solutions for complex risks 


 59 

(a) It is recognised that the nature of some particular risks unique to CCS are such that they are not yet well 
understood and/or readily insured against or easily managed. The Authority considers that a pragmatic solution 
will need to be established between industry and Government for the management of, and liability for, those risks. 


 

(b) However, the Authority will not contract: 


 

(i) for Government to manage risks which, despite their novelty and emerging nature, industry has better expertise 
to manage; or 


 

(ii) for industry to manage risks which are wholly outside its control and which Government or other stakeholders 
are better placed to manage. 


 

Shared risks migrates to industry over time 


 

(c) Some risks may be shared and the Authority expects that there may be a distinction to be drawn between the 
management of some risks (often best placed with industry) and the financial consequences of risks maturing. 


 

(d) The Authority’s analysis suggests that risk allocation and management in some areas should change over time 
as risks become better understood and Projects become better defined and developed. The contractual 
arrangements described in Part 4 of this ITPD will include a mechanism for change that allows this to occur at an 
affordable price, and with value-for-money and Deliverability as the key drivers. 


 

Some Projects may not succeed 


 

(e) Ultimately, it is possible that a Project may, despite the best efforts of all parties, prove that CCS, or a 
particular CCS technology, is not economically viable at Commercial Scale. If this happens, this is not a risk that 
the Authority expects Bidders to take exclusively. 


 

5.3 Overview of Authority’s required risk allocation 


 

5.3.1 General 


 

(a) The Authority seeks to achieve a process for the allocation and management of risk which maximises the 
delivery of the CCS Commercialisation Outcome at best value for taxpayers and electricity consumers and within 
affordability constraints. 


 

(b) The Authority recognises that to deliver the CCS Commercialisation Outcome at best value-for-money within 
affordability constraints it needs to balance the exposure of participants (Government and industry) to risk in a 
manner which makes Projects fundable, from both public and private sources. 


 

(c) At a high level, it is expected that risks will be allocated and managed by one or more parties and managed 
through the agreed contractual mechanisms. To achieve this it is necessary to identify and characterise all 
material risk, including its likelihood and impact to time, cost and performance and agree appropriate mitigation 
action and identify the party best able to manage it. 


 

5.3.2 FEED work 


 

(a) A key risk mitigant will be work that industry has done or does to explore and develop its understanding and 
reduction of risk during FEED work. The Authority is willing to consider part-funding of this work on the basis 
described in the draft FEED Contract. 


 

(b) FEED will be commissioned where Bids, selected through Evaluation, are insufficiently mature in terms of cost 
uncertainty, risk understanding or other factors to justify the immediate award of a Project Contract. 


 

5.3.3 Project Contract, CfD and PCG 


 

The primary risk allocation arrangements will be contained in the suite of contracts that may be awarded to 
Bidders. These are described in Part 4 of this ITPD and comprise primarily: 


  60 

(a) The Project Contract. This will be the principal contract for the injection of Capital Grant for construction 
funding by the Authority and addressing design and construction risks and others that apply during the period 
before the CCS systems have all completed commissioning. Certain other, longer term risks will also be 
addressed in this contract. A summary of this contract is set out in Section 4 of Part 4 of this ITPD. 


 

(b) The Contract for Difference that is intended to be agreed at the time that the Project Contract is executed, 
subject to modification at key project Milestones to reflect agreed risk allocation. A summary of the main terms 
that the Authority envisages this will contain is set out in Section 5 of Part 4 of this ITPD. This is intended to be a 
vehicle for funding operating period costs and (potentially) further contributions towards capital costs. It is 
intended to address the risks associated with electricity market price volatility; and 


 

(c) The Parent Company Guarantee described in Section 6 of Part 4 of this ITPD and set out in Appendix 8. 


 

5.3.4 Risk proposition 


 

The Authority has established and reflected in this ITPD what it considers to be a balanced proposition on risk 
allocation which reflects the approach described above. The Authority accepts that, in Projects as novel as those 
which will participate in the CCS Commercialisation Programme, negotiation of risk allocation will be required to 
strike the optimum balance; however, during these negotiations it does not expect a wholesale departure from the 
proposition set out in this ITPD. 


 

5.3.5 Baseline Risk Allocation Matrix 


 

Purpose 


 

(a) The Baseline Risk Allocation Matrix is set out in Appendix 11 of this ITPD. It has been developed as a means 
through which to present the principal risks that arise in a potential CCS Project. It does so assuming an 
integrated CCS Full Chain Project. It is intended as a mechanism to show how the Authority expects risks to be 
allocated between industry and the Government and provide a reasoned justification for the allocation. 


 

Instructions to Bidders 


 

(b) Bidders are accordingly urged to accept and price the risk allocation proposed in the Baseline Risk Allocation 
and the Contracts Principles set out in Part 4 of this ITPD. Departures from the Authority’s Baseline Risk 
Allocation proposition must be itemised and fully detailed. Each must be priced, to allow the Authority to assess 
the improved value for money afforded by the proposed change. 


 

Evaluation of Bid risk profile 


 

(c) The extent to which a Bid departs from the Authority’s Baseline Risk Allocation, any enhanced value for money 
offered will be Evaluated. Significant detrimental departures will attract concomitantly negative Evaluation. Bids 
which depart from the Authority’s risk proposition to such an extent as to call into question the likelihood that 
the Authority would be able to conclude a negotiation successfully will be Evaluated accordingly. The Authority 
reserves the right to reject any Bid which leads it to conclude that a negotiation is unlikely to be successful. 


 

(d) It follows that the Authority considers that any Bid in which Bidders propose to accept and manage additional 
risk to that already allocated to industry in the Authority’s proposed allocation will be Evaluated more favourably, 
provided it is demonstrated that the risks concerned can be managed effectively. 


 

Bidder discussion of risk 


 

(e) Bidders are urged to use the discussion process described in Section 3 of Part 1 of this ITPD to test proposed 
deviations from the Authority’s risk proposition. 


 

Preference for integrated Bidders 


 

(f) Bids which are made on a fully integrated basis – where a single contract can be placed with a single Bid 
Vehicle, which is responsible for managing the entire Project and all risks that are allocated to industry, supported 
by Parent Company Guarantees in the form set out in Appendix 8 – will be Evaluated as being significantly more 
attractive than those which are not made on that basis. In short, the Authority does not want to own or fund 
Consortium integration risks. 


 61  

Part Chain Projects 


 

(g) The risks posed by Part Chain Projects will need to be managed effectively. Part Chain Projects will only be 
supported by a FEED Contract where the Bidder can clearly identify the potential to connect and become part of a 
CCS Full Chain Project in the foreseeable future. In such cases, definition and allocation of risks across the 
CCS Chain will need to be demonstrated in a manner consistent with the overall risk allocation put forward by the 
Authority. Part Chain Projects will not be funded beyond FEED Contracts unless they have joined other Part 
Chain Projects or a CCS Full Chain Project to become a CCS Full Chain Project or a Cluster Project. 


     62 

Annex II - Government’s approach to Risk 
Allocation under Phase 1 of the 
Commercialisation Programme [ii] 


 

[Full documentation can be found at: 
https://online.contractsfinder.businesslink.gov.uk/Common/View%20Notice.aspx?site=1000&lang=en&noticeid=56
0937&fs=true] 


 

Appendix 11 from ITPD – Baseline Risk Allocation Matrix 


 

1.1 Baseline Risk Allocation Matrix 


 

General 


 

1.1.1 The Baseline Risk Allocation Matrix prepared by the Authority has been presented in this Appendix 11 of 
this ITPD. The Baseline Risk Allocation Matrix sets out the CCS Specific Risks and the Business As Usual risks. 


 

1.1.2 Any risks/and or impacts to the Project which are considered to be a result of Developer default is a BAU 
risk. 


 

1.1.3 At the point at which risks are considered closed (i.e. at the point in time beyond which the probability of the 
risk materialising is close to zero) then, the majority of such risks will pass entirely to the Bidder/Developer. 


 

Structure of Baseline Risk Allocation Matrix 


 

1.1.4 The structure and headings of the Baseline Risk Allocation Matrix are as follows running from left to right: 


 

 Level 1 and Level 2 risk categorisation: high level broad risk categories are identified (Level 1) with 
subsequent detailed breakdown into Level 2. Risks are profiled at their lowest defined level. The 
Level 1 and Level 2 risks have been given unique identification numbers. 


 

 Component chain: where applicable, the risk is subsequently defined according to the CCS Chain 
Link to which it relates. 


 

 Consequence / impact: provides a description of the likely impact which will be result should the risk 
materialise. 


 

 Temporal description of the risk: the relevant part of the Project lifecycle which is potentially affected 
by each risk is described in this column. A statement about when in the Project lifecycle the 
Baseline Risk Allocation and subsequent responsibility for its management changes is also 
provided, where relevant. 


 

 Risks mitigated during FEED: a statement as to the likelihood of the risk level reducing as a result of 
conducting FEED, is provided. 


 

 General Baseline Risk Allocation and explanation of Baseline Risk Allocation: a statement about 
who is responsible for which risk, along with an explanation, is provided. 


 

 Contractual treatment: a high-level explanation of how the risk will be addressed in the relevant 
contracts is provided. 


 

 Risk control measures: potential risk control measures are provided and are split according to the 
Authority enabling activities and industry management techniques. The former category 
demonstrates the actions which the Authority believes that the it needs to take in order to mitigate 
the risk in question; the latter category demonstrates the type of risk mitigation response that it 


 63 

would expect from industry. This is not intended to be comprehensive but provides an initial 
proposed risk allocation for Bidders. The Authority does not expect that the 

 relevant contracts will necessarily oblige it to undertake these activities; in some cases it would be 
unlawful to fetter its public law discretion by doing so. 


 

1.1.5 Any risks and/or impacts to the project which are considered to be a result of Developer fault is a BAU risk. 


 

1.1.6 At the point at which risks are considered closed (i.e. at the point in time beyond which the probability of the 
risk materialising is close to zero) then, in the main, they pass entirely to Bidder/Developer. 


   

[NB. Appendix 11 contains six pages of detailed tables, a sample of which is below.  These can be found in the 
electronic version] 


    

© Crown copyright 2014 

Department of Energy & Climate Change 

3 Whitehall Place 

London SW1A 2AW 

www.gov.uk/decc   

URN 14D/281 

http://www.gov.uk/decc

