

 

The UK’s position on Phase 
IV of EU ETS  


             

9 November 2015


 2 

© Crown copyright 2015  

URN 15D/514 

You may re-use this information (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium, 
under the terms of the Open Government Licence.  

To view this licence, visit www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/  
or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU,  
or email: psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk.  

Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at eu.ets@decc.gsi.gov.uk  

http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/
mailto:psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk
mailto:eu.ets@decc.gsi.gov.uk


 3  

Contents 

Executive summary .................................................................................................................... 4 

The UK’s Position on Phase IV of EU ETS ................................................................................ 5 

Phase IV Proposal ..................................................................................................................... 5 


    4 

Executive summary 

The UK supports the significant steps taken so far to improve the functioning of the EU ETS, 

such as the creation of the Market Stability Reserve (MSR). The proposed reform of the system 

for Phase IV comes at a critical juncture and offers a key opportunity to address outstanding 

structural issues which reduce the effectiveness and credibility of the scheme. In order to build a 

more effective EU ETS that provides the right incentives to achieve abatement at least cost, 

while supporting industry through the transition to a low-carbon economy, the UK supports: 

 An EU ETS cap in line with the EU’s target of at least 40% domestic Greenhouse 

Gas emission reductions by 2030 from 1990 levels, honouring the October 2014 

European Council Conclusions.  

 A secure, liquid carbon market. This is critical to provide the right incentives for 

installations to reduce their emissions, driving cost-effective abatement and innovation. 

To ensure this, a sufficient proportion of EU ETS allowances must be released to the 

market via auctioning.  

 Targeted, cost-effective and risk-based carbon leakage support. In the context of a 

declining supply of free allocation, support should be focused on those sectors at 

greatest risk of carbon leakage, with low- and middle-risk sectors also receiving 

proportionate support. A strong evidence base is vital to achieve this.  

 The minimisation of administrative burdens on operators, especially small 

emitters. It is vital that costs for all operators are kept as low as possible, in order to 

reduce the competitiveness impacts of the EU ETS, and that measures are taken to 

support small businesses.  

 Funds that support decarbonisation of the UK’s and EU’s industrial and energy 

sectors are administered cost-effectively. The Innovation and Modernisation Funds 

must help drive the decarbonisation needed to enable the EU to meet its 2030 and 2050 

targets by supporting industry in the transition to a greener economy. To achieve this, 

funds must be governed in a transparent and cost-effective manner.  


   5  

The UK’s Position on Phase IV of EU ETS 

The EU ETS is Europe’s flagship climate policy, and the world’s largest cap-and-trade system. 
The EU ETS demonstrates Europe’s ambition to act as a global leader in tackling climate 
change through a functional and effective carbon market whilst supporting the competitiveness 
of key industrial sectors. The continued success of the EU ETS is vital in helping the EU to meet 
its 2030 and 2050 targets at least cost and to lay the foundations for a global carbon market.   

The EU ETS has already achieved many of its objectives with many companies significantly 
reducing their emissions. There is also evidence


1

 that more companies are factoring carbon 

pricing into their investment decisions. However, the current Phase of the EU ETS has revealed 
structural issues in the EU ETS which weaken the effectiveness and credibility of the system. 
These include the persistent surplus and consequent weak low-carbon investment signal, as 
well as industry protection measures which do not adequately reflect actual risk of carbon 
leakage, complex administrative processes, and opaque procedures for securing access to 
funds.  

The introduction of the MSR will help address the surplus of allowances and it is essential that 
the integrity of the MSR is maintained in the next phase of negotiations. However, there are still 
significant challenges ahead. The negotiations on Phase IV of the EU ETS come at a critical 
point; a strong outcome is vital to maintain and improve the status of the EU ETS as a secure, 
functional, and credible carbon market which supports competitiveness.  

Phase IV Proposal 

The Commission’s proposal to reform the EU ETS is a welcome first step in creating a more 
robust and effective system.  In particular the proposed split between auctioning and free 
allocation of allowances, the broadened scope of the new Innovation Fund and the 
rationalisation of the carbon leakage list are all positive steps to strengthen the EU ETS. 
However, there are outstanding issues with the proposal which must be addressed in order to 
create a more effective system.   

A secure, liquid carbon market 

The UK supports the proposed 57%/43% split between auctioned allowances and free 
allocation, in line with the October 2014 European Council Conclusions. It is important that 
adequate free allocation is supplied to those industries at risk of carbon leakage. At the same 
time, a sufficient supply of allowances must be made available on the open market for purchase 
by power generators and industrial installations.  

Reducing the share of auctioned allowances could have a damaging impact on the carbon 
market, with the potential to reduce liquidity for power and non-carbon leakage sectors 
substantially. It would also place a greater onus on the power sector to decarbonise while 
reducing the incentive for industry to invest in abatement measures.  


  1

 World Bank Group (2015) 

http://www-wds.worldbank.org/external/default/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2015/09/21/090224b0830f0f31/2_0/Rendered/PDF/State0and0trends0of0carbon0pricing02015.pdf


 6  

Targeted, cost-effective and risk-based carbon leakage support  

The UK recognises the real risk of carbon leakage. There would be no benefit, in either 
environmental or economic terms, of installations leaving Europe for areas with less ambitious 
climate policies as a result of the costs of participating in EU ETS. The UK supports the 
continued use of free allocation to mitigate the risk of carbon leakage. Numerous studies have 
shown no robust evidence of carbon leakage from the EU ETS in the current Phase so far; this 
has been due in large part to free allocation as well as the lower than expected price of carbon


2. 

However, as the carbon price rises and free allocation becomes scarcer, it is likely that highly 
exposed sectors could become subject to carbon leakage risk. It is therefore vital to the success 
of ETS that the industrial competitiveness of key energy intensive industries is supported.  

In the current phase of the EU ETS, the vast majority of energy-intensive industry sectors - 
representing around 97% of industrial emissions - have been deemed at significant risk of 
carbon leakage; in order to mitigate this risk, sectors at risk are entitled to a substantial quantity 
of free allowances to reduce their carbon costs. The high number of sectors deemed at risk of 
carbon leakage under the current assessment criteria has led to the introduction of the Cross-
Sectoral Correction Factor, which removes free allocation by a fixed percentage from all 
installations regardless of their risk in order to keep the total amount of free allocation below the 
maximum level. The result of this is a risk that those installations which are genuinely exposed 
to carbon leakage receive less support than they need.  

The European Commission’s legislative proposal has a carbon leakage list which is much 
shorter in terms of sector numbers (with around 50 sectors qualifying for carbon leakage 
status), but which covers only a slightly smaller share (94%) of industrial emissions. Under the 
current proposals, DECC analysis indicates that the reintroduction of the CSCF is therefore 
likely, meaning sectors at most risk would remain exposed.  

The UK’s preferred approach is for a tiered approach to carbon leakage. In a tiered approach, 
sectors would be classified as at (for example) high-, medium-, low- or no-risk, with allowances 
distributed accordingly. This would ensure that those sectors at greatest risk continue to receive 
as close to 100% of free allocation at their benchmarks as possible, while those sectors at lower 
levels of carbon leakage risk receive support more proportionate to their level of risk. 

Benchmarks based on robust evidence 

The UK is concerned by proposals for a flat percentage reduction in benchmark values for 
industry, which may not genuinely reflect technological improvements and could introduce 
competitive distortions between sectors. The UK believes that any changes to benchmark 
values should be grounded in a strong evidence base and accurately reflect the abatement 
potential of a sector, and differences in abatement potential between sectors. We will consider 
the Commission’s proposal further in the coming months, and alternative options for improving 
benchmarking provisions. 

Provisions for economic growth 

The UK welcomes the Commission’s proposed changes to allow installations to receive more 
free allocation when they have a significant increase in production, which will enable better 
alignment of free allocation with changing production levels, as called for in the October 2014 
Council Conclusions. The UK would welcome further information from the Commission on how 
the new production-based system will work in practice.  


   2

See for example Vivid Economics (2014), Chatham House (2009) and Ecological Economics (2014) 

http://www.vivideconomics.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/carbon_leakage_prospects_under_phase_III_eu_ets.pdf
https://www.chathamhouse.org/sites/files/chathamhouse/public/Meetings/Meeting%20Transcripts/0109reinaud.pdf
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S092180091400161X


 7  

Compensation for indirect carbon costs 

The UK supports the continuation of the current state aid-based system allowing Member 
States to compensate electricity intensive industries for the indirect carbon costs of the EU ETS 
passed through to them by electricity providers. Under the current system there is an 
appropriate level of flexibility for Member States to decide whether they wish to compensate 
eligible sectors, subject to State Aid guidance. The State Aid guidance determines maximum 
levels of compensation that can be paid for the costs incurred by eligible sectors, reducing the 
risk of intra-EU distortions while maintaining necessary incentives to achieve abatement.  

Minimising administrative burdens for operators, particularly for small emitters 

The UK strongly supports measures to reduce the administrative burden of complying with the 
EU ETS, particularly for smaller operators. We welcome the proposed continuation of the ability 
for Member States to opt-out small emitters from the EU ETS and are exploring the implications 
of increasing the threshold. Beyond the small emitter opt-out, the Commission’s proposal 
contains little detail on how the administrative burden of the system will be addressed. 

Simplification of the EU ETS should be a fundamental principle which the Commission, Member 
States and the European Parliament consider across the course of negotiations and in 
subsequent legislation.   

Funds that support decarbonisation and are administered cost effectively 

The UK welcomes the establishment of an Innovation Fund supplied with allowances from the 
free allocation portion of the EU ETS cap, as a successor to the NER300. The UK particularly 
welcomes the continuation of support for CCS projects and the inclusion of support for 
innovation in industrial technology and processes. 

The UK firmly supports having a flexible Innovation Fund which supports innovation for both 
industry and the power sector and welcomes the Commission’s proposal for a fund to act as a 
‘bridge’ between the NER300 and the start of the Innovation Fund, to provide important support 
to ‘early start’ projects. The Commission’s proposals to allow projects to access funding 
following achievement of defined milestones in their development provides greater flexibility, 
better reflects the reality of project development and should encourage a diversity of projects. 
While funding small-scale projects is important, larger scale, deep-decarbonisation measures 
must also play a key role. In order to ensure these funds enable this, it is important that their 
governance is open and transparent.  

The UK supports the creation of a Modernisation Fund to support the decarbonisation of power 
production in lower income Member States as well as the continuation of the provision of free 
allocation to power producers in some Member States under article 10c of the Directive. The 
use of these funds should be transparent and operate in accordance with the environmental 
objectives of the EU ETS.  


 

Please contact the DECC EU ETS team (eu.ets@decc.gsi.gov.uk) if you have 

any comments on Phase IV of EU ETS or the UK’s position. 


  

© Crown copyright 2015 

Department of Energy & Climate Change 

3 Whitehall Place 

London SW1A 2AW 

www.gov.uk/decc  

URN 15D/514 

http://www.gov.uk/decc

